


£*«# 











KJJ 
























































.. . , ,, CCf.TUi^ 1 * 

\ K A * 3 

, < 1 * fv5 * 




! 





ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 


A B 


TRANSLATED BY 

D OF SCHOLARS 


• -W* •, 


- A. 

«V T, i 


AND EDITED BY 

Prof. J. L. SHASTRI 



Volume 19 




ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND 
MYTHOLOGY SERIES 

[PURANAS IN TRANSLATION] 

VOLUMES 

SIVA 1-4 
LINGA5-6 
BHAGAVATA 7-11 
GARUDA 12-14 
NARADA 15-19 
KURMA 20-21 
BRAHMANDA 22-26 
AGNI 27-30 
VARAHA 31-32 
BRAHMA 33-36 
VAYU 37-38 
PADMA 39-48 

SKANDA, PARTS I-XIV 49-61 

VOLUMES UNDER PREPARATION 

SKANDA, PARTS XV-XXIV 
BHAVISYA 
BRAHMAVAIVARTA 

devIbhAgavata 

kAlikA 

mArkandeya 

MATSYA 

vAmana 

VISNU 

VISNUDHARMOTTARA 


THE 

NARADA-PURANA 

♦ 


translated and annotated by 

GANESH VASUDEO TAGARE 


Part V 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 




First Edition: Delhi, 1982 
Reprint: Delhi, 1998 

O MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 
All Rights Reserved 

ISBN: 81-2084351-5 


Also available at: 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8, Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royapeuah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, Subhash Nagar, Pune 411 002 
16 St. Mark’s Road, Bangalore 560 001 
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS-Indian Series 
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series 
of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works, 
jointly sponsored by the United Nations Educa¬ 
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) and the Government of India 


PRINTED IN INDIA 


BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS 
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 


PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean 
or in the depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or 
delve into the rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies 
concealed in the language which with the passage of time has 
become obsolete. Man has to learn that language before he 
discovers that truth. 

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation. 
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular 
international medium of expression. The publication of the 
Puranas in English translation is a step towards that goal. 









PREFACE 


The present volume contains the Narada Purana , Part V 
in English translation. It includes Chs 38-82 of theUttarabhaga 
and completes the Purana. This is the nineteenth volume in 
the Series of fifty volumes which we have planned on Ancient 
Indian Tradition and Mythology . 

The project of the Series was envisaged and financed in 
1970 by Lala Sundar Lai Jain of Messers Motilal Banarsidass. 
Hitherto eighteen volumes of the Series (comprising English 
translation of Siva, Liiiga , Bhagavata , Garuda, and Narada Parts 
I to IV) have been published and released for sale. 

The present volume, as the contents would show, deals 
primarily with the description of sacred rivers, mountains, 
cities and centres. The subject of Vrata, in the context of 
EkadasI, was treated in the previous part (U. bhaga chs. 1 to 
37) of this Purana which records how MohinI was created by 
Brahma at the instance of Yama, lord of hells, how she married 
King Rukmangada and persuaded him to stop the observance 
of EkadasI.by the people of his kingdom, how she failed in her 
mission, wrought tragedy in her family, was rebuked by her 
family priest Vasu and after admonition converted to Vaisnav- 
ism. The present part (chs. 38 to 82) contains Vasu’s discourse 
on religious topics concerning ablution in and worship of 
Ganga river and the procedure of charitable gifts such as jaggery 
cow. It includes glorification of Gaya and its seven chains 
of hillocks, praise of Varanasi and worship of lingas thereat. 
It describes Purusottama ksetra (Jagannatha of Puri & Orissa) 
and Pafica-tlrtha (five sub-tlrthas attached thereto. One would 
find herein the Panca-ratra system of worship of Purusottama 
and a fully developed stage of Radha cult. There is a graphic 
description of wonderful Vrndavana, portrayal of feelings of 
devotion and the mind’s ultimate absorption into the non-dual 
supreme entity. One gets a complete portrait of Kuruksetra and 
its seven forests, of Gangadvara (= Haridvara), of Kamaksa 
both as a Sakta-pitha and a Siddhi-pltha, Puskara and Setu 


( viii ) 

(Ramesvaram). Vasu discloses the glory of Linga-worship, 
merits of pilgrimage to Tirthas, the secret of Vrndavana-the 
playground for lord Srlkvsna’s amorous sports with the Gopis. 
The Purana places emphasis on the merit of Lihga-worship and 
of devotion to Visnu. Thus it brings about a fruitful compromise 
between Saivism and Vaisnavism. 

This English translation is based on the Sanskrit Text of 
the Narad a Purana as published by Messrs Ksemaraja Srl- 

krsnadasa, Verikatesvara Press, Bombay. This text constructed 

on the collation of manuscripts and supported by the evidence 
of citations found in the Smrti and other granthas is fairly 
accurate. 

For general information about this Purana, the reader is 
referred to Dr. G. V. Tagare’s scholarly Introduction prefixed 
to Part I of this Purana. The preliminaries prefixed to the 
present Part include Preface, Abbreviations and Contents. A 
General Index of the complete Purana has been added to this 
Part. 


—Editor 


-<*' 


ABBREVIATIONS 


{ 


Common and self-evident abbreviations such as ch(s)— 
chapter (s), p—page, pp—pages, v—verse, vv—verses, Ftn— 
footnote, Hist. Ind. Philo—History of Indian Philosophy are 
not included in this list. 


ABORI 

AGP 

AIHT 

AP 

AV 

Bha. P. 
Bh. P. 


Bm. P. 

Brn. 

Bs. P. 

Bv. P. 

CC 

DB 

De or GDAMI 


Dh. S. 

ERE 

GP 

GS 


Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona. 

S. M. Ali’s The Geography of Puranas, PPH, 
New Delhi, 1973. 

Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, F. E. 
Pargiter, Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD), 
Delhi. 

Agni Purana, Guru Mandal Edition (GM), 
Calcutta, 1957. 

Atharoa Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh. 

Bhagavata Purana, MLBD, Delhi, 1973. 

Bhagavata Parana, Bhagavat, Vidyapeeth, 
Ahmedabad. 

Brahma Parana, GM. 1954. 

Brhannaradiya, Pt. Hrishikesh Shastri, Chow- 
khamba, 1975. 

Bhaoifya Purana, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai. 

Brahma VaivartaParana, GM, 1955-57. 

Caturvarga Cintamani by Hemadri. 

Devi Bhagavata, GM, 1960-61. 

The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and 
Mediaeval India, N. L. De, Orienta 
Reprint, Delhi, 1971. 

Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author’s 
name such as Gautama). 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics— Hastings. 

Garuda Puma, Ed. R. S. Bhattacharya, 
Chowkhamba, Varanasi, 1964. 

Grhya Sutra (Preceded by the name of the 
author such as Apastamba) 


.If 


HD 


( * ) 


IA 

IHQ. 

KP 


LP 

Mbh. 

MK 

MN 

Mt. P. 

MW 

NP 

PCK 

Pd. P. 

PE 

PJ- 

PR or PRHRG 
RV 

Sat. Br 
SEP 

SG or SGAMI 


SKD 
Sk. P. 


History of Dharma Sastra by P. V. Kane, 
G.O.S. 

The Indian Antiquary. 

The Indian Historical Quarterly. 

Kurma Purana, Venkateshwara Press Edt. 
Bombay, also Kashiraj Trust Edt., 
Varanasi 1971. 

Linga Purana, GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi. 

Mahabharata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, VS 
2014. 

Markandeya Ptirdna. 

Mahabharata Namdnukramani, Gita Press, 
Gorakhpur, VS 2016. 

Matsya Purana, GM, 1954. 

Monier Williams Sk. English Dictionary, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1976. 

Naradiya or Narada Purana, Venkateshwar 
Press, Bombay. 

Bharatavarsiya Pracina Carilra kofa, Siddheshwar 
Shastri, Poona, 1968. 

Padma Purana, GM., 19.57-59. 

Puranic Encyclopaedia by V. Mani, English, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1975. 

Purana (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust), 
Varanasi. 

Puranic Records on Hindu Riles and Customs 
R. C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948. 

Rg Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh 

Satapatha Brahmana. 

Studies in Epics and Purdnas by A. D. Pusalkar 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan(BVB), Bombay. 

Studies in the Geography of Ancient and 
Mediaeval India— D. C. Sircar, MLBD, 
Delhi, 1971. 

Sabda-Kalpa-Druma —Raja R. K. Dev., 

Chowkhamba, Varanasi. 

Skanda Purdtfa, GM, 1960-65. 


( xi ) 


SM 

SMC 

Smr 


Sv. P. 

Va. P. 
VP. 

VR 

VRK 


Yaj 

YSP 


Sadhana Maid, B. Bhattacharya, GOS, 
Baroda, 1928. 

Smrti Candrika, Devanna Bhatta. 

Smrti (preceded by the author’s name or 
simply the author’s name e.g. Manu Smrti 
or Manu. All GM editions in the Smrti- 
Sandarbha, 1952-57.. 

Siva Purdrfa, Pandit Pustakalaya, Kashi, 
V.S. 2020. 

Vayu Parana, GM, 1959. 

Vifnu Parana, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, V.S. 
2026. 

Valmlki Ramayana, Gita Press, V.S. 2020. 
Valmiki Ramayana Kola —Ramkumar Rai, 
(Chowkhamba Varanasi.) 

Tajnavalkya (Smrti), etc. 

The Toga System of Patanjali —J. H. Wood. 
(MLBD) 














CONTENTS 


A. PREFACE 

B. ABBREVIATIONS 

TRANSLATION AND NOTES 
Part V 


CHAPTERS 

38. The Greatness of the Gahga 

39. The Glory of Ablution in the Gahga 

40. The Fruit of Ablution in Different Holy Centres 

41. The Procedure for Charitable Gifts 

42. The Procedure for the Gift of Guda-dhenu 

43. The Procedure of Worship of the Gahga 

44. The Greatness of Gaya 

45. The Procedure of offering Pindas in the Gaya-Yatra 

46. Importance of offering Pindas at Gaya 

47. The Glory of Gaya 

48. The Greatness of Kasi 

49. Pilgrimage to Kasi 

50. The Glory of Kasi 

51. The Greatness of Kasi (concluded) 

52. The Greatness of Purusottama 
(Jagannatha of Puri) 

53. The Greatness of Purusottama (cont .) 

54. The Glory of Purusottama (contd.) 

55. The Greatness of Purusottama (contd.) 

56. The Greatness of Purusottama (cont .) 

57. The Glory of Purusottama : The Proce 
of Worship 

58. The Creation of the Golden Egg 

59. Purusottama Mahatmyam (Contd.) 

60. Ablution of Deity _ mjl Ksetra 

61. The Fruit of Pilgrimage to Purusottama Ksetra 


1747 

1753 

1757 

1763 

1770 

1774 

1787 

1797 

1808 

1814 

1824 

1833 

1839 

1846 

1850 

1859 

1865 

1876 

1876 

1896 

1902 

1909 

1913 

1920 









( xiv ) 


62. The Greatness of Prayaga; the Procedure of 

Pilgrimage 1929 

63. The Greatness of Prayaga (concluded) 1935 

64. The Greatness of Kuruksetra 1952 

65. Pilgrimage to Kuruksetra 1956 

66. Glory of Gangadvara (or Haridvara) 1969 

67. The Greatness of Badarikasrama 1975 

68. The Legend of Kamada 1983 

69. The Greatness of Kamaksa 1985 

70. The Greatness of Prabhasa 1989 

71. The Greatness of Puskara 1998 

72. The Power of Austerities of Gautama 2004 

73. The Greatness of Tryambakesvara 2008 

74. The Glory of Gokarna 2024 

75. The Greatness of Laksmanacala 2028 

76. The Greatness of Setu 2035 

77. Sanctity of the Tirthas in Narmada 2037 

78. The Glory of Avan ti 2040 

79. The Greatness of Mathura 2045 

80. The Glory of Vrndavana 2050 

81. The Review of the Story of Vasu 2061 

82. The Benefit of Listening to the Narada Purana 2066 

INDEX, general 2073 


Uttarabhaga 38.1-7 


1747 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 

The greatness of the Gahga l 

Vasiflha said : 

1. O leading king, that Vasu who was engaged in what 
was beneficial to all the worlds, spoke these soft words to 
MohinI, beloved of his Yajya (patron whose sacrifices Vasu 
performed). 

Vasu said : 

2. O MohinI, listen. I shall narrate the characteristics 
of the holy places severally. On understanding them, the 
sinners can have the most excellent salvation instantaneously. 

3. On the surface of the Earth, the most excellent of all 
the sacred places is the Ganga. There is nothing else which is as 
destructive of sins as the Ganga. 

4. On hearing these words of Vasu, her own priest, 
MohinI who had great respect for a holy dip in the Ganga, 
bowed to him and said : 

Mohini said : 

5. O holy sir, the most excellent Brahmana, now kindly 
recount the excellent greatness of the Ganga, acknowledged by 
the Puranas. 

6. After hearing the unequalled grandeur of the Ganga 
that is destructive of sins, I shall go alongwith you, to take 
holy bath in that river that destroys all sins. 

7. Those lands, countries, mountains and the hermita¬ 
ges are very holy if the sacred Ganga is ever adjacent to them. 


1. Though Ganga is mentioned in the Nadi-Sukta of the BV. X* 
75. 5-6, it was in the age of Epics and Puranas that it came to be looked 
upon as the holiest of rivers. The Mbh and other Puranas are vying with 
one another in singing the glory of the Ganga (and borrowing such verses 
from each other). As this section of the NP. deals with pilgrimage to- 
holy places, it is meet that it should start with the glory of the Gahga. 









1748 


Narada Parana 


8 On hearing those words of MohinI, Vasu who was 
conversant with the Puranas recounted the greatness of the 
Ganga that is destructive of sins. 

Vasu said : 

9. A creature (living soul) does not attain by means of 
austerities, celibacy, Yajnas or renunciation, that state of exis¬ 
tence or salvation which it may derive after resorting to the 
Ganga. 

10. Those men also who commit sins in the early years of 
their lives but resort to the Ganga during the later years, attain 
great salvation. 

11. The man who stands on a single leg for a thousand 
years (byway of penance), and the man who takes his holy 
dip into the Ganga for only a month, —these two attain equal 
benefits. 

12. By way of penance a man may stand topsy-turvy 
for ten thousand Yugas. But, if a man stands on the Ganga in 
any manner as he pleases he is superior to the former. 

13. In the case of living beings there (in the world), 
whose minds are afflicted by misery and who are in search 
of salvation, there is no other place like the Ganga. 

14. The Ganga may redeem per force those base men 
who are sinful on account of great and terrible sins. It will 
prevent them from going to the impure hell. 

15. Those who always go near Ganga that is liked even by 
the gods, are certainly on a par with the sages and the Devas 
including their king Indra. 

16. On every occasion, the Ganga is resorted to by the 
Devas including Indra, by sages and by human beings, for the 
sake of flourishing prosperity. The Ganga has an immense 
cosmic form. It may sanctify even blind men, senseless men and 
the indigent ones. 

17-19. O MohinI, in the beginning of the dark half of the 
month, the Ganga is present on Earth for ten days ending 
with the sacred Amavasya day. From the first to the tenth 
of the bright half of the month, it is present in the nether- 
worlds by itself. Beginning with the eleventh day in the 


1749 


Uttarabhaga 38.20-28 

bright half and ending with the fifth day (in the dark half), she 
is always present in heaven for ten days. 

20. In the Krtayuga all sacred places are alike. In the 
Treta the Puskara lake is the greatest, in the Dvapara Kuru- 
ksetra is the holiest centre and in the Kali age the Ganga is 
superior to all other holy places. 1 

21. In the Kali age, the holy centres and sacred rivers 
cast off (deposit) their prowess in the Ganga naturally. But the 
divine Gapga does not cast it off anywhere else. 

22 Even those men who are habitually interested in sinful 
actions attain the greatest goal, even if they are touched with 
the wind blowing from a person wet with the drops of waters 
from the Ganga. 

23. There is no doubt that he who is Lord Visnu, Janar- 
dana, embodiment of consciousness and all-pervading himself 
assumes the liquid form, it is then called the Ganga water. 

24. The murderer of a Brahmana, the slayer of his 

preceptor, the slaughterer of a cow, the thief and the defiler of 

the preceptor’s bed are sanctified by the waters of the Ganga. 
No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 

25. The water of the Ganga shall dispel one s sin com¬ 
mitted till one’s death, ifit is used as it is in a holy centre, or if 
it is taken out elsewhere or if it is taken in hot or cold 
weather. 

26. Ordinary water kept overnight is to be avoided. 
The leaf or flower petal kept overnight is to be avoided, but 
not so in the case of the water of the Ganga or the leaf of 
TulasI, the holy basil plant. 

27. No one has the power to count the gold pieces or the 
jewels in mount Meru or to describe the extent of the special 
merits of the waters of the Ganga. 

28 Even if a man does not fulfil the procedure laid 
down for the performance of pilgrimage, he too shall benefit 
by it, thanks to the greatness of the waters of the Ganga. 


1. The same as Mbh. Vana 85.90. Also Kurma I. 27.37 except for 
Krta-Yuga. 



1750 


Narada Purdna 


29. The drops of waters of the Ganga are superior to 
many wish-yielding jewels, since they grant the devotees 
whatever benefit they desire. 

30. Even if a person gargles once with the waters of the 
Ganga devoutly, he enjoys in heaven the divine juices 
originating from the udders of the wish-yielding cow. 

31. He who sprinkles the Ganga water on the Salagrama 
stone, shines like the sun that dispels dense darkness at the 
time of rising. 

32. There is no doubt that a man who is engulfed 
in different sins originating from (or committed by) mind, 
words, or body becomes purified on seeing the Ganga. 

33. He who always partakes of alms sprinkled with the 
Ganga water, sheds off all sins like the serpent that casts off its 
slough. 

34. Heaps of sinful vicious actions as big as the 
Himalayas or the Vindhya mountains perish through the waters 
of the Ganga like misfortunes through devotion to Visnu. 

35. At the very moment when men devoutly enter the 
Ganga for taking ablution, their sins of Brahmana slaughter 
etc. cry out ‘Alas !’ and disappear. 

36. The man who continuously stays on the banks of the 
Ganga, and who drinks the water of the Ganga always shall be 
liberated from the sins accumulated before. 

37. Verily, he who, resorting to the Ganga, always stays 
there fearlessly, deserves to be worshipped by gods, mortals 
and great sages. 

38. Of what avail is the Yoga with its eight ancillaries ? 
Of what use are the austerities? Of what advantage are the 
sacrifices? The residence on the banks of the Ganga alone is 
superior to them all in every respect. 

39. Why should you go in for many Yajnas, words of 
Japas, austerities and gifts of wealth ? For, the Ganga that can 
be easily served and that bestows heavenly pleasures and salvation 
is present nearby. 

40. By means of Yajnas, observances, restraints, charitable 
gifts and renunciation one does not attain that benefit which 
one attains by resorting to the Ganga. 







Uttarabhaga 38.41-52a 


1751 


41. The benefit that a man derives at Prabhasa by giving 
away a thousand cows when the sun is swallowed byRahu 
(i.e. at the time of solar eclipse), can be derived by taking 
bath in the Ganga by a single day. 

42. If a man is desirous of liberation, he must eschew other 
means and decisively stay happily on the banks of the Ganga. 
Only then can he be the object of salvation. 

43. In Varanasi particularly, the Ganga bestows liberation 
immediately. Every month, on the eighth or fourteenth day, it 
confers emancipation from Samsara. 

44-45a. The residence on the banks of the Ganga as 
long as one lives, is the bestower of final beatitude. On the 
banks of the Ganga, one obtains that benefit and happiness 
which is usually obtained after performing Krcchra rites or the 
Candrayana expiation always. 

45b-46a. O daughter of Brahma, even by hundreds of 
sacrifices it is not possible to obtain the benefit that one gets in 
half a day by being devoted to the service of Ganga. 

46b-47a. By staying on the banks of the Ganga with 
devotion, one gets that benefit which is obtained by all these 
rites viz. Yajna, austerities, charitable gifts, Yaugic practice and 
recitation of the Vedic passages. 

47b-48a. By staying on the bank of the Ganga that 
merit is obtained which life-long Brahmacarins (those who 
have taken the vow of celibacy) get through truthful words and 
which those who perform Agnihotra get. 

48b-49a. Devotion to the Ganga certainly redeems in¬ 
finite crores of families belonging to the mother, father, and 
wife from the ocean of worldly existence. 

49b-50. The devotee of the Ganga attains contentment, 
great power and prosperity, knowledge of truth, happiness of 
the soul and the acquisition of humility and good conduct. 
Only by resorting to the Ganga does a man become contented 
and blessed. 

51-52a. There is no doubt about this that even after 
death he will be its devotee and engrossed in devotion. 
The man who devoutly touches its waters and drinks them, 
obtains the means of salvation without any strain. 



1752 


Narada Purana 


52b-53. These men rejoice in the presence of Siva, viz. 
the man who gets initiated in the Yajnas; the man who drinks 
Soma juice every day;theman whose rites are always performed 
through the waters of the Ganga. They eschew their bodies and 
rejoice in the presence of Siva. 

54. Just as Indra and other Devas imbibe the nectarine 
juice present in the moon and the sun, so also men drink the 
Ganga water through their mouths. 

55-56. By drinking a handful of the Ganga water, one 
derives hundred times the merits of the gifts of virgins (in 
marriage), plots of lands, cooked rice, cows, gold and other 
metals, chariots, horses and elephants (all gifts being) duly 
devoutly performed. 

57. A benefit more than what is glorified in the case of 
thousands of Candrayana observance, is obtained by drinking 
the waters of the Ganga. 

58. If one drinks a mouthful of the Ganga water, one 
attains the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. Salvation is within 
the grasp of that person who drinks the water of the Ganga 
freely. 

59. The water of the Sarasvati becomes stale in 
three months; that of the Yamuna in seven months, that of the 
Narmada in ten months and that of the Ganga in a year. 

60. If in the case of any dead person the obsequies and 
the water libations are not performed in accordance with the 
injunctions in the scriptures, they can have the subsequent 
benefit by casting the bones in the Ganga. 

61. Of the two—one performing a thousand Candrayana 
Vratas (vows) subjecting himself to bodily strain and the other 
drinking the Ganga water as he pleases—it is the latter that 
excels the former. 

62. He who sees, eulogises and bathes in the Ganga and 
he who drinks water of the Ganga, attains heavenly pleasures, 
pure knowledge, Yogic power and salvation. 

63. He who drinks water of the Ganga warmed by 
the rays of the sun gains merits. The drinking of the Ganga 
water is superior to the partaking of barley grains soaked in 
cow’s urine. 






Uttarabhaga 39.1-12a 


1753 


CHAPTER THmTYNINE 

The Glory of Ablution in the Ganga 

Vasu said : 

1. “O Mohinl listen. I shall recount to you the 
meritorious benefit of seeing the Ganga as mentioned in the 
Puranas by sages, the seers of the Truth. 

2. Just as the serpents become devoid of poison at the 
sight of Tarksya (Garutfa), so also one is liberated from sins at 
the sight of the Ganga. 

3. By seeing, touching and plunging into the Ganga, a 
man redeems seven subsequent generations, seven earlier 
generations as well as other manes beyond them. 

4. By seeing, touching, and drinking the waters of the 
Ganga and by glorifying the name Ganga, a man sanctifies 
hundreds and thousands of persons in his family. 

5. The benefits originating from seeing the Ganga are 
perfect knowledge, unequalled lordship and prowess, establish¬ 
ment of auspicious Asramas (stages of life), longevity and 
renown. 

6. By the mere sight of the Ganga, all these (the 
following) perish viz.—the frivolousness of the sense-organs, 
vices, sins and ruthlessness. 

7. Violence towards others, crookedness, looking at 
others’ faults etc and the hypocrisy of men, perish by the mere 
sight of the Ganga. 

8. If a man wishes for the permanent unchanging region 
(Moksa) may he see (the Ganga) frequently; may he touch it 
with devotion again and again. 

9. By the sight of the Ganga one attains the same merit 
as one gets elsewhere through the digging and construction of 
tanks, wells, lakes, watering sheds, asylums, etc. 

10. By looking at the Ganga with devotional feelings, 
one attains the same benefit as is obtained in visualizing the 
great Atman. 

11-12a. The great sages say that in the Kali age, by 
the mere sight of the Ganga, a man obtains the same benefit 
as one obtains by resorting to taking bath in or touching (the 


j 754 Narada Pur&na 

sacred waters) in Naimisa, Kuruksetra, Narmada and 
Puskara. 

12b-13a. Henceforth, O beautiful wife of the king, I 
shall recount to you the benefit of remembering the Gahga as 
glorified in the Puranas. 

13b-14a. Even when it is remembered from a far distance, 
the Ganga uplifts people falling into the hell or sinking 
into the ocean of worldly existence and endowed with 
inauspicious Karmans. 

14b-15a. Man who remembers the Ganga from the 
distance of thousands ofYojanas away from it, attains the 
greatest salvation, although he may be a man of vicious 
activities . 1 

15b-16a. Through the remembrance of the Ganga, the 
cage of multitudes of sins breaks into a thousand pieces like 
a mountain when struck with the thunderbolt. 

16b-18a. He who always remembers the Ganga while 
walking, standing, sleeping, meditating, waking, eating, laughing 
or crying becomes liberated from bondage . 2 Those who 
devoutly remember the Gahga though stationed a thousand 
Yojanas away, and shout out “Ganga, Ganga” are released 
from sins. 

18b-19a. Those who remember the Ganga, those who 
are devotedly attached to the Gahga are liberated wholly from 
great sins. There is no doubt in this. 

19b-20a. These are the benefits of remembering the 
Ganga viz. obtaining houses of variegated nature, different 
kinds of ornaments, women, absence of ailments, and plenty 
of riches. 

20b-21a. The man who mentally remembers the Ganga 
even while staying far off, certainly attains the benefit of 
observances of a thousand Candrayana rites. 

2lb-22. One who repeats the name “Ganga, Ganga 55 
even when stationed a hundred Yojanas away, is liberated from 
all sins . 3 He goes to the world of Visnu. By glorifying the 

1. VP. II. 8. 121; Pd. P. VI. 8; Brahma 175.82 with slight 
variations. 

2. The same as Skanda IV. 1. 27. 37. 

3. Mt. P. 104.14. 





Uttarabhdga 39.23-33 


1755 


Ganga, he is liberated from sins. By seeing the Ganga one 
derives auspiciousness. 

23. By taking bath into the Ganga and by drinking its 
water, a man sanctifies up to the seventh generation in his 
family. He sanctifies seven earlier generations, seven subsequent 
generations and seven generations beyond these. 

24-25a. When glorified even casually, the Ganga redeems 
persons. Even he who carelessly or with lack of faith mentions 
the name of the holy river Ganga becomes the beneficiary of 
heavenly pleasures. 

25b-26a. Whatever may be the plight one is in, even if 
one is devoid of all holy acts and rites, one attains auspicious 
goal and salvation merely by glorifying the Ganga. 

26b-27a. Even if he is a Brahmana-slayer, or the 
murderer of his preceptor or the slaughterer of a cow or one 
who is defiled by all sorts of sins, a man is liberated from 
sins by drinking the water of the Ganga. 

27b-28a. “When shall I see the Ganga ? When shall I 
be able to take my bath in it ?” If a man desires earnestly like 
this, the Ganga redeems a hundred families. 

28b-30a. Henceforth, O gentle lady, I shall recount to you 
the meritorious benefit of ablution in the Ganga. On 
hearing this, one is liberated from all sins. There is no doubt 
in this. O Mohinl, the sin of a person who takes his bath in 
the waters of the Ganga perishes immediately. He will imme¬ 
diately acquire unprecedented merits. 

30b-32a. The prosperity that is attained by those men 
of pure souls who take bath in the pure waters of the Ganga 
is not obtained even by hundreds of sacrifices. Just as, on 
rising, the sun dispels dense darkness and shines brilliantly, so 
also one who is sprinkled with the water of the Ganga dispels 
sins and shines brightly. 

32b-33. O beautiful wife of the king, a man certainly 
derives the benefit of horse-sacrifice even with a single bath 
in the Ganga, if it is taken in accordance with injunctions. By 
the mere ablution in the Ganga, the sins of a man accumulated 
in'the course of many births, perish. 


1756 Narada Purana 

\ 

34 . He becomes the object of merit immediately. Sins 
committed in other places perish on the banks of the Ganga. 

35. Sins committed on the banks of the Ganga perish 
as a result of the bath in the Ganga. One gets the merit of a 
horse-sacrifice by taking bath assiduously in the Ganga by 
day or by night or during Sandhya (twilight). 

36-37a. One can take one’s bath at home with the 
water taken from the Ganga. There is no doubt in this that a 
man derives from bath in the Ganga that benefit which 
one gets in all the holy centres and favourite temples. 

37b-38. A man burdened with great sins or with all sins 
is liberated from all of them through bath in the Ganga 
duly performed. There has never been a greater ablution 
than one in the Ganga nor will it ever be. 

39. Especially in the Kali yuga, the Ganga dispels sins 
after destroying defects originating from lust, mentally, physically 
or verbally. 

40-41 a. By taking bath in Ganga with great devotion, 
one rejoices in heaven like a god. The man who devotedly 
bathes in the Ganga for a year, can stay in the world of Visnu 
for a Kalpa. 

41b-42. The man who takes bath in the Ganga every 
day till his death is absolved of all sins. In the company of all 
the members of his family, he is honoured in the world of Visnu 
and is blessed with all sorts of pleasures. 

43-44a. He is honoured there for the period of two 
Parardhas. No doubt need be entertained in this regard. He 
who continuously and daily takes bath in the Ganga is a 
liberated soul during his life-time. When dead, he attains 
Visnu’s region. 

44b-45. The merit of bath at midday is ten times 
that of bath in the morning. The bath in the evening has 
hundred times the merit. In the presence of Siva the merit 
of the bath is infinite. The bath in the Ganga excels even 
a crore of charitable guts of tawny-coloured cows. 

46. Wherever you perform ablution in it, the Ganga 
yields the same benefit as the ablution at Kuruksetra. It 



1757 


UltarabhSga 39.47—40.5 

bestows more benefit when bathed at Haridvara, Prayaga and 
at the place where it meets with the sea . 1 

47. These are the words of the sun. “O Ganga those 
who take bath in your waters heated by my rays, pierce my 
disc and attain salvation.” 

48. Varuna said to Ganga. 

“He who glorifies you while taking bath in his house, 
goes to the heaven.” 


CHAPTER FORTY 

The Fruit of Ablution in Different Holy Centres 


Vasu said : , , „ 

1 . O woman of beautiful thighs, henceforth I shal 
recount to you the benefit of ablution in Ganga on special 

occasions. Listen attentively. 

2 The man who continuously takes bath m the 

Ganga in the month of Magha shall stay in the world oflndra 
(i.e . 8 heaven) for a long time along with all the members of 

his family. ■ he tQ the city 0 f god Brahma and 

stavs there for hundreds and crores of Kalpas. The man who 
stays tnere io Ganga for six months 

continuously ‘f 1- who takes bath once 

^IT'o^h dur nV (northern transit of 

1 mn) g^s .O Vijs region, redeeming hundred members 

of his family ^ who tate bath , k waters of *e 
Dm . the Sankrantis (transits of the sun 

from "one sign" of the zodiac to another) goes to the abode of 
Visnu, seated in chariot having the lustre of the sun. 


1. Garuda I. 81-1-2, Pd. P. V. 60.120 



1758 


Narada Parana 


6 . There have been announced (in scriptures) special 
benefits (in taking baths) during the equinoxes and tropical 
transits. They know that the benefit of ablution in the 
Ganga during the month of Karttika is like that of performing 
a penance. 

7. O Mohini, the lotus-seated deity (god) Brahma and 
others say that the holy dip in the Ganga when the sun enters 
the Aries or on the full moon day in the month of Karttika 
is superior to the holy bath during the month of Magha. 

8 . Your father has stated that the benefit of ablution 
for the whole of the year is obtained if the bath is taken on the 
Aksaya tithi (i.e. third day in the bright half of Vaisakha), the 
month of Karttika or the month of Vaisakha. 

9. O wife of my Yajya, the benefit obtained by taking 
bath in the course of the three months (i.e. Magha, Karttika 
and Vais'akha) is the same as that of the bath in the Ganga 
water on the Manvadi days and the Yugadi days (i.e. days 
marking the anniversary of Manvantaras and Yugas). 

10 . Rare indeed is a holy bath in the Ganga when 
Sravana constellation coincides with Dvadasi, or Pusya star is 
in conjunction with AstamI (eighth day) or the Ardra star is 
in conjunction with Caturdasx (fourteenth day) of the lunar 
fortnight. 

11. The full moon day in the month of Vaisakha is 
highly meritorious; so also in the months of Karttika and Magha. 

Rare indeed are the new moon days in these months for the 
holy bath in the Ganga. 

12 a. If the merit in all the Parvans is hundred-fold, that 
ontheAstamiday in the dark half (of Bhadrapada) is a 


* 2 , b - 14 \ ° ^aste lady, on the New Moon day and the 
eighth day m the dark half of the month of Magha, there is a 
special hundredfold merit. There is the Ardhoda^a Parva* 


Havana \r a klaL t0 Md ^at'ipm^ogT In' ^hTn ^ ^ **** “ 



Uttarabhaga 40.15-20a 


1759 


on the New moon day of Magha and when there is a slight 
deficiency (when one of the requirements for the Ardhodaya 
Parva is lacking), there is the Mahodaya Parva. The bath at 
Mahodaya Parva yields hundred-fold merits, whilst that at 
the time of the Ardhodaya Parva is stated as yielding a 
hundred thousand-fold benefit in merits. O gentle lady, if the 
bath is taken in the waters of the Ganga during the eclipse of 
the sun or the moon, it yields high benefits. If the bath is taken 
in the months of Phalguna and Asadha, it has the benefit of 
ablution for three months. 

15. If the bath is taken in the Ganga devoutly, when 
the constellation under which one is bom, occurs on the day, 
sins accumulated since one’s birth are annihilated. 

16. For taking ablutions in the Ganga, rare indeed is 
the Yoga (specific astronomical period) called Vyatlpata* on 
the fourteenth day in the dark half of the month of Magha; sq 
also is rare the Vaidhrti Yoga **especially on the Kr?nastaml 
(the eighth day in the dark half of Bhadrapada.) 

17-18a. If a man takes bath every day at dawn through¬ 
out the month of Magha in accordance with the injunctions, 
he shall become Jatismara (one who can recall incidents of 
the previous births). He shall certainly become perfectly 
conversant with the scriptural topics and also free from 
ailments. 

18b-20a. If a man willingly takes bath in the Ganga 
during the days of transit, during the last days of the fortnights 
and during the eclipses of the sun and the moon, he shall attain 
the abode of Brahma. The benefit of the (bath at the time of 
Lunar eclipse is a hundred thousand times and that at the 


reckoning which the NP follows), that is called Ardhodaya. When one of 
above requirements is absent it becames Mahodaya — Parva-Kriya-sara-Samu- 
ccaya , p. 30. 

♦There are two types of Vyatipalas : (1) The one in the dark half is 
the New Moon day on Sunday, the moon being on the first quarter of any of 
the following Nakfatras —Asvini, Sravana, Dhanisfha, Aslesa, (ii) The second 
is on the 12th day, the day’s Naksatra being Hasta, the planets Jupiter and 
Mars in the Leo and the Sim in the Aries. 

** Vaidhrti is the 27th Yoga similar to Vyatipata, with a difference 
(vide Surya Siddhanta XI.I) 





1760 


Narada Purana 


time of the solar eclipse is ten times that. But if it is performed 
on the banks of the Ganga, the benefit of the lunar eclipse is 
a crore times and that of the solar eclipse is ten times that. 

20b-c. If the thirteenth day in the dark half of the 
month of Caitra accompanied by the constellation pertaining 
to Varuna viz. Sata-bhisaj is obtained in the Ganga, it is their 
equal to hundreds of solar eclipses. 

21. It was on the tenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Jyestha, when the day of the week was Tuesday and 
the constellation was Hasta, that Ganga descended to the 
mortal world. On that Tithi, Ganga dispels sins. It yields 
merits hundred times those of horse sacrifices. 

22. (The devotee must say thus) “O Ganga, I have 
come on the day of Govinda DvadasI, dispel the multitudes of 
great sins that I have.” 

23-24. When the constellation is Magha and it is the 
full moon day and the moon and Jupiter are in the same 
zodiac, that Tithi is stated to be great. If the day is 
obtained in the Ganga (i.e. if the ablution in the Ganga is 
possible on that day) it is on a par with hundreds of solar 
eclipses. 

Henceforth, the benefit of the holy dip (in Tirthas) in 
different lands is being mentioned : 

25. 1 Bath in the Ganga may be taken anywhere at 
random; it has ten times the benefit (if taken at) Kuruksetra; 
in the place where it is associated with the Vindhya, it has 
hundred times the benefit of Kuruksetra. 

26-27. The Ganga at the city of KaSI has the merit 
hundred times than that of Vindhya. The Ganga is difficult of 
access everywhere. In three places it is all the more so, viz. 
in Gangadvara, in Prayaga and at the place where it meets with 
the ocean. Those who take bath in these places go to heaven 
Those who die here are not reborn, (i.e. attain Moksa) 

28. Llsten to the meritorious benefit of ablution 
m the Ganga at Gangadvara, and Kusavarta. It is the 
same as that of seven Rajasuya sacrifices or two horse- 


1. Mt. P. 106.54; Kurma I. 37,54. 



Uttarabhdga 40.29-39 


1761 


29. Learned men know that by residing there for half 
a month, one derives the benefit of six ‘Visvajit’ sacrifices or 
that of the charitable gift of a hundred thousand cows. 

30. By worshipping etc. Lord Visnu at the excellent 
lake (Kusavarla) and god Rudra who abides at Kanakhala or 
by taking bath into the Ganga at these places, one attains 
inexhaustible fund of merits. 

31. O auspicious lady, listen. There is the highly 
meritorious holy centre named Saukara wherein formerly 
Acyuta manifested himself in the form of a Divine Boar. 

32. By visiting this holy centre and bathing therein a 
man attains the benefit of a hundred ‘Agnicit’ sacrifices 
(Agnihotras) or two Jyotistomas or a thousand Agnistomas. 

33. If a man takes bath there itself in the Tirtha of 
Brahma, he obtains the merit of ten thousand Jyotistomas and 
three-horse sacrifices. 

34. O MohinI, the Tirtha (holy centre) named Kubja 
is a pure one. All ailments perish here. So also the sins 
committed throughout life, perish there. 

35. There is another Tirtha here called Kapila. O 
auspicious lady, a man who takes bath here derives a 
benefit equal to that of religious gift of eighty thousand 
Kapila (tawny-coloured) cows. 

36. By taking holy dip in Ganga-Dvara Kusavarta, 
Bilvaka, Nilaparvata and in Kanakhala, a man shakes off his 
sins and attains heaven. 

37. Thereafter is the holy centre designated as f Pavitra\ 
It is the most excellent of all excellent Tirthas. By taking 
holy dip there, a man obtains the benefit of two ‘Visvajit’ 
sacrifices. 

38. Thereafter is the holy centre called Venirajya where 
the highly meritorious Sarayu joins the holy Ganga like a 
sister meeting with her sister. 

39. The Ganga has become the celestial river inasmuch 
as it washes the right foot of Hari resembling a lotus. The 







1702 Narada Purana 

Sarayu born of the Manasa lake* originates from his left 
foot. 

40. Worshipping Rudra or Visnu in that holy centre 
the worshipper shall attain oneness with Visnu. The holy 
dip there is glorified as yielding the benefit of five horse- 
sacrifices. 

41. Thereafter is the holy centre Gandaka and (the 
river) GandakI flow there (in the Ganga). The charitable 
gift of a thousand cows and the holy dip there—both are 
equal. 

42-44a. Thereafter is the holy centre Ramatirtha. 
Vaikuntha is near it. Thereafter is the holy centre Somatlrtha, 
where sage Nakula worshipped and meditated on Siva and 
attained a position as the attendant of Siva. Then there is the 
meritorious holy centre Campaka where the Ganga flows 
in a northerly direction. It is equal to Manikarnika and is 
destructive of great sins. 

44b-45a. Thereafter is the holy centre Kalasa. Sage 
Agastya born of a Kalasa (pot) worshipped Rudra there and 
became an excellent sage. 

45b-46a. The holy centre Somadvlpa is • highly 
meritorious and is equal to Varanasi. Soma (the moon) 
worshipped Is'a (Rudra)there and so was held by him on his 
head. 

46b-47a. Visvamitra’s sister, Satyavafi (?) mingled with 
the Ganga there. The man who takes holy dip there, shall 
be the favourite guest of Indra. 

47b-52a. O MohinI, the man who takes holy dip in 
the great Tirtha called Jahnuhrada** certainly becomes the 
redeemer of twentyone generations of his family. Thereafter 
is the holy centre called Adititlrtha. It was here that Aditi 


‘Though the Sarayu rises in the mountains of Kumaun, according tc 
a iegend m thn Mbh-AnuSasana 155.23-24, while the Ganga was going to 
KaUasa Vas.stha brought her to the Manasa lake. But the Ganga bToke the 
bank of the lake and flowed forth. Hence it came to be known as the sarayu- 
saw bhinnas taya nadya sarqyuh sa tato'bhavat / Ibid 24a. V 

BC La Pro ^-^JaJtnus Asrama at Sultangunj to the west of Bhagalpur 
B.C. Law (.Historical Geography of Ancient India, p. 223. 




Uttarabhaga 40.52b—41.3 


1763 


bore Hari to Kasyapa. O blessed lady, they say that the holy 
dip there is Mahodaya (having great rise) (i.e. yielding great 
results)'. Then there is the great holy centre called Siloccaya 
where people perform penance and go to heaven. Even the 
grasses there, in view of their being supported by a number of 
holy centre attain heaven. Thereafter is the holy centre called 
IndranI Tlrtha where IndranI performed penance and obtained 
Indra as her husband. This holy centre must be resorted to 
like Prayaga. Then there is the holy centre Snataka that yields 
merits. It was here that Visvamitra performed penance and 
although he was a Ksatriya, he derived the status of a Brahmana 
sage by resorting to the holy centre. 

52b-54. Then the holy centre Pradyumna Tlrtha is 
famous. By means of his penance here, Kama became the son 
of Hari by the name Pradyumna. Thereafter is the holy 
centre Daksaprayaga which is very great and which yields 
great prosperity. This extends from Ganga to Yamuna (?) By 
taking the holy dip therein ever-lasting merit is obtained as 
one gets at Prayaga. 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

The Procedure for Charitable Gifts 

Vasu said : 

1. Henceforth, the benefit of the rites of taking bath etc. 
is being explained. O daughter of Brahma and the beloved of 
the king, listen attentively. 

2 . Siva (the auspicious river) redeems from the world a 
hundred thousand members of the families of those persons 
by whom the meritorious river Ganga was at least once bathed 
into, with devotion. 

3. O gentle lady, if the Sandhya prayers are offered 
there, the merit thereof is a hundred thousand times more thaa 








1764 Narada Pur ana 

the benefit when they are performed in ordinary places. The 
Ganga who sanctifies the Brahmanas is competent to do so. 

4. If water-libations are offered to the Pitrs by the sons 
endowed with faith, O MohinI, they give rare and everlasting 
satisfaction to the manes. 

5. The Pitrs will stay in the heaven for as many thousand 
years as the number of gingelly seeds taken by their sons in 
the holy rite of the Pitrs. 

6 . If the Pitrs are propitiated with the auspicious waters 
of the Ganga, all the Pitrs staying in the worlds of the Pitrs 
(including the ancestors of all other people) attain the greatest 
satisfaction. 

7. O auspicious-faced lady, he who wishes his life to be 
fruitful and has a desire for progeny, must propitiate the Pitrs 
and the Devas after approaching the Ganga. 

8 . Those who are dead and have gone to miserable 
condition (in hell), and are propitiated by persons born in 
their families by means of Kusa grass, gingelly seeds and the 
waters of the Ganga, go to Hari’s region. 

9. It is the statement of god Brahma that “those Pitrs 
who are meritorious and who are stationed in the heaven 
attain salvation if they are propitiated With the waters of the 
Ganga.” 

10. If the Pitrs are propitiated for a month by means of 
Tarpana 1 rites, and the offerings of balls of rice (Pindas) 
in the Ganga, all of them are highly delighted and they attain 
splendour of the sun. 

ll-13a. (Defective) They get into excellent aerial 
chariots and go over to the world of Brahma, accompanied 
by the bevies of celestial ladies, bedecked in gold ornaments 
and jewels, embellished in clusters of pearls and beautified with 
garlands etc. and having the charming bodies oftheGandharvas. 
They will have divine pleasures and they will be honoured with 


Sadating ° ne by offcrin S water. Manu (2. 176) has 
~° ^ - ** (ancestors). Tarpana is both 

as “ i *+?***■. *»» i» p«r™Li mu bo* *o 

miiTES*-" " ° r v "‘“- («*'* 



Uttarabhaga 41.13b-23 


1765 


the pleasing sounds of flutes, lutes, drums, conchs, Mrdangas 
and other instruments. 

13b-14a. The man who takes bath in the Ganga every 
day and worships the Liriga of god Siva certainly attains the 
greatest liberation, even in a single birth. 

14b-15a. Agni-Hotras, Vedas and Yajnas with sumptuous 
monetary gifts are not equal to even a hundred millionth part 
of the worship of the Linga in the Ganga. 

15b-16a. If one sprinkles with the waters of the Ganga 
(directing the act to the Pitrs or the Devas, in view of his 
Pitrs, they will be pleased and satisfied instantaneously even if 
they are in the hell. 

16b-18a. The waters of the copper-pots are ten times 
better than the waters of the mud-pots for the holy ablution. 
The merit in silver vessels is hundred times better and that of 
gold vessels is remembered to be crore times better. Similarly, 
in the cases of Arghya, Naivedya, and oblations and worships 
the benefit goes on increasing due to the qualities of the vessels 
used. 

18b-19a. Being affluent, if one does not extend the 
paraphernalia of worship due to delusion, he does not attain 
the benefit of those respective rites. He is shouted down as 
Devadrohi (inimical to God). 

19b-20. The sight of the Devas is meritorious; touching 
them is better than seeing; worshipping is more excellent than 
touching. Beyond this is the ablution with ghee. Learned men 
say that ablution with the waters of the Ganga is equal to the 
ablution with ghee. 

21-22b. By offering Arghya even once to the deities 
alongwith one’s own Pitrs, a man shall attain heavenly plea¬ 
sures in the company of his sons and grandsons.—the Arghya, 
however, shall consist of special articles of worship alongwith 
the Ganga water, in a copper vessel of the capacity of a 
Prastha according to the reckoning in the Magadha land. 

22c-23. The constituents of the Arghya to the sun are 
-eight viz—water, milk, ends of Kus'a grass, ghee, cyrds, honey, 
red Karavira flowers and red sandal paste. 



1766 


Narada Purana 


24-25. An excellent man must instal the idols of Visnu, 
Siva, sun, Durga and Brahma on the banks of the Ganga. 
According to his ability he must construct shrines too for them. 
The benefit of constructing these here is crores and crores of 
times more than that of erecting them in other holy centres. 

26-27. According to one’s ability one must make Lihgas 
having all special characteristics, out of the clay found on 
the banks of the Ganga. Every day he must instal them, wor¬ 
ship them with Mantras, leaves, flowers etc. according to 
his ability and finally cast them into the Ganga. The benefit 
of these activities is endless. 

28. If an excellent man devoutly performs the Japa of 
eight-syllabled Mantra i.e, Om Namo Narayanaya (Om, 
obeisance unto Narayana) in the Ganga that bestows bliss on 
everyone, liberation is within his reach. 

29. All the Siddhis wait upon the person who observes 
rules and restraints and performs Japa of the Mantra “Ora 
namo Narayanaya”, for six months. 

30. He who performs Japa of the Mantra (< Namah 
Sivaya” (Obeisance to Siva) alongwith the Oihkara, in accor¬ 
dance with the injunction, for two million and four hundred 
thousand times, shall become Sankara himself. 

31. There is no doubt that the five-syllabled Mantra— 
Namah Sivaya—is highly efficacious and is Siva himself. By 
performing its Japa whether one is unholy or holy, one becomes 
free from sins. 

32. If the Ganga is worshipped, the deities too are 
worshipped. Hence, one shall assiduously worship the celestial 
river. 

33-35. One shall meditate on the Ganga as follows 
She has four arms and three eyes. She is splendid in all limbs; 
she holds the jewelled pot, white lotus and the gestures of grant¬ 
ing boons and fearlessness with her four arms. She is clad in 
white garments; she is bedecked in pearls and jewels; she is 
pleased; her face is splendid and her lotus-like heart melts with 
pity; she has flooded the entire surface of the Earth with nectar¬ 
ine juice and is ever bowed to by the three worlds. 1 One who 

1. This description is instructive to have a mental picture of the 
Ganga while meditating as well as making her idol. 



Uttarabhaga 41.36-48 


1767 


meditates on the Ganga thus and worships her shall be 
meritorious. 

36. He who worships her continuously even for half a 
month shall be equal to a.Deva. The benefit will be more if the 
duration of worship is more. 

37. It was on the seventh day in the bright half of the 
month ofVaisakha that the Ganga was formerly drunk up by 
Jahnu out of anger, and cast off later on through the right 
ear. 

38. O splendid-faced lady, one should worship the divine 
Ganga, the girdle of the firmament, on that day or on the 
Aksayatrtlya day or in the month of Vaisakha or Karttika. 

39. After keeping awake at night, the devotee shall wor¬ 
ship Visnu, Ganga and Siva with feelings of great devotion, by 
means of cooked barley grains and gingelly seeds. 

40-42a. Similarly, the following articles too shall be used 
in worship viz.—fragrant flowers, saffron, Agallochum, sandal 
paste, the leaves of TulasI, Bilva etc., the fruits of Matuluhga 
(citron-likefruit,) etc, incense, lights, Naivedya (food) offer¬ 
ings etc. Their quantity and variety must be befitting one’s 
affluence and status. He will be going to the world of Visnu, 
riding on a divine aerial chariot. He will be honoured there for 
hundreds, thousands and crores of Kalpas. 

42b-43. Thereafter, he will return to the Earth and 
become a virtuous king. He will be endowed with comely fea¬ 
tures and good conduct. He will enjoy different kinds of plea¬ 
sures. On death he will have perfect knowledge and shall attain 
Absorption in Siva. 

44. Whether it is Yajna, or charitable gift, penance or 
Japa, Sraddha or the worship of the gods, every thing performed 
in (i.e. on the bank of) the Ganga yields benefits crores 
and crores of times. 

45. Listen to the merit of that person who makes a cha¬ 
ritable gift of a cow of ghee (?).on the day of Aksaya Trtlya 
on the banks of the Ganga in accordance with the injunctions. 

46-48. For thousands and crores of Kalpas, for hundreds 
and crores of Kalpas, he will be honoured in the world of 
Brahma alongwith his ancestors. He will be going there in an 



1768 


Narada Purana 


aerial chariot, variously bedecked in gold and jewels and em¬ 
bellished with figures of swans. He will be as refulgent as a 
thousand suns. He will be blessed with all cherished desires. 
Thereafter he is born as a Brahmana endowed with much wealth 
on the banks of Ganga. Undoubtedly he will become a 'knower 
of the Brahman after death and attain salvation. 

49. Similarly, he who makes a charitable gift of a cow 
duly, is honoured in the heavenly world for as many years as 
there are hairs on the body of the cow. 

50. Afterwards, he is born in a family richly endowed 
with wealth and foodgrains, full of jewels, gold and plots of 
lands and possessing good conduct, learning and fame. 

51. No doubt need be entertained in this regard that he 
will enjoy extensive pleasures, that he will be blessed with sons 
and grandsons and that he will be attaining final emancipation 
from Samsara. 


52. If a Kapila (tawny-coloured) cow is duly given to a 
person who has mastered the Vedas, he leads all his ancestors 
stationed in the hell on to the heaven. 


53. He who gives a plot of land on the Ganga, extending 
to a Nivartana (i.e. about two hundred and ten hands) excels 
Brahma, Visnu and Siva for as many years as there are particles 
of dust on that plot of land. 


54-57. He is reborn on the Earth. He shall become the 
lord of seven continents. He will be awakened after sleep 
by means of musical sounds, drums, conchs, etc., songs and 
instrumental music as well as eulogies of the Magadhas (bards). 
He wiU attain all sorts of pleasures. He will be engrossed in all 
holy religious acts. He will take all those ancestors detained in 
the hell, on to the heaven, and will liberate those who are in 
heaven O Mohmi, he will derive perfect spiritual knowledge 
imsdf. In the end, with the sword of perfect knowledge, he 

will cut off Avidya (Ignorance) consisting of five knots. Attain- 

BrlhiLan detaChmentl he wil1 the greatest 


58. Each rod is seven hands long. Thirty such rods make 

vSL h- t; fthk constitute Gocarma m — 

Vidhx (Brahma) himself has mentioned this measurement. 


Uttarabhdga 41.59-72 


1769 


59. If anyone gives a village on the bank of the Ganga 
to Brahmanas, it is conducive to the delight of Brahma, Visnu, 
Siva, Durga and the sun-god. 

60-62a. The giver of the village attains thousand times 
the benefit mentioned in the case of all charitable gifts, all 
Yajnas, all penances, holy rites and merits. He will be joyously 
eulogised by the Devas and others. He will be sporting about 
in an aerial chariot as refulgent as crores of suns in the city 
pertaining to Visnu (Vaikuntha) or to Sankara (Kailasa). He 
stays there for as many years as there are dust particles in the 
plot of land. He is then reborn in the family of Yogins, endow¬ 
ed with Anima (ability to be atomic in size) and other super¬ 
normal powers. 

62b-66a. O gentle lady, he who gives sixteen Masas of 
gold to a leading Brahmana on the Aksaya-Trtlya day is wor¬ 
shipped in all the worlds. Thanks to the charitable gift of 
cooked food, one attains Visnu’s world; thanks to the gift of 
gingelly seeds, one attains Siva’s world; by giving jewels, one 
attains Brahma’s world; Indra’s world by giving cow and gold; 
the world of the Gandharvas by giving gold and garments; 
renown by giving away a virgin in marriage. He shall attain 
salvation-yielding knowledge through learning, and realise the 
pure unsullied Being. 

66b-72. I shall succinctly mention the merit attained 
by a person who plants a big park on the banks of the Ganga 
with the following trees viz. plantain trees, coconut trees, wood 
apple trees, Asoka, Gampaka jack trees, Bilva trees, Kadamba 
trees, holy fig trees, Patala trees, mango trees, palmyras, 
oranges, and other trees. After making an image also there¬ 
in bedecked in flowers such as Jati, Vijaya (?) and Patala he 
shall dedicate it to Siva or Visnu or Durga or the sun god. With 
great devotion he must provide it with all necessary objects. 
They will stay in those worlds for as many thousands of Kalpas 
as there are flowers, roots, fruits and seeds of various kinds. 



1770 


Narada Purana 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

The Procedure for the Gift of Guda-dhenu 1 


Mohini said : 

1 . I am blessed. I am contented. My life is successful, 
since the excellent greatness of the Ganga has been heard from 
your lotus-like mouth. 

2. There is no other sacred river equal to the Ganga 
on the surface of the Earth. The merit accruing from the 
sight etc. of that river has been described in this manner. 

3. O leading Brahmana, I have been always your devotee. 
In due order, mention the procedure of the gift of Guqladhenu 
(a cow made of Jaggery) etc. 

Vasiffha said : 

4. On hearing those words of Mohini, Vasu, her priest, 
who knew the principles and real meanings of the Vedas and 
Agamas said smilingly. 

Vasu said : 

5 . O Mohini, listen. I shall recount to you what has been 
asked by you viz. the procedure for the gift of the cow made of 
jaggery etc. as glorified and prescribed in the scriptures. 


1. Although the chapter is captioned as Guda-dhenu ( dana) vidhi , 
‘The procedure for the gift of the (replica of the ) cow made of jaggery’, 
it prescribes some thirteen kinds of articles (some liquids) to be 
presented as ‘cows’. This chapter is called Guda-dhenu-vidhi as jaggery is 
the first in the list of such articles representing cows, vide VV. 22-25 
below. The Mt. P. Gh. 81 and AP. 212-10-34 endorse the procedure of the 
gift [dana) of guda-dhenu which is broadly thus : 

A black-antelope-skin four cubits in length is to be spread over¬ 
ground smeared with cow-dung and overstrewn with darbha grass, with the 
neck-portion of the skin to the cast and a smaller skin symbolic of the calf 
is also to be spread. The jaggery-cow should be of the weight of 4 or 2 or 1 
Bhdra and the calf to be proportionately of one quarter of the cow’s weight 
depending on the affluence of the donor, vide VV. 6-20 below for the 
detailed procedure of gifting the jaggery-cow. As usual the cow is identified 
with the Lakpnl of all deities. V. 20 states that the above procedure is to be 
followed in gifting other articles as ‘cows’. 




Uttarabhaga 42 . 6-15 


1771 ’ 


6. The ground must be smeared with cow-dung, and 
Kusa grass must be assiduously spread over it. Over it a deer 
skin measuring four Hastas (hands) must be placed with the 
neck (portion) directed towards the east. 

7-9a. The replica of the cow shall be so made that its 
face is turned towards the East and the calf is near the leg on 
the northern side (i.e. the left side). In the most excellent 
Gudadhenu four Bharas (special weight of 3000 Palas) of jag¬ 
gery must .be used, and the calf is made with a Bhara of Jag¬ 
gery. The middling replica of the cow is to be . made with two 
Bharas of jaggery. The calf must be made with half a Bhara of 
jaggery. The lowest type of Gudadhenu is made of one Bhara 
of Jaggery (1 Bhara = 200 Palas). The calf shall then be made 
with a fourth of it. These replicas are made in accordance with 
the wealth of the household. 

9b-10. A person who is affluent enough to make the ear¬ 
lier type of replica but prepares a latter type of replica, is a 
person of confused mind. He will not have the excellent 
future benefit. Both the cow and the calf made of jaggery shall 
be covered with a soft white cloth. 

11. Oyster shells are to be used for their ears. Sugarcane 
stems for the legs, pure pearls for their eyes; white threads for 
their sinews and veins and white plants for their dewlaps. 

12. The knots on their backs shall be represented by a 
copper pot; the hair by means of white chowries (tail of the 
antelope called Camara), corals shall be studded to their feet 
and butter shall represent the udders. 

13. There must be a bell metal vessel for the purpose of 
milking into. The pupils of the eyes shall be represented by a 
sapphire gem; the two horns must be bedecked in gold; the 
hoofs must be of pure silver. 

/ 14. Many kinds of fruits (must be given along with the 

cow). A smalL case of scents shall represent the snout. After 
making (the cow and the calf) thus, the devotee shall worship 
them with incense and lights. The following prayer shall be 
repeated : 

15. “May the Laksmx of all living beings, may goddess 
Laksml of the Devas stationed in the form of a cow, give me 
peace and calmness. 




’ 1772 


JSfarada Purana 


16. May the beloved wife of Sankara stationed in the 
bodies of the Rudras, may the goddess in the form of a cow 
dispel my sin. 

17. May that Laksml stationed on the chest of Visnu,. 
may that Laksml in the form of Svaha (wife of the fire god), 
may the Sakti of the moon, the sun and Indra and which is in 
the form of the cow be conducive to prosperity. 

18. May that Laksml of the four-faced deity, may that 
Laksml of Kubera, may that Laksml of the guardians of the 
worlds, may this cow be the bestower of boons on me. 

19. May that Svadha of the chiefs of the Pitt's, may 
that Svaha of the partakers of Yajna, may this cow that 
dispels sins grant peace unto me. 5 ’ 

20. After repeating this Mantra the devotee should dedi¬ 
cate the cow to the Brahmana. This is the procedure cited in. 
the case of all articles to be given as cows. 

21. O Mohiril, listen. I shall describe the nature as laid 
down in the scriptures, of all those ten kinds of cow glorified as 
destroyers of sins. 

22-24a. The first is the cow made of jaggery, the next one 
is the cow of ghee; the third is the cow of gingeliy seeds; the 
fourth is that named after the water ; the fifth shall be the cow 
of milk; the sixth is made of honey; the seventh the cow of 
sugar ; the eighth shall be the cow of curds; the ninth is the 
cow of jewels, and the tenth is the one in its own form (the 
real form). 1 

24b-25. For the cows in the form of liquids, pots shall be 
used and for others the masses and heaps of the articles con¬ 
cerned. Some wise men desire to include gold (cows) also 
among these. Some great sages recommend cows of fresh butter 
as well as of oil. 

26. This alone is the procedure. These alone are the 
articles facilitating the completion of the holy rite along with 


1. These verses list the names of the articles to be gifted as ‘cows’. 
The list is common to Mt. P. 81. 18-19 and AP. 212.11-12. But the NP adds 
‘gold , fresh butter and oil as additional articles for cow (v. 25) out of 
which ‘gold’ and ‘butter* are recommended in the Mt. P. 81. 21 which 
include Ratna-dhenu (jewelled cow) as well. 





Uttarabhaga 42.27-38 1773 

the Mantras and invocations in the different Parvans for 

ever. ■ , 

27. They must be given as gifts in accordane with one s 

faith. They yield worldly pleasures and liberation. They accord 
the same benefit as mantras. They are auspicious, removers 
of all sins. 

28-29. The cow of jaggery etc. must be given by persons 
endowed with devotion and faith during tropical and equino- 
tical transits of the sun, on the holy occasions of Vyatipata 
during the anniversaries of the beginnings of the Yugas and 
Manvantaras, and during the special occasions like eclipses etc. 
They may be given in holy centres, in one’s own house, or 

particularly on the banks of the Ganga. 

30-31. After making this gift of a cow to a leading Brah- 
mana in accordance with the injunctions, the devotee sha 
circumambulate the Brahmana and please the Rmks with 
monetary gifts. He shall make obeisance to them and bid them 
farewel. Thereafter, with great concentration and purity 

of mind he should worship the Ganga duly. 

32-36. He must visit the goddess of divine forms assurmng 
,he eight physical bodies, wid, . 

rice grains and two Prasthas of mi . of each 

the milt pudding. He must add honey and ghee apala of 

with devotional feelings. He should then cast off that mi k P 

ding into the Ganga along with sweet-meats and nng-hke P .s, 
half a Gunja weight. of gold and 

chum, camphor, saffron, aro " ia ^. ’ d t blue lotuses and 
grass, Rocana (yellow pigmem) be fully 

other fragrant flowers according 

devout then. Mantra men- 

37-38. O blessed ladg te||^ |^ sance to the Ganga. 
tioned in the Purana viz- O _ > , k t he procedure, 

to Narayana and to Siva.” O o mi, mo on day, 

Every month, on the New moon day, and on tn 

1. The dayTfor giving a jaggery-cow are the same a, m the case of 

other danas . ,, ca [ 

^a^ra^Si^opardgeca^daUiun akfayam ucyale //, ^ 200.125 



1774 Narada Pur an a 

this must be observed in the morning by persons, with great 
concentration. 

39-41. With great devotion and mental joy, the man 
must worship thus in accordance with his ability, for the period 
of a year. He must take only a small quantity of food and that 
too only Havisya) (cooked rice offerings soaked in ghee). He 
must observe the vow of celibacy by day and by night. O MohinI, 
by observing this strictly at the end of a year, the Ganga, as¬ 
suming divine form, wearing heavenly garlands and bedecked 
in divine jewels shall reveal herself to him personally. She will 
stand personally in front of him and grant him boons. 

42. O splendid lady ! After visualizing with his own eyes, 
the actual manifestation of the divine form of the Ganga before 
him, the man shall become quite contented and blessed. 

43. Whatever desires he cherishes, he accomplishes them 
all. If he be devoid of any desire, he will attain the final beati¬ 
tude in this very existence. 

44. Thus the procedure of the worship of the Ganga 
alongwith that of the gift of cow made of jaggery, about which 
you asked me, has been recounted by me completely. It is a 
holy rite that brings about salvation. This observance lasts for a 
year, and it yields satisfaction to the lord of Sri (Visnu). 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

The Procedure af Worship of the Ganga 
Vasiftha said : 

1. O leading king, on hearing the words of Vasu indicat- 

ZZ^Z******"*** once askcd L 

Mohini said : 

2. O Brahmana, everything auspicious, like the gift of a 

cow etc. has been heard by me Now t - u . f 

y Ine - 1Now I wish to hear the 



Uttarabhaga 43 . 3-11 


1775 


excellent Gangavrata (holy observance pertaining to the 
Ganga). 

3 . O Brahmana, O omniscient one, tell me what is the 
benefit of the worship of the Ganga, etc. or its installation 
there ? I seek refuge in you. 

4 . • You alone are the bcstower of salvation to me who 
am abandoned by my kinsmen. O Prominent one among the 
knowers or the learned, I am bereaved of my husband, nor have 
I any son. 

5 . I have sought refuge in you giving full credence and 
weight to the words of my father. Hence, holy sir, kindly nar¬ 
rate to me the way of propitiation of the deity along with the 
glorification of the Ganga on hearing which exery one is absolv¬ 
ed of his sins. I have bowed down to you. 

Vasiftha said : 

6 . O king, on hearing the words of MohinI, Vasu, the 
dignified Brahmana, the foremost among the knowers of the 
Vedas, honoured MohinI and said : 


Vasu said : 

7 -8a. “O gentle, lady, you have asked me pertinently, 
with the desire for the benefit of all the worlds. (I shall tell you) 
the greatness of the Ganga completely. It is destructive of great 

sins 

. 8b-9a. Formerly, while residing on the bank of the Gmiga 

this was narrated out of mercy by the bull-bannered go iva 
when he was lovingly asked by his consort go ess arva . 

9b-10. Food offering is taken in the forenoon by the 
Devas and at midday by the sages; in the a ternoon y * 

and at night by the Guhyakas and othem. It ts excellent 
to hike food at night after going beyond all other perrods of 

'“"ll. Begging alms is more excellent than obsenring fast. 

Taking unsolicited food is better than begging 
food at night* is better than taking -msohoKd f ~ 
shall take food at night (when stars appear 1 

*Xakta is mainly the time when the stars appear m the sky Hema 
on Kola , p. 114. 



1776 


Narada Purana 


12. The devotee regularly practising Nakta (acceptance 
•of food after appearance of stars in the evening) shall observe 
six things viz- partaking of Havisya, ablution, truthfulness, 
lightness of deity, holy rites in the fire, and sleeping below* (on 
the bare ground). 

13-14. The man who regularly practises this observance 
of Nakta shall do so in the month of Magha on the bank of the 
<janga. If he takes it near a Siva temple he shall take Krsara 
with ghee. He shall offer Krsaranna as Naivedya (food offer¬ 
ing) to Siva. Observing Kastamauna (the silence of a log of 
wood), he shall take food and avoid over-indulgence of the 
tongue. 

15. He shall take food in the leafy cups of Palana tree. 
Conquering the sense-organs, he shall remember Siva. He shall 
offer separate balls of rice to Dharmaraja and the goddess 
(Parvati). 

16-17. On the CaturdasI (fourteenth) day in both 
the fortnights, he should observe fast. On the full moon day 
the ablution of Siva must be performed severally with scents, 
Ganga water, milk, honey, ghee and curds. So also he must 
offer a golden flower on the head of the Linga. 

18. Then he should offer to the extent of his capacity, 
baked pies cooked in ghee. Taking an Adhaka measure of gin- 
gelly seeds, he should put it upon the Sivalinga. 

19. The devotee should worship the lord of all by means 
of blue lotuses and lilies. If they are not available, he should 
worship Hara with golden lotuses. 

20 - 21 . With devotion, one should offer to Mahesa, milk 

pudding soaked in honey, agallochum accompanied by ghee, 
lamp wherein ghee is burned and smear with sandal-paste, etc. 
He should offer leaves and fruits and dedicate a pair of black 
cows of handsome appearance. 

22. At the end of a month he should feed eight Brahmanas 
and give them monetary gifts. For the whole of that month, 
he should avoid honey (wine) and flesh. He shall observe celi- 
bacy for the whole of that month. 


♦Cf. Linga P. 1.10-12. Hemadri on Vrata I. 
quotes Gd. P. 


p. 333. Sm{ti-kaustubha t p. 


11 




Ultarabhaga 43.23-36 


1777 


23-24a If a person performs this holy rite even for once 
in the manner mentioned before, with faith and devotion, main¬ 
taining all observances and restraints, attains all the pleasures 
here and after death, he attains excellent salvation. 

24b-27. He goes to the beautiful city of Siva accompanied 
by the members of his family, in aerial chariots resembling 
sapphire gems, full of divine jewels. Peacocks shall be yoked to 
them. Means of all divine pleasures will be present there. He 
shall be accompanied by different friends. Until the dissolu¬ 
tion of all living beings, he will enjoy different kinds of desired 
pleasures. Thereafter, he becomes the righteous-souled ruler of 
Jambudvlpa. Free from all sins, he will enjoy all sorts of 
pleasures. 

28. Endowed with comely form and good fortune, exer¬ 
cising royal powers and free from all ailments, he too will 
enjoy this fruit. 

29. Or on the fourteenth day, in the bright half of Vais- 
akha, he who with a concentrated mind observes the Nakta- 
Vrata should take at night food consisting of cooked Sali rice 
mixed with milk. 


30-31. The devotee should worship Siva with flowers 
etc. and offer edibles as Naivedya. He should partake of the 
food with the silence of a log of wood. He should perform the 
rite of brushing the teeth silently with the twig of a banyan 
tree with purity of mind. He should sleep near the iva inga at 
night, on the banks of the river Ganga. 

32. On the morning of the full-moon day (of Vaisakha) 
he should duly take bad. in the Gahga. He should perform 
the Samkalpa rite (formal declaration of the .Mention) for fast. 
On that night, he should keep awake. 

33-34. He should perform ablution of the Lihga duly 
with ghee and worship it with flowers, scents, incense, p 
and food offerings. He should embelhsh a splen dtd bull 
with white flowers, cloths, etc. as well as powdere 
and sandal paste. He should duly dedicate it to iva. 

35-36. He should feed Brahmanas with milk P udd, "S ‘“ 

accordance with his capacity. He ££ 

tion and faith, even for once, undoubtedly odi 


1778 


Narada Parana 


which one gets after performing penance with due observances 
for one thousand seven hundred and fifty divine Yugas. 

37-38a. He goes to Isvara’s (god Siva’s) palace along- 
with his ancestors by means of aerial chariots that have the 
luster of swans and Kunda flowers that resemble the moon* 
chariots that are yoked with white bulls and embellished with 
clusters of pearls. 

38b-39a. He enjoys different kinds of pleasures through 
beloved ladies of divine beauty, having the fragrance of blue 
lotuses. He will be surrounded by them. 

39b-40. He will be blessed with prosperity and power 
for an indefinite period of time. He is born on the Earth 
as a king endowed with fame and prosperity. Under his sin¬ 
gle royal umbrella, he holds sway over the Earth. 

41-42a. In the end, he gains detached outlook on life 
and regains the Ganga. With that faith he courts death in the 
Gahga. He remembers the previous birth and certainly 
attains salvation. 

42b-44. A man or a woman should observe the following 
holy rite with devotional feelings. On the tenth day in the 
bright half of the month of Jyestha when associated with the 
constellation Hasta, the devotee should keep vigil at night on 
the banks of the river Ganga; with great faith he should worship 
the Ganga with ten kinds of flowers and scents, ten varieties of 
fruits, ten different articles of Naivedyas and ten lights. He 
shall offer batel leaves too. 

45-46a. After taking bath in the Gahga with devotion 
the devotee'should, w.th due formality, offer ten handfuls of 
black gingelly seeds with ghee into the water. He should also 
offer balls of ground flour of fried grains as well as those of 
Jaggery each being ten in number. 

46b-49a. On the beautiful banks of the Ganga, a mystic 
diagram of the lotus and Svastika should be drawn, over which 
a fUll water-pot should be placed. It must be covered with a 
cloth. Round the neck of the pot, a garland must be tied. An 
idol of the Gahga, in the form mentioned below, shall be made 
in gold or silver and placed over the pot. The devotee should 
worship the goddess (i.e. the divine Gahga) thus. If gold or 


1779 


Ultarabliaga 43.49b-58 

silver is not available, the image shall be made of clay. If the 
devotee is not able to make the clay idol, he shall draw the 
figure on the ground by means of flour dough. 

49b-51. The form of the Ganga for the idol as well as 
the picture is as follows : She has four arms. The eyes are 
beautiful. She has the lustre of ten thousand moons. She is 
being fanned with chowries. A white umbrella above her head 
embellishes her. She is delighted. Her innermost heart melts 
with pity. She is ready to grant boons. With nectarine juice, 
she has flooded the surface of the Earth. She is eulogised by 
the Devas and others. She is adorned with divine jewels. 
She has divine garlands and unguents. 1 

52. After meditating on the goddess in the water in the 
manner mentioned before, the devotee should worship her in 
the objects used for worship (i.e. image or picture). He should 
observe a special worshipping rite with the following Mantra, 
(vide verse 66 below). 

53. During the worship, the ablution of the deity with 
Paiicamrta is specially recommended. Justin front of the image, 
the ground shall be scrubbed and smeared with cow-dung. 

54-55. In accordance with his capacity the devotee 
should worship Narayana, Mahesa, Brahma, Bhaskara the sun, 
Bhagiratha the king, and the king of mountains, Himavan, 
by means of scents, fragrant flowers etc. To ten Brahmanas 
he shall distribute ten Prastha measures of gingelly seeds. 

56-57. Similarly, he should distribute ten Prastha 
measures of barley-grains to ten persons after mixing them wi 
milk products. In accordance with his capacity, the devotee 
should cause the replicas of aquatic animals such as fish, 
tortoise, frog, (crocodiles), etc. made in gold or silver. It it 
is not available, he should make them out of flour 01 J8• 
After worshipping these with flowers etc., the knower of the 
Mantras shall cast them into the Ganga reciting the antra (i 

verse 66 below) in the meanwhile. . 

58. On the day of Rathayatra (chariot procession), the 

devotee should make a replica of the Ganga facing t e nor 


1. Cf. Supra 41. 33-35. 



1780 Narada Purdna 

and riding a chariot, if he has the required affluence and 
means there. 

59. Rare indeed is the vision of the Ganga going round 
in procession in the case of men of evil deeds. Just as there is 
the chariot procession ofDurga; this procession too should be 
conducted in the same manner. 

60. After observing all the rites thus, in accordance 
with the injunction, the devotee should avoid stinginess in the 
matter of expense. Thereby he is immediately liberated from 
the ten kinds of sins mentioned below. 

61-63.* Among them there are three types of physi¬ 
cal sins viz. a) as taking away what is not voluntarily given, b) 
killing, etc. without scriptural sanction and c) enjoying another 
man’s wife carnally. There are four types of verbal sins viz. 
(i) harsh words (ii) false-hood (iii) back-biting in all its modes 
and (iv) irrelevant speech. There are three kinds of mental 
sins viz. a) wistful contemplation of another man’s wealth, b) 
thinking ill of others mentally and c) futile ardour and 
yearning. 

64. The devotee will be liberated from ten types of 
sins accumulated in the course of crores of births. There is 
no doubt about itsofar as the utterance of Brahma goes. 

65. (The Ganga) worshipped with the following Mantra 
does redeem from worldly existence, forty earlier generations and 
forty subsequent generations. 

66-67. The Mantra is “Om namo dasa-harayai Narayanyai 
Gangayai namah” — cc Om obeisance to Da Sahara (remover 
of tenfold ills), to Narayam, to Ganga.” He who repeats 
this Mantra five thousand times within a day and a night, on 
the day of the chariot procession, shall attain the fruit of 
ten kinds of Dharmas (?). He shall redeem from the ocean of 
worldly existence ten earlier generations and ten subsequent 
generations. 

68. The following hymn should be taken up for repeti¬ 
tion on that day. The devotee should, thereafter, proceed ahead 
with the worship of Visnu. 


♦Quoted from Manu XII 5-7. 







Uttarabhdga 43.69-77 


1781 


Hymn to Ganga 1 

69. Om obeisance to Siva, the Ganga, the bestower of 
auspicious things. Obeisance be to you. Hail be to the deity of 
the form of Visnu. Obeisance, Obeisance be to you the Ganga. 

70. Bow to the deity, the embodiment ofallDevas; 
obeisance to the deity of the form of medicine; Hail to you, O 
most excellent physician of all ailments of everyone. 

71. Obeisance be to you; O queller of poisons origi¬ 
nating from mobile and immobile beings; obeisance, obeisance 
to the destroyer of the poison of worldly existence; obeisance 
to the enlivener. 

72. Repeated bows to the remover of the three types of 
miseries of human beings, to the Is'varl (controller) of vital 
breaths. Obeisance to you, the remover of distress, the bestower 
of calmness and peace; obeisance to you the omniformed one. 

73. Hail to the purifier of all for liberation from sins; 
obeisance to the deity bestowing worldly pleasures and salvation, 
obeisance, obeisance to the deity possessing pleasures. 

74. Bow to you, the Mandakini (i.e. heavenly Ganga); 
obeisance, obeisance to the bestower of heavenly pleasures; 
obeisance to the embodied form of the set of the three worlds; 
obeisance, obeisance to the divine one. 

75. Hail to you stationed in Sukla (i.e. Siva); 
obeisance, obeisance to the possessor of well-being; Bow to you 
the divinity stationed in the seats of the Devas. Hail to you 
the possessor of brilliance. 

76. Salutations to the slow-moving river, to the bearer 
of the Linga, to Narayanl. Obeisance to you who are friendly 
to the universe. Obeisance to you, O Revatl. 

77. Obeisance always to you of huge size. Salutations 
to the support of all the worlds. Obeisance to you the chief 
one in the universe. Repeated bow to you NandinI (the 
delighter). 


1. Here Ganga is identified with the supreme Deity. Hence, many 
•epithets of the river Ganga remind one of Vcdantic Hymns. 



1782 


jVarada Pur an a 


78. Obeisance to the large one, the auspicious one and 
to the immoral one; salutations to the Pure one, devoid of 
dust (sin); obeisance to the deity whose access is both far and 
near. Obeisance, obeisance to the redeeming divinity. 

79. Obeisance to you who abide in the heaven; 
salutations to the non-different, to the unsplit divinity* 
Obeisance to the quiescent one; bow to you the stable found¬ 
ation; obeisance, obeisance to you the bestower of these 
boons. 

80. Obeisance to the fierce one. Obeisance to one who 
prattles with her mouth (?); salutations to the enlivener; 
obeisance to one who goes to the Brahman; obeisance to one 
who bestows the Brahman; obeisance, obeisance to the destroyer 
of sins. 

81. Bow to the queller of the anguish of those who bow 
down; salutations to the mother of the universe; obeisance to 
Vilusa (one who injures (the wicked) ; obeisance to the 
remover of difficulties; repeated obeisance to the efficient 
one. 

82-83. Obeisance to one who is antagonistic to all 
miseries; repeated obeisance to the auspicious deity. O greatest 
deity, greater than the greatest, obeisance to you, O bestower 
of salvation for ever. May Ganga be in front of me; may 
Ganga be at my sides. May Ganga be all round me; O 
Ganga, may my existence be in you. You are at the beginning. 
You are in the end; you are in the middle, you are everything- 
O auspicious deity who have descended on the Earth. 

84. You alone are the primordial Prakrti; you are lord 
Narayana. O Ganga, you are the great Atman; you are Siva. 
Obeisance, obeisance to you.” 

85-87. He who recites this hymn every day with devotion 
or listens to this with faith, is liberated from the tenfold defects, 
physical and verbal. The patient will be liberated from the 
ailment and the unlucky from miseries and mishaps. He is 
liberated from the enemies, from the bondage and fears. 
He attains all desires. After death he gets absorbed into the 
Brahman. 


Uttarabhaga 43.88-97 


1783 


88. There is no fear from arson, larceny or. sinful 
activities in the house where this hymn is written down and is 
honoured. 

89-90. A person who stands in the waters of the Ganga 
and repeats this hymn ten times on the Dasami (tenth) day 
whether he is indigent or incompetent, shall after worshipping 
the Ganga with devotion, attain the benefit that is mentioned 
in case of the worship performed in accordance with the 
procedure laid down above. 

91. Just as Gaurl, so also is the Ganga. Hence the 
procedure laid down for the worship of Gauri should be followed 
in the case of the worship of the Ganga too. 

92. Just as Siva so also is Visnu; Just as Visnu so also 
Uma; just as Uma so also is the Ganga. There is no difference 
and distinction among them. 

93. He who advocates that there is difference between 
Visnu and Rudra, that there is difference between Ganga and 
Gauri, and that there is difference between LaksmI and Gauri, 
is a man of confounded intellect. 1 

94. It is the blessed men on the Earth who cast off their 
body by the day-time in the bright half of a month in the 
Ganga during the Uttarayana (during the transit of the sun in 
the northern hemisphere), while Janardana is abiding in the 
heart meditate upon him as such. 

95. O daughter of Brahma, those men who leave off 
their vital breaths by casting their bodies into the Ganga go 
to the world of Visnu eulogised by those who are domiciled 
in the heaven. 

96. (?) He who dies pariially due to observance of 
fast and partially due to being drowned in the Ganga, is not 
reborn. He attains Sayujya (identity) with the Brahman. 

97. The embodied being that casts off its vital breaths 
(dies by throwing himself) in the Ganga has the same salvation 
as that of an intelligent being endowed with Sattva guna and 
Yogic practice. 


1. The NP, though a Vaisnava Purana, always advocates the one¬ 
ness between Siva and Visnu and other deities. He emphasizes ekam sat 
(Reality is one). 





1784 


Narada Purdna 


98. The man who takes up the vow of abstaining from 
taking food and dies on the banks of the Ganga, attains in fact 
the greatest world alongwith the Pitrs (his ancestors). 

99-1 Ola. (?) If an intelligent man desires to abandon 
his vital breath by dying in the Ganga but many births pass 
by and he meets his deaths here and there and at different 
places but not in the Ganga, or many days elapse as he goes 
here and there and does dot reach it (it does not matter. He 
will have the benefit). Even if he dies two Yojanas away, it 
is as beneficial as dying nearby or in the Ganga itself. No doubt 
need be entertained in this respect. 

101b-102a. Whether with the perfect knowledge or 
without it, whether with desire or without desire, the 
man who dies in the Ganga attains heavenly pleasures and 
salvation. 

102b-103. Whilst dying, if a man remembers the Ganga 
or touches it, he attains the greatest salvation even if he is a 
habitual sinner. 

104. Those intelligent men (self-possessed ones) by 
whom the physical body is cast off after going off to the Ganga 
attain equality with the Devas. Hence, one shall reasoningly 
eschew all other means of bestowing liberation and resort to 
the Ganga till one’s body falls. 

105. He who dies in the firmament on the Earth or in 
the water, attains the everlasting region worthy of being 
honoured by Brahma, Visnu and Siva. 

106. He who is righteous, is alive, who is pure and 
honoured by good men and who mentally thinks of the Ganga, 
attains the greatest salvation. 

107. Wherever one may die, if one devoutly remembers 
the Ganga when death is imminent, one goes to the city per¬ 
taining to Siva or to Visnu. 

108. The Ganga came out of the cluster of the matted 
hair of Sambhu, that is very rough and hard. It flowed 
over the sons of Sagara who were sinners and led them to 
the heaven. 

109. A man is honoured in the heavenly world as many 



Uttarabhaga 43.110-118 


1785 

thousands of years as the number of his bones that are cast in 
the Ganga. 1 

110. A man’s stay in the heavenly world begins from 
the moment when his bones are cast off into the waters of the 
Ganga by other men. 

Ill- If the bones of any one of auspicious rites are taken 
to the Ganga water, he does not at all return from the world 
of Brahma. 

112. If any one’s bones are cast off into the Ganga 
water within the ten days (from his death), he attains a 
benefit similar to that of the death within the Ganga. 

113-115. The son (or others who perform the obsequies) 
should take bath and sprinkle Pancagavya on the bones. 
He should then place them in a basket or casket alongwith the 
gold, honey, ghee and gingelly seeds. Facing the quarter fre¬ 
quented by the groups of ghosts (i.e. the south) he shall repeat 
this— cc Obeisance be to Dharma”. Thereafter he, should enter 
the water and saying “He was dear to me,” cast off the bones. 
He should take bath once again and visit the Aksayavata (the 
everlasting holy banyan tree). Then he should give away the 
religious monetary gifts. When this is done the dead man 
detained in the city of the dead, shall go to the heaven and 
have a position similar to Indra (the king of gods) . 2 

116. Narayana is the lord of the place by the current 
of water on the one hand and a place of four Hastas away 
on the other hand. No one else can ever be the lord of that 
place. 

117-118. No one shall accept Pratigraha (monetary 
gift) in that region (where Narayana is the lord) even if the 
vital breaths have reached the throat i.e. even when death is 
imminent.). The water level reached on the fourteenth day in 
the bright half of the month of Bhadrapada is called Garbha. 


1. The same as Matsya 106.52, Kuma ,1. 37.32; NP Supra I. 

15.163. ^ , 

2. This is the procedure of costing-off bones of the deceased 
relative in the Ganga. Gf. the procedure described in the Brahma . 
and quoted in Tirtha-Cintdmariiy pp. 265-266. 







1786 


Ndrada Parana 


The distance covered by Garbha is called Tira (bank, shore). 
“The distance of hundred and fifty Hastas is called Garbha (or 
the bed of the river). Beyond that is the Tira.” 1 

119-121. O gentle lady, this is* the opinion of some and it 
is approved of in the Srutis and Smrtis. The distance of a 
Gavyuti (six kms) around theTlrais called Ksetra (sacred area 
or field). One should eschew the Tira and reside in the Ksetra. 
Residence in the Tira is not advisable. The limiting boundary 
of the Ksetra extends to one Yojana from either bank. All the 
sins never transgress the boundary of the Ganga. On seeing it, 
the sins run away like the forest-dwellers (or the animals) on 
seeing the lion. 

122. O excessively blessed lady, the space of three 
Yojanas on either side of the Ganga should be known as Siddha- 
ksetra. It was here that Rama and Sambhu had their penance 
groves. 

123. No man shall accept Pratigraha (monetary gift) in 
a holy centre or in the sacred temples. A man shall abstain 
from it under all circumstances (i.e. even when there are 
justifiable reasons). 

124. The holy centre is of no avail (i.e. ceases to be 
so) to one who accepts Pratigraha in the holy centre or in 
sacred temples as long as that money is retained by him. 

125. O gentle lady, by selling the Ganga, one becomes 
(guilty) of selling (god) Visnu. When Janardana is sold, all the 
three worlds are sold. 

126. He who applies the clay taken up from the banks of 
the Ganga on his head assumes the form of the sun for the 
destruction of darkness. 

127. A man shall spread the dust particles taken from 
the banks of the Ganga and place the balls of rice for his 
Pitis. He shall thus propitiate them and lead them to 
heaven. 

128. O gentle lady, thus the excellent greatness of the 
Ganga has been recounted to you. A man who reads this or 
listens to this attains the greatest region of Visnu. 


1. Quoted by Tirlha-Cintamapi, p. 266. 



JJttarabhaga 43.129—44.4 


1787 


129. O daughter of Brahma, this section is to be repeated 
every day with devotion by persons who are pure, endowed 
with faith and who wish for salvation leading to the region 
ofVisnu or Siva. 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 


The Greatness of Gaya. * 


Vasistha said : 

1. O king, after hearing the excellent greatness of 
the Ganga, the destroyer of sins, Mohini said again to the 
priest. 

Mohini said : 


2. O holy sir, I have been blessed with your sympathy 
since the holy story of the Ganga that dispels sins has been 


recounted. 


3. O excellent Brahmana, how is the holy place Gaya 
Tlrtha * 1 well-known in the world ? I wish to know it. Kindly 


recount it now. 


Vasu said : 


4. The holy centre named Gaya is remembered as the 
most excellent of all TIrthas. God Brahma, the gran sire 


*Gaya as a 
find Gaya Mdhatmy 
chs. 82-86, Agni 


1. One wc 
away from the ( 

( Tirtha-rdja ) and 

are on the Ganga__, 

Bengal followed a separate order of sacred places. 


no. of verses are c 





1788 


Narada Purana 


of the world, the lord of the chief of the Devas, personally stays 

here. , , 

5-6. It is here that the following verse was sung by the 

Pitrs who desired Yoga : “One shall seek many sons so that 
at least one of them may go to Gaya or perform a horsesacrifice 
or set a dark-coloured,bull free O gental lady, the excellent 
greatness of Gaya is the essence of all essences. I shall recount it 
succinctly. Listen to it. It yields worldly pleasures as well as 
liberation from Samsara. 

7-8. Formerly, there was an exceedingly powerful demon 
named Gayasura. He performed a very terrible penance that 
scorched all living beings. The Devas being extremely afflicted 
by the severity of the heat of his penance went to Hari for 
bringing about his death. 

9-11. The Devas sought refuge in Hari. Hari spoke to 
them “When his huge body is struck down, all of you should 
be auspicious-souled (pure in mind) ”* The Devas said ‘'So be 
it” Once (demon Gaya brought lotuses from the milk ocean for 
the sake of Siva’s worship. He went to bed in a place near 
Hari. Since he was deluded by Visnu’s Maya, he was killed by 
Visnu with his iron club. 1 2 Thereafter Visnu is remembered when 
offering balls of rice, taking holy dip etc. (here). He shall, go to 


1. The same as Mbh. Vana, 87. 9-10. Mt. P. 22-6. Vdyu 105. 10,. 
Kurma P. II. 35. 12, Pd. P. I. 38.17. 

♦It may also be interpreted in view of the future events : When his 
huge body is felled down, you should be there (on it) with your auspicious 
souls. 

2. The story differs in the Vdyu P. Gh. 106. There Gayasura 
voluntarily offers his body for the sacrifice of god Brahma and subsequently 
all gods stay permanently on him. 

It is not known why this great self-sacrificer is called an ‘Asura-* 
Apart from the reference to Gaya, the seer of two suktas in the Rgveda 
(X. 63 and 64), we find a pious king Gaya, the son of King Samudravijaya 
of Rajagrha in the Svetambara Jaina work Uttaradhyayana-Sutra and a royal 
sage Gaya whose hermitage the Buddha is said to have visited (in Asva 
ghosa’s Buddha-Carita ). Even the Vdyu P. which calls it Asura states that 
his body was purer than gods’ and his act of offering his body is too sublime 
to designate him as Asura. 

Thus Jain, Buddhist and Brahmanical sources are unanimous about 
the saintly nature of the so-called ‘Asura* Gaya. 



1789 


Uttarabhdga 44.12-21 

the ‘Gadadhara’ (wielder of the iron club). At Gaya he is the 
bestower of salvation. 

12. Assuming the form of the Lingapure (?) Pitamaha 
(god Brahma) stationed himself on his body. It will be a holy 
centre with the vehicle of Visnu as the delimiting boundary and 
guardian deity. 

13. The man who performs Yajna, Sraddha, Pinda-dana 
will go to heaven or the world of Brahma. That man will 
not go to hell. 

14. Realising that the holy centre of Gaya is the greatest 
of all, Brahma performed Yogic rites. He worshipped the 
Brahmanas and the sages who came there. 

15. After creating the river Sarasvatl, he stood pervading 
the quarters and the interstices of the quarters. Then he created 
edibles, foodstuffs, fruits, etc. and then Kamadhenus (wish- 
yielding divine cows.). 


16-18. He made Gayatlrtha five Krosas (15kms) in extent. 
He gave Brahmanas sufficient wealth. In the Yoga (sacri¬ 
fice) performed by Dharma, these Brahmanas accepted wealth 
etc. as Pratigraha. Hence those Brahmanas who stayed at Gaya 


May you not have any learning for 
the river shall be devoid of taste 


were cursed by Brahma. *'M 
three generations. To you tl 
the mountain shall be a mere 


rock. Brahma was then requested 


by them. Hence the lord created holy centres and sacrea 

rivers. 1 * . 

19. “The people in Gaya are holy ones, by means of Srad- 
dha they go to the world of Brahma. I am always wors ippe 


Viv tTincf* nersons who honour you. 



tlrtha desirous of holy dips therein. 




1790 


jYarada Purana 


22. The sins of Brahmana-slaughter, imbibing liquor, steal¬ 
ing, outraging the modesty of the preceptor’s wife and those of 
coming into contact with these perish, thanks to Gayasraddha.* 

23. Those who are dead but not consecrated (with Vedic 
Mantras) well, those who are killed by animals and those who 
are bitten by serpents become liberated by Gayasraddha and 
go to the heaven. 

24. The benefit that a man attains by offering balls of 
rice in Gaya cannot be adequately described by me even in the 
course of hundreds and crores of Kalpas. 

25. O Gentle lady, in this connection there is a traditional 
mythological story. O blessed lady, listen to it with concentra¬ 
tion of mind. 

26-2 7a. In theTreta yuga there was a king named Visala. * 1 
He lived in the city of Visala. He was blessed with fortitude 
but was devoid of a son. Hence the ruler of Visala himself 
asked the leading Brahmanas. The destroyer of enemies asked 
them about the son. The Brahmanas of excellent spiritual 
power and virtue spoke to him. 

27b-28a. Ci O king, go to Gaya. Propitiate Pitrs with 
balls of rice in accordance with the injunctions, for the sake of 
a son. O heroic one, thereby you will certainly have a son 
who will be the donor of thousands and who will be lord of the 
entire Earth.” 

28b-30a. On being thus spoken by the groups of Brahma¬ 
nas the king, the ruler of Visala was delighted. His mind hover¬ 
ed round the most excellent of all holy centres. Accompanied 
by the Brahmanas he went to Gaya. Desirous of a son he came 
to the most excellent of all the holy centres. At Gayaslras he was 
engrossed in the sacrifice. 

30b-31a. In accordance with the injunctions he made 
offerings of balls of rice to the Pitrs. At that time he saw three 
persons in the sky. They were endowed with excellent, physical 
forms of white, red and black complexions. He spoke to them, 
“O sirs, why are you thus ? How is it, that delusion is expcri- 


* Vayu P. 112-7-14; Agni P. 115.54-59, Garu<Ja P. 84.34-39. 

1. The same as Vayu 105. 13. 



Uttarabhaga 44.3lb-40 


1791 


enced by you ? Tell me everything. Curiosity has been generated 
in my mind. 

Sita (the white person ) said : 

31 b-32. “O king, I am Sita (the white one), your father. 
My name, colour and activity expatiate upon my name Sita. (I 
am of pure conduct. Hence my name is‘white’). This red-com- 
plexioned one is my father. He has committed ruthless acts. 
He has killed Brahmanas. He is a sinner. Thereafter (the person 
beyond that) is my grandfather. By name, colour and aedvity 
he is Krsna (black). 

33. Formerly, in the previous birth, many ancient sages 
had been' killed by this Kr?na. These two the father and the son 
are remembered to have fallen into the hell called Avici. 

34. My father and beyond him, the other one both of them 
are black-faced. They were in the hell for a long time. By 
means of my pure karman, I attained the scat of Indra which is 

very difficult of access. 

35. You are the knower of Mantras. By offering 
balls of rice at Gaya, these two who had gone inside the hell 
called Avici were liberated, thanks to the power of excellent 

holy centre. _ , 

36-37 O destroyer of your enemies, you a o ere 
water libations saying “I shall propitiate my father, 
and great grandfather.” O excellent one, thanks to that state 

ment we all have come together at the same place and time. 

Them is no doubt about this that we will go to the world of 

Pitrs, thanks to the power of holy centre. 

38 By your offering the balls of rice there at Gaya 

your grandfather and great-grandfather had b- 
Lm their sins. Their subtle bodies too are deformed but they 

have now attained Siddhi. , 

39. O son, it is for this rernon that I have taken them 

with me in order to see you. Now 1 shall go away. 

* * * "?£££% fit tplT^ father 

may, by offerings the balls ol nee at v y 

who is a Brahmana-slayer. 



1792 


Narada Purdna 


41. After saying this and blessing his son visala ith bene¬ 
dictions, his father Sita, immediately went to his own world 
alongwith those two grandfathers. 

42. Going once to Gaya, offering balls of rice once, 
even this is very difficult of access. What then a continuous stay 
therein ? 

43. (?) The holy rite of fallen men is sometimes observed 
only once in a year in the Gaya-well by the relatives with the 
consideration for time and space. 

44-47. A certain royal ghost* said to a merchant for the 
purpose of his own liberation ; You visit the holy place called 
Gayatlrtha. Take your holy bath and be scrupulously clean. 
Offer balls of rice in my name. By your offering the balls 
of rice there, I will be easily liberated from this state of ghost- 
hood. I will then attain the auspicious world of all donors.” 
After saying this to the merchant in the company of his attend¬ 
ants, the royal ghost duly but secretly narrated his name etc. 
After understanding these, the merchant went to the excellent 
holy centre of Gayasirsa. 

48. He performed the rite of Pamsunirvapana (offering 
of balls of rice on the dust) to the ghosts in due order. He 
made the gift of wealth after making Pitrs go ahead. 

49. This highly, intelligent person offered balls of 
rice for himself in accordance with the injunctions but without 
gingelly seeds. * 1 So also in the case of other members born 
in the family. 

50. When the balls of rice were offered by the merchant, 
(the royal ghost and others) were liberated from ghosthood. 
They attained the status of twice-boms and went over to the 
world of Brahma.’ 

51. The following things should be offered by the sons; 
milk puddings and the meat of rhinoceros when offered take 
Pitrs to their abode. The black and red ewe or ram shall be 
conducive to the infinite results. 


♦This story is repeated in Vdyu P 112.16-19 Agni P. 115.60-64 Garuda 
P. 84.32-35. 

1. For offering Pivfa to oneself vide Vdyu 105. 12, AP. 115. 68. 



(Jttarabhdga 44.52-60 


1793 


52. Sraddha, Japa, Homa and austerities performed 
at Gaya are of inexhaustible merit. These rites performed by 
the son on the death-anniversaries of the Pitrs shall have 
endless benefits. 


53. The Pitrs who are over whelmed by the fear of hell 
desire for sons, hoping thus, “The son who goes to Gaya will 
redeem us.” 


54. Whatever is given to the Pitrs at Gaya in the 
following places is of everlasting benefit, viz. Dharma Prstha, 
the assembly of Brahma, Gayasirsa and the Aksaya Vata. 

55. After visiting Brahmaranya, Dharmaprstha and 
Dhenukaranya one should worship the Pitrs. He will thereby 
redeem twenty members of his family. 

56. The sin committed in the course of great Kalpa 
perishes as soon as one reaches Gaya. The Sraddha offered at 
the ‘Bull’ and at the Grdhravata* (Banyan tree at Gfdhra- 
kuta) yields great benefit. 

57. The pada (foot-print) of sage Matanga** is seen 
there by all men. The entire essence of Dharma has been 
proclaimed as an example to the people. 

58. That grove of lotuses wherein Pandu had entered (?) 
and which is frequented by meritorious persons is holy and 
sacred. It is a holy centre that is a model for all. 

59. On the third side at the foot of the sila in the pre¬ 
cinct of (the lotus-pond called) Niksira.*** and on the bank of 
the deep pool of the Kausiki, 1 the sraddha that is offered yie 

great benefit. , 

60. His foot was placed on the Mundapr?tha hill by the 
intelligent Mahadeva. Penance very difficult to be performe 


. .... rr 04qi The Grdhra-kuta hill is to the left of 

♦Mentioned in Mbh. Vana 84.91. 1 . M G{d hrakuta-vata 

the (Prcta) Sila, The Gldhravafa in the N 

in the Vayu 108.63. . , , ^ an d not to the foot- 

*+Mbh. Vana 84, 101 refers to Matanga s hermi g 


print. 

***vidc Vayu P . 108.83-84. 

1. One of the rivers invited by sage 

108.81) 


Lomasa there (vide Vayu 











1 Narada Puraria 

was gone through for many hundreds of years in the holy 
places. 

61. Here, a man devoted to Dharma casts off immediate¬ 
ly his sins in the course of a short while, like serpent that 
casts off its old slough. 

62. There itself to the north of Mundaprsha (moun¬ 
tain) is the holy centre well-known by the name of Kanaka- 
nanda. It is frequented by groups of Brahmana sages. 

63. By taking their holy dips therein, men go to heaven 
in their physical bodies. The Sraddha offered there is cited to 
be always of ever-lasting benefit. 

64. O lady of beautiful eyes, the devotee must take a holy 
dip for three days in the Niksira and in the lake Manasa. He 
shall then perform Sraddha there. 

65-66a. By going to the lake called northern Manasa* 
one attains excellent Siddhi. He who offers Sraddha there in 
accordance with his influence and capacity attains all divine 
desires and all the means of liberation. 

66b-68. Thereafter, the devotee should go to BrahmaSiras 
that is embellished of necessity by Brahma. He shall attain 
the world of Brahma. Early in the morning, immediately 
after it had dawned, a holy sacrificial post was fixed in that 
lake** by Brahma. By circumambulating the sacrificial post, he 
shall obtain the benefit of Vajapeya sacrifice. Thereafter, O bless¬ 
ed lady, he should go to Dhenuka well known throughout 
the worlds. 

69. The devotee should observe fast and spend a night 
there. He should then offer a cow with gingelly seeds (or replica 
of a cow made of gingelly seeds). Liberated from all sins he 
shall certainly go to the world of Soma (the moon-god). 

70-72. O highly blessed lady, even today highly wonder¬ 
ful prints are seen there. A tawny-coloured cow grazes 
on the mountain along with calf. O Mohinl, the marks of the 


* Uttar a and dakfina Manasa arc the tanks at Gaya. Vdyu P ch 1114 
and 8 

**Cf. Vdyu 111.30-33. The NP seems to have skipped over the visit to 
the Bodhi tree (mentioned in the Vdyu 111.26-29) 



1795 


Uttarabhaga 44.73-83 


hoofs of that cow and calf are seen (even today). If there is 
any inauspicious Karman, it perishes the moment these foot¬ 
prints are seen by those leading men. Thereafter, he should go 
to the Grdhravata, the abode of the intelligent lord (Siva). 

73-74. After applying Bhasman over the body the devotee 
should perform the Bhasmasnana (Bath in ashes) and then 
approach the bull-bannered lord. O gentle lady, the holy.obser¬ 
vance of the Brahmanas lasts for twelve years. In the case of 
all other castes, all the sins perish thereby. Thereafter, the de¬ 
votee should go to the Udyana mountain reverberating with 


songs. 

75. The Brahmana of praiseworthy holy observances should 
perform Sandhya prayers at the place where the highly 
meritorious foot-print of Savitrl is seen. 


76-78. That has the benefit of (performance of) a twelve 
years Sandhya prayer. O daughter of Brahma, the Yonidvara 
hill is also there. If a person passes through it, he is liberated 
from the torture of vaginal passage (i.e. rebirth). The king 
who resides in Gaya for both the fort-nights, the bright and 
the dark sanctifies seven generations of his family. There¬ 
after, O blessed lady, he should go to Dharmaprstha that 
yields great benefits. 


79. By going to that place where Dharma, the protec¬ 
tor of the world of the Pitre is himself stationed, the devotee 
shall attain the benefit, of horse sacrifice. 


80. Thereafter, the man should go to the excellent holy- 
centre of Brahma. By approaching and worshipping Brahma 
there, the devotee attains the benefit of the Rajasuya 
sacrifice. 

81. The holy centre of Phalgu tirtha is well known. It is 
endowed with many roots and fruits. The Sraddha performe m 
the place where the river KausikI flows is remembered as yield- 
ing ever-lasting benefits. 

82-83. Thereafter, he should go to the mountain ( aya- 
Siras) protected by the king conversant with piety, t is 
enjoyed by the meritorious king Gaya. It » hem that. the sao,ed 
river Malitnadl (i.e. Phalgu) flows. The lake Gayastras ts also 









1796 Narada Purana 

here. The holy lake Brahmasaras is frequented by sages and is 
exceedingly meritorious. 

84. It was here that the holy sage Agastya went towards 
Vaivasvata Yama; the eternal ruler of Dharma stayed here 
always. 

85. Here the outcome of all the rivers is seen. The 
Pinaka-bearing Mahadeva is continuously present here. 

86-87a. There is the world-famous Aksayavata (the ever¬ 
lasting banyan tree).Formerly, Gaya performed a sacrifice here 
and worshipped the deity. The most excellent river (Phalgu) 
which was protected in the sacrifices of Gaya is also present 
there. 

87b-88a. At Gaya, one must see the Mund a -Pr?tha, the 
divine mountain Raivata and the third Krauncapada. On see¬ 
ing them one is liberated from sins. 

88b-89a By seeing Samkara in the SivanadI, Gadadhara 
at Gaya and the great Atman everywhere, one is liberated from 
multitudes of sins. 

89b-90. The goddess at Varanasi is VisalaksI, Lalita at 
Prayaga; goddess named Mangala at Gaya and Saimhika (in 
the place called) Krta-sauca. Whatever a person gives while 
staying at Gaya attains infinite and ever-lasting benefits. 

91. His Pitrs (forefathers) are delighted by his excellent 
Karman (rites). The Pitrs consider themselves really blessed 
with sons when they stay at Gaya and offer cooked rice-balls to 
the Pitrs. 


Uttarabhaga 45.1-6a 


1797 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 

The Procedure of offering Pin das 1 
(in the Gaya-Yaira) 

Vasu continued : 

1. O Mohinl, listen, I shall now recount to you the 
merit accruing from Preta-Sila (a part of Sila-or a stone slab 
which is a hill supposed to have been placed on Gayasura’s head 
to stabilise him). By offering Pinzas (balls of rice) at it, one 
uplifts one’s forefathers (from their present status in after¬ 
life). 

2. The foot of the Sila is covered by a hill* called Pra¬ 
bhasa. Being pleased with sages (who propitiated him), 
Prabhasa emerged out of the big-toe of the Sila. 

3. God Siva abides in that <c toe”(of the Sila) and hence 
is glorified as Prabhasesa. It is a part of the big toe of the Sila 
and that whole is called Preta-Sila. 

4a. A person who offers balls of rice (Pinqlas) there (at 
the Preta-Sila) redeems his forefathers from ghost-hood. 

4b-6a. The man who takes bath at the meeting-place 
of the great river Phalgu and Prabhasa hill, will himself become 


1. Offering of Pinda (balls of rice) to Pitfs — Pi^da-dana has an 
important place in the pilgrimage to Gaya. This chapter has a close textual 
similarity with the Vayu P. 108. 12ff. 

As the NP. has borrowed a number of verses from the Gaya Tatra section 
of the Vayu P., it is not necessary to locate every verse that way. A few verses 
are however noted below as a specimen : 


JVP. 

Vayu p . (Ch. 108) 

8b-9a. 

20 

9b-10a. 

23 

lOb-lla. 

22 

llb-12a. 

28 

12b-13a. 

29a. 

13b-14a. 

30 etc. etc. 


♦The reading Prabhasendtrina in the NP is meaningless. It should have 
been Prabhasenadrm , as Prabhasa is the name of a hillock at Gaya. The Vayu 
which gives a full-fledged Gaya Mahatraya reads this line thus : acchaditah 
iilapadah prabhasenadri(id yatah // 108.13 






1798 


jVarada Pur ana 


Vamadeva. Hence it is remembered as Vama-tlrtha*. 

When, on being requested Rama performed ablution 
in the Mahanadi (Phalgu), that place of bath came to be 
known as Rama-Tirtha since then. It completely purifies all 

the people. , 

6b-7a. Whatever sins have been committed by men in 
thousands of their previous births—all that sin gets dissolved 
(by taking a bath in Rama Tlrtha). 

7b-9a. Having taken bath while chanting the Mantia . 
“O Rama ! Rama of mighty arms who aftord protection 
(and freedom from fear) to gods ! O Lord of gods ! I shall 
pay obeisance to you. May my sins perish.”, a man should 
perform Sraddha. He who offers Pinqlas (balls of rice to Pitre) 
at Rama-Tirtha is honoured in the world of Visnu. 

9b-ll. After bowing him down, one should go to reful¬ 
gent Siva, Prabhasesa. Afterpaying homage to Sambhu (Siva), 
one should offer oblation (food with Kusa-grass, sesame and 
water) to Yama (with the prayer) : "O lord of gods 1 You 
are the waters as well as the Lord of luminaries. Annihilate 
instantly my sins committed by me with my mind, word and 
deed.” (As the legend goes, when Gayasura began to move) 
god Yama occupied the rear of the Sila (to stabilise it with his 
weight.) 


♦The verse in the NP reads : 

Vamadevah svayam bhuyad Vama-Tirtham tatah smxtam /5 a. This verse as 
printed in the NP (and translated above) is irrelevant in the context, as 
the next verse shows that the Tirlha became Rama-Tirtha when Rama took 
bath in the great river Phalgu. The editors of the NP printed atri for 
original adri and brought in Vamadeva from the blue. The original verse in 
the Vdyu P. is as follows : 

Mahanadi-prabhdsddryoh safigame sndna-krn narah / 

Rdmo dtvyd saha sndto Rama-Tirtham tatah smxtam //—108.16 

“Rama along with his queen Sita took bath at the meeting place of 
Mahanadi (Phalgu) and Prabhasa hill. Thence-forth it came to be 
remembered as Rama-Tirtha**. 

At Gaya actually there is a Rama-Tirtha as mentioned in the verse 
in the Vdyu P. but no Rama-Tirtha is noted in the NP. In the next verse 
both the Vdyu and the NP note that Rama was requested to take bath 
in the Phalgu. This agreement shows the Printing mistakes of the NP text 
about Vamadeva and Atri (for adri) 



Uttarabhaga 45.12-21 


1799 


12. Then the hill (viz. Sila) was ordered by Dharma- 
raja, “Do not go (move) ,, and hence it came to be remembered 
as cc Na-ga” (motion-less). Yama-raja and Dharma-raja have 
stationed themselves here to bring stability and fixity. 

13-14a. (After offering bali to these two gods, one should 
offer bali to their two dogs Sya'ma and Sabala with the Mantra) 
“I shall offer Pinda to two dogs Syama (a black-coloured dog) 
and Sabala (a dog of variegated colours) born of the family 
of Vaivasvata. May they be non-violent to me.” 

14b-15a. In the holy Tlrtha, on the Preta-Sila and 
other places, the person should invoke the Pitrs with the 
offerings of Caru (an oblation of rice) alongwith ghee. He 
should then offer the Pinqlas chanting the mantras. 

15b-16a. On the hillock near Gaya known as Preta- 
parvata, the person should meditate on the Pitrs with self- 
restraint and concentration. He should wear the sacred thread 
over the right shoulder and passed under the left arm. Facing 
the south, he should meditate thus : 

16b-19a. “May the following highly fortunate ones who 
have been protected by you come here—viz. Anala (the fire- 
god) who is the conveyor of oblations to Pitrs (Kavya-vaha), 
Yama, Aryaman, the Pitr-devatas (the manes as deities) who 
are consumed by fire (Agnisvatta), deceased ancestors 
(of a particular class) who imbibe Soma juice.” I have come 
here to Gaya for offering balls of rice to those of my 
ancestors (Pitrs) who had been born in the family and who 
are my kindred. May all of them attain permanent satisfaction 
by the efficacy of this Sraddha.” 

19b-20. He should then perform the Acamana rite and 
repeat the five items in the almanac and restrain the breath 
assiduously. He should then perform the Sankalpa rite (of 
vowing solemnly the performance of Sraddha) thus : (This is) 
“For the the acquisition of the world of Brahma from which 
there is no return." After performing this Samkalpa (rite of 
taking the solemn vow), he should duly perform Sraddha in 
due order. 

21. After first sanctifying the spot with the Pancagavya 
ingredients severally, he should invoke the Pitrs, worship them 
and offer Pinzas to them with the mantras. 



1800 


Narada Purdna 


22-23. After offering Sraddha to Sapindas (nearest 
kins to whom the Pind as —rice balls—are due), to their south 
he should spread over Kusa grass over which he should offer 
once the libations of gingelly seeds and water. The Pitr- 
Tirtha (holy water intended for the manes)should be assiduously 
taken in a single handful. He should then offer the ever¬ 
lasting Pinda with a handful of fried barley-meal. 

24. He should offer gingelly seeds, ghee, curds, honey 
etc. alongwith the articles for the balls of rice. He should in¬ 
voke the kinsmen onto the Kusa grass by means of gingelly 
seeds etc. 

25. If the Sraddha is for a lady, the Mantras must be 
uttered using the feminine gender suitably. The invocation of the 
Pitrs is as before and he should offer the Pin<J a s too as before. 

26. In regard to the offering of Pintos to a couple of 
one’s own Gotra or of a different Gotra, the Sraddha, the Pinda 
or the water libation, if not offered separately, becomes futile. 

27-28. He should put gingelly seeds in the vessel of the 
Pindas and fill it with auspicious waters. With the following 
Mantra he should sprinkle the Pindas in the (clock-wise) form 
of a circle three times. He should bow down to all of them 
and crave their forgiveness. After bidding farewell to the 
Pitrs and performing the Acamana rite, he shall cite the Devas 
as witnesses. 

29. 1 O Mohinl, in all the places, the offering of the 
Pindas should be in this manner. In the offering of the Pind as 
at Gaya one shall not think much of the time. 

30. One must not perform Gayasraddha during the in¬ 
tercalary lunar month, on the birth day, at the setting of Jupiter 
and Venus, and when the Jupiter is in the Simharasi (Leo). 

31. A mendicant who does not want to offer Pindas 
should after going to Gaya, exhibit his staff. By placing his 
staff at the Visnu-pada (the foot-print of Visnu), he is liberated 
alongwith his ancestors. 

32. It is laid down in the scriptures that the Pindas to 
be offered at Gaya can be made of milk pudding, powdered 
fried grain, pounded gingelly seeds, Carus, rice grains etc. 


1. VV. 15-29 describe the procedure of Sraddha at Gaya. 



Uttarabhdga 45.33-43 


1801 


33. O blessed lady, on seeing Gaya, even a sinner 
guilty of great sins shall be sanctified and deserve holy rites. 
He who performs Sraddha attains the world of Brahma. 

34. Even a person who performs thousands of horse- 
sacrifices does not attain that benefit which one attains in the 
Phalgutlrtha. 

35. After reaching Gaya, the pilgrim should ofTer the 
Pinzas of which the Pitrs are very fond. Delay should not be 
made, nor should any obstacles be put therein. 

36-37. (Mantra)—‘ ‘Balls of rice are offered by me to 
these viz.—Father, grandfather, great-grandfather, mother, 
grand-mother and great-grandmother, maternal grandfather 
and his father, maternal great-grandfather and others. May 
these Pindas reach them and be of everlasting benefits. 1 

38. I am giving this Pinda for the uplift of those persons 
in our family who are dead but who have not as yet attained 
salvation. 

39. I am giving this Pinda for the uplift of those persons 
among our kinsmen and their families who have not as yet 
attained salvation. 

40. I am giving the Pinda for the uplift of those persons 
who are dead before cutting their teeth or even while they were 
in the foetus stage. 

41. I am giving the Pinda unto those men some of whom 
are burnt in fire (that is who are cremeated properly) and 
others who are not properly cremated, and those who were 
killed by lightning or by thieves. 

42. I am giving the Pinda unto those men who died in 
the forest fire, who were killed by lions and tigers and those 
who were killed by fanged or horned animals. 

43. I am giving this Pinda to those who died by hanging 
themselves, those who were killed with poison or through 
weapons and those who had committed suicide (otherwise). 


1. VV. 36-37 show die breadth of outlook of the performer of Srdddha 
in offering Pipdas. cf. V&yn 110. 23-59. 






1802 


Narada Puraiia 


44. I am giving this Pinda to those who died due to 
thirst and hunger in the forest or on the way to the forest 
and those who were killed by goblins, ghosts or spirits. 

45. I am giving this Pintfa to those who are lying in 
hells—Raurava, Tamisra and Kalasutra in order to uplift 
them. 

46. I am giving this Pinda to redeem those persons who 
are lying in many different cells of torture and those who 
have gone to the world of the dead. 

47. Iam giving this Pinda for the deliverance of those 
persons who had attained miseries due to imprecations and 
curses and were killed. 

48. I am giving this Pincja for the uplift of those persons 
who have been subjected to the control of emissaries of Yama 
in all the hells. 

49. I am giving the Pinda unto those who are born 
in the wombs of animals, or those who have become birds, 
worms, and reptiles or those who are born among the vegetable 
kingdom. 

50. I am giving Pinda to those who wander among 
thousands of other species of beings and to whom human birth 
is inaccessible. 

51. I am giving this Pinda to my Pitrs, kinsmen and 
others stationed in the heaven, firmament or the Earth and to 
those who were not consecrated after death. 

52. Some of my Pitrs may be remaining in the form of 
ghosts. May all of them always attain satisfaction with this 
Pinda. 

53. Pintja has been given by me to those who were or 
were not my kinsmen and to those who had been my kinsmen in 
other births. May this reach them and may this be of ever¬ 
lasting benefit. 

54-56. Pincja has been given by me to those who died in 
my father’s family, to those who died in my mother’s family, 
to those kinsmen of preceptors, father-in-law and other relatives 
who were dead, those who were devoid of sons and wives, in 
my family and hence had been deprived of these Pinqlas; those 
who had gone astray due to the omission of holy rites, those 
who were born blind, those who were lame, those who had 



Uttarabhaga 45.57-66a 


1803 


been deformed, those who had been prematurely delivered of 
and those of my family whether known or unknown. May it 
reach them and be of everlasting benefit. 

57. I am giving Pinda alongwith Svadha to those who 
were born in my father’s family (tracing the origin) to Brahma, 
to those who were born of my mother’s family and to those who 
are somehow connected with me in both the families. 

58. May the Devas, Brahma, Isana and others bear me 
my witnessess that I have come down to Gaya, and performed 
the rites of redemption to my Pitrs. 

59. “O lord, Gadadhara, I have come to Gaya for the 
rites of my Pitrs. You alone arc the lord and witness thereof. 
I am now free from the three types of debts.” 

60. On the next 1 day the intelligent devotee should 
purify himself (in body and mind) and go to Pretaparvata (the 
mountain of the dead). 

After taking a holy dip in the Brahmakunda, the intelli¬ 
gent person should perform Tarpana rite to the Devas and 
others. 


61. At the Pretaparvata, the pilgrim should, with self- 
control and purity, invoke the Pitrs. After performing the 
Samkalpa rite as before, he should ofter the Pindas. 

62-63. Just as the serpents afraid of Garuda, the Asuras 
terrified of the holy rite of Sraddha, run away from that devotee. 
Their number shall be as many as that of the gingelly seeds 
taken by the men in the holy rite of the Pitrs, after worshipping 
the great Pitr-dcities by means of their own Mantras. O 
MohinI, there also he should perform all the rites as before. 

64-66a. So also, he should scatter the powdered fried 
grains mixed with gingelly seeds on that Pretaparvata saying 
“With these fried grains of barley powdered and mixed wi 
gingelly seeds may all the Pitrs of mine be satisfied-those Pit r s 
who may remain in the form of ghosts. Beginning with Brahma 


1. This is the 2nd day of Gaya Yatra. Preta-Parvata is a luU to 
NVV of Gaya at a distance of four miles (GayBU). Phe&t« t 
mentioned here is the foot of the NE part of Preta-Parvata (TM-Sctu p. 
355). Compare the text from v. 60 ff. with Viyu p. UO. 0 n. 



1804 


Ndrada Purdtia 


and ending with a blade of grass whatever living being mobile 
or immobile there may be, let it be entirely satisfied with the 
Pinda offered by me.” 

66b. At the outset this is the procedure in the northern 
Manasa* lake among the five holy Tlrthas. 1 

67. With the Kusa grass in the hand, the pilgrim should 
sprinkle his head with water after the Acamana rite. He should 
then go to the northern Manasa lake and perform the rite of 
ablution repeating this Mantra. 

68. <C I am taking the holy dip in the northern Manasa 
lake for the purity of myself, for attaining the world of the sun 
etc. and for the liberation of my Pitre.” 

69-70. After the holy bath, he should duly perform the 
rite of Tarpana for the Devas and others. “May every one— 
Devas, sages, Pitrs and human beings, beginning with 
Brahma and ending with the blade of grass—may all the Pitrs, 
mothers, maternal grandfathers and others be satisfied.” 

He shall perform the rite of Sraddha alongwith the 
offerings of the Pindas in accordance with the injunctions laid 
down in one’s particular Sutra. 

71. In Astakas, in Vrddhi-Sraddha, at Gaya, and on the 
anniversary of death, one should offer Sraddha separately to 
one’s mother but on all other occasions with her husband (i.e. 
with one’s father.)** 

72. (Mantra) “Om Obeisance be to lord Bhanu (the 
sun) who has the forms of the moon, of Mars, of Mercury, of 
Jupiter, of Venus, of Saturn, of Rahu, and of Kctu.” 

73. By bowing down to the sun and worshipping him, 
the devotee shall take Pitrs to the world of the sun. Here 


*The five Tirthas are Uttara-manasa, Udici-tlrtha, Kanakhala, 
Daksina-Manasa and Phalgu. Phalgu Tirtha is the same as Gaya-Siras vide 
VdyuP. 111.1-22. 

1. As per Vdyu Ch. Ill these Panca-Tirthi rites are to be performed 
on the 3rd day of this Yatra. 

**Cf. Vayu P. 110.17. 



Uttarabhdga 45.74-83 


1805 


there is the Manasa lake and beyond that is the northern 
Manasa. 

74. Observing silence, the pilgrim should go from the 
northern Manasa to the Southern Manasa*. To the north of 
it, is the Udlcltirtha which is the bestower of liberation. 

75. To the north of the hill Mundaprstha, the devotee 
should perform the Tarpana rite of Devas, sages and 
Pitrs. The holy centre of Kanakhala is in the middle. It yields 
salvation to the Pitrs. 

76. After taking bath (in Kanakhala Tlrtha), the man 
shines like gold and attains sanctity. Hence, this holy centre is 
well known as the excellent Kanakhala Tlrtha. 

77. To the South of it is the Tlrtha (holy bathing place) 
called Daksina Manasa (Southern Manasa). Thus three 
Tlrthas are cited in the Daksina Manasa (as its constituents). 

78-79. After duly bathing in them, the pilgrim should 
perform the Sraddha separately (at each) (saying) “O Divakara 
(sun) I am bathing in the Daksinamanasa for the destruction 
of the masses of sins of Brahmana-slaughtcr etc. and for 
liberation.” With this Mantra he should perform the rites of 
ablution, worship and Sraddha alongwith the offerings of 
Pinqlas. 

80-8la. “I bow down to the sun-god for the redemption 
of the Pitrs and their satisfaction as well as for the increase of 
sons, grandsons, wealth, prosperity, longevity, and health.” 
After looking at the sun and worshipping him silently the devotee 
should repeat this Mantra. 

8lb-82. “May the deities of Pitrs, ‘Kavyavaha 5 (fire 
god) and others be propitiated alongwith my Pitrs. May the 
partakers of Svadha be propitiated”. Thereafter, he should go to 
Phalgutlrtha that is the most excellent of all holy centres. 

83. The performer shall attain liberation always, thanks 
to the Sraddha of the Pitrs. Formerly when he was requested by 
Brahma, Visnu became the holy Tlrtha Phalguka. 


♦The three Tirthas constituting Daksina Manasa are Udici-Tirtha of 
the North, Kanakhala (in the middle) and Daksina Manasa to the South. 




1806 


jVarada Purana 


84. It had originated from the Daksinagni (sacrificial 
fire) that is the sacred river of Plialgu. It yields plenty of fruits. 
Cows will be Kamadhenus. The Plialgu water will facilitate 
the growth of fruits. The earth yields water (?) 

85-86. Since this comes under the creation (of Lord him¬ 
self) above [or from under-ground] , Phalgutirtha is never futile. 
There is no doubt that all the sacred rivers and bathing 
places in all the worlds come to Phalgutirtha for taking 
bath. The Ganga is the water coming out of the foot of Visnu. 
But the Plialgu is the primordial Visnu himself. 1 

87. Hence, they know that Phalgu is superior to Ganga. 
From the plunge into the waters of the Phalgu, one derives the 
benefit equal to thousands of horse-sacrifices. 

88. "I am taking bath today in the holy Phalgutirtha 
which is the watery form of Visnu. It is for facilitating the 
attainment of Visnu’s world by the Pitrs and for the achievement 
of worldly pleasures and liberation. 55 

89. After bathing in the Phalgutirtha the man should 
perform the rites of Tarpana and Sraddha alongwith the 
Pindas as prescribed in his own Sutra. He shall bow down to 
Brahma. 

90. "Obeisance to lord Siva, Isana, Purusa, Aghora, 
Vamadeva, Sadyojata, Sambhu. 55 

91-93. After bowing down to lord Brahma the Pilgrim 
should worship with the above mantra. After taking bath in the 
Phalgutirtha, afier visiting lord Visnu and after bowing down 
to the lord, the devotee takes himself along with the Pitrs 
to the region of Visnu. 

ce Om obeisance to Vasudeva. Bow to Sarnkarsana, to 
Pradyumna, to Aniruddha, to Srldhara and to Visnu. 
By taking bath in the Pancatlrthl (the collection of the above 
five holy bathing places) the devotee takes his Pitrs to the 
world of Brahma. 

94. If anyone does not make Visnu bathe in fivefold 
nectars or does not embellish Visnu with flowers, garments, etc. 
his Sraddha goes futile. 


1 . Vayu 111 . 16 . 



Uttarabhaga 45.95-104 


1807 


95. The place bounded by Nagakuta, Grdhrakuta, Visnu- 
kuta and Uttaramanasa is called Gayasiras. It is also called 
Phalgutlrtha. 

96-97. The excellent Phalgutlrtha is beneath the mountain 
Mundaprstha. By performing Sraddha there, all the Pitrs shall 
attain salvation. At Gayasiras the devotee should offer Pindas of 
the size of the leaf of a Sami tree. The devotee shall lead into the 
permanent Brahman, the person uttering whose name he had 
offered the Pindas. 

98. The Lord of unmanifest form, after assuming the 
form of the mountain Mundapystha or the form of Phalgutlrtha 
etc., bows down to Visnu. 

99. Pie who has assumed the state of non-manifestation 
by taking the form of (Preta) Sila-parvata, the Phalgu, etc — 
that Adi-Visnu presented manifest form as Gadadhara the 
wielder of the mace. 

100. Thereafter, 1 the devotee shall go to the forest 
called Dharmaranya where Dharma (god Varna)- is well 
established. After taking bath in the tank of Matangavapi the 
devotee should perform the rites of Tarpana and Sraddha. 

101-102. After going there and bowing down to Matan- 
gesa the devotee shall utter this hlantra . 


“The deities are the authorities, Sambhu and the guardians 
of the worlds (quarters) are the witnesses. After coming to 
Matanga Ksetra, atonement for redemption of the Pitrs has 
been performed by me in this Matanga (vapi). At the outset, 
the devotee should perform Sraddha etc. in the well called 


Brahmatlrtha. 


103-104 By performing (the Sraddha etc) in between 
the well and the sacrificial post (viz. Brahma-Yupa) the devotee 
shall redeem Pitrs. After bowing to Dharma, and Dharme- 

-i -Thi. is on the 4th day from entering Gaya. 


referr 
(H. 
may 1 

Naimisa, — 







1808 Narada Purana 

svara, the devotee shall bow down to the tree Mahabodhi 
(tree of great enlightenment). 

Thus the duties of the second day of (panca-tirthi) 
pilgrimage to Gaya 1 have been recounted to you by me. It is 
conducive to the happiness of the Pitrs by means of holy dips, 
Tarpana rites, offering of balls of rice, worship, obeisance, etc. 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 

Importance of offering Pindas [at Gaya)* 

Vasu said : 

1. Henceforth, I shall recount to you the duties on the 
third day. 2 * They yield both the worldly pleasures as well as 
salvation. They yield the benefit of contact with Gaya. 

2-3. After taking bath in the Brahmasaras, the pilgrim 
should perform Sraddha alongwith the Pindas: 

“I take my holy bath in this TIrtha for the liberation from 
the three-fold indebtedness, for conducting Sraddha, for offering 
Pindas, for the rite of Tarpana and for the achievement of 
wealth.” 

He who performs that (the Sraddha etc.) between the well 
called ‘Brahmakupa’ and the sacrificial post (raised by 
Brahma—) ‘Brahma yupa’ redeems the Pitrs. 

4. The lofty sacrificial post is that of Brahma. By per¬ 
forming Sraddha at the Brahmasaras, the devotee shall take the 
Pitrs to the world of Brahma. 


^ Th “ 2nd da y °f the Pailca-Tirthi rites is 'the 4th day from entering 

F4y U A^ll t .3°2- t 75? VerSeSin *“* ChaptCr arc idcntical with those in the 

2. The 3rd day of Paflca-Tirlhi rites corresponds to the 5th dav from 

entering Gaya. 7 



Uttarabhaga 46.5-14 


1809 


5. The mango trees near Gopracara were planted by 
Brahma. Merely by sprinkling them with water (from Brahma- 
saras), the Pitrs will attain salvation. 

6. <C I water the Mango tree that has grown out of 
Brahmasaras, that is lordly and containing all the Devas and 
that is the embodiment of Visnu, for the sake of salvation of the 
Pitrs. 

7. A sage with a pot and the Kusa grass at the tip of his 
hands pours water at the root of the mango tree. The Mango 
trees are watered and the Pitrs are propitiated. A single action 
is well reputed as serving two purposes.* A man who performs 
the Acamana rite and pours water at the root is not negligible 
(even) to gods. 

8. By circumambulating the sacrificial post (of Brahma) 
one shall attain the benefit of the Vajapeya sacrifice. By bowing 
down to Brahma the devotee takes the Pitrs to the city of 
Brahma. 

9. “Orh, Hail to Brahma, who is eternal (unborn) and 
who is the cause of creation, etc. of the Universe; obeisance, to 
the redeemer of the devotees and the Pitrs. 

10-11. With the following Mantra he should offer 
oblation to Yama, with mental control : “Yamaraja and 
Dharamaraja are steadily stationed here. I offer oblation to 
them for the purpose of liberation of the Pitrs.” O Mohim, 
he then offers oblation to the dogs with the Mantra men¬ 
tioned before : 

12-13. Thereafter, with self-control, the devotee should 
offer oblation to the crows repeating the following Mantra . 

“May the crows pertaining to Indra, Varuna, Vayu, Y a ma 
and Nirrti accept the ball of rice placed by me on the ground 
Thereafter, he shall take holy dip in the Brahma Tirtha 
with the Kusa grass (in his hand). 

14. Thus completing the observances of the third day 
the intelligent pilgrim shall bow down to lord Gada ara an 
maintain the vow of celibacy. 

•Quoted in the Agni P. 115.40, the Vayu P. 111.37 and Pa dm a iff' 
khapda 11.77. 





1810 


jVarada Purdna 


15. On the fourth day, 1 the devotee should perform 
the rite of ablution etc, in the Phalgu tirtha. At Gayasiras, at 
various Padas he should perform the Sraddhas along with the 
Pinzas. 2 

16. The Gayasiras itself has been made the support of 
Phalgu tirtha. Gayasiras extends from Krauncapada* to Phalgu 
Tirtha. 

17. (Defective)** There are mountains etc. in the Gaya¬ 
siras as well as Phalgu Tirtha. It is the face of the demon Gaya. 
One shall perform the Sraddha after bathing. 

18. The primordial lord Gadadhara presiding over the 
manifest and unmanifest things, has assumed the from of 
Visnupada (and other Padas—foot-prints) for the liberation 
of the Pitrs. 

19. There is the Visnu-pada (the footprint of Visnu). 
It is divine. By its mere sight the sins are destroyed. By touching 
and worshipping, it is conducive to the salvation of the Pitrs. 

20. By performing Sraddha at Visnupada alongwith the 
offering of the Pinclas the man uplifts a thousand members of his 
own family and takes them to Visnu’s world. 

21. By performing Sraddha at Rudrapada, the man shall 
take a hundred members of his family to the city of Siva along¬ 
with himself. So also (with Sraddha etc) at the auspicious 
Brahmapada. 

22. He who performs Sraddha at the Daksinagnipada 
shall attain the benefit of a Vajapeya sacrifice. He who per- 


1. The 4th day of Panca-Tirthi rite falls on the Gth day after entering 
into Gaya. 

2. The Trislhali Setu , p. 366 states that there is no separate *f raddha 
on Gayasiras apart from that performed on Visnupada and'other Padas . 

♦Vide verse 52 below : Krauhca-pada is the hill Mun<Ja-Prs{ha. On it a 
sage assuming the form of a heron performed penance and imprinted his 
(heron-like) footsteps on it. Hence it is called Kraunca-pada ( Vdyu P. 106.75) 

♦♦This verse is a combination of the Vdyu P, 111.45a and 44b out of 
which 17a in the NP (i.e. Vdyu lll*.45a) is wrongly printed. The original 
line in the Vdyu is : munda-pr^han nagddhastdt sdksdt tat Phalgu-Tirthakam / 

“Below the hill called Mun(Ja-P m ha ig vcrily that Tirtha called p halgu 

(the Phalgu river).*’ 

The NP. 17a runs thus -.—Gaya-Sirc nagadyaica sakfat tat Phalgu-tirthakam 
If nagadyas ca is emended as nagadhastat the obscurity is lessened. 



Uttarabhaga 46.23-32a 


1811 


forms Sraddha at the Garhapatyapada shall derive the benefit 
of a Rajasuya sacrifice. 

23. By performing Sraddha at the Candrapada one shall 
attain the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. He who performs Sraddha 
at the Satyapada shall attain the benefit of a Jyotistoma 
sacrifice. 

24. He who performs Sraddha at the Avasathyapada 
shall attain the world of Soma (moon). By performing Sraddha 
at the* Candrapada (Indra-pada ?) the devotee shall lead his 
Pitrs to Sakra’s world. 

25. He who performs Sraddha at the Pada of others** 
shall take Pitrs to the region of Brahma. He who performs 
Sraddha at the Suryapada shall take sinners to the city of Arka 
(sun). 

26. He who performs Sraddha at the Karttikeyapada 
shall take Pitrs to Siva’s world. By performing the rite of Sraddha 
at the Agastyapada the devotee takes Pitrs to the world of 
Brahma. 

27. The Kasyapapada is the most excellent of all Padas. 
The Padas of Visnu, Rudra and Brahma are cited to be the 
greatest of all. 

28. At the beginning or at the conclusion, one of the 
above Padas is recommended. O MohinI, he who performs 
Sraddha therein, will find it conducive to welfare. 

29. Formerly, the divine sage Bharadvaja wanted to 
perform Sraddha and offer the Pinqlas to Pitrs and others at 
the Pada of Kasyapa.*** 

30. Then two hands, one white and the other black, came 
out piercing through the Pada. On seeing two hands, Bharadvaja 
became doubtful about the real father. 

31-32a. Then Bharadvaja asked hismothcr Santa: “At the 
Kasyapapada, O mother, into which hand should I offer the 


*The Vaya ~P. reads iakra-pida in the corresponding verse (111.52) 

**anyesim cat pad, in the NP is obscure. Who are these ‘others’ sacred 
enough to enable the Pitfs to go toBrahmopada ?The Vayu P. reads Agastyasy* 
pad, in the corresponding verse ( 111 . 53 ) which-line occurs below in verse 

26 b * 1 **xhisstory is given in the Vayu P. 111.58-63 in identical 
in the NP.) • 


verses (as- 






1812 Narad a Parana 

Pinda, the white one or the black one ? You know my father, 
Tell me.” 

32b-33. On hearing the words of the intelligent Bhara¬ 
dvaja, Santa said with her face beaming with pleasure, to the 
son who was about to offer Sraddha, “O highly intelligent 
Bharadvaja give the Pincla to the black one.” 

34. Thereupon, Bharadvaja attempted to give the Pinda 
to the black one. The white one became visible and said:* cc O 
son give it to me. You arc my bosom-born (legitimate) son.” 

35-37a. The black one said—“You are born of my wife 
(Ksetraja). Hence give the Pinda unto me.” The white one 
said. 4 ‘Shc is an unchaste woman. Hence, I am your progenitor 
(you are my bosom-born son). The son born of unchaste 
woman gave the Pinda first to the Ksetrin (the husband of the 
mother) and thereafter to the Bijin (the seed-giver i.e. the pro¬ 
genitor). O highly blessed lady, by devoutly handing over the 
Pindas, * the excessively intelligent (Bharadvaja) considered 
himself blessed, thanks to the direct talk (with the Pitrs). 

37b-38. In the course of his Sracldha at Visnupada, 
Bhlsma invoked his Pitrs after duly performing the Sraddha; 
when he attempted to offer the Pindas, the pair of the hands of 
his father Santanu sprang out. 

39. But Bhlsma placed the Pinda on the ground since the 
hand is not authorised to receive the Pinda directly. With delight 
Santanu said :- “You are definite in the matter of the import 
of the scriptures. 

40. Be blessed with the power of seeing the events of the 
three units of time. In the end, Visnu will be your final goal. 
You can court death according to your will. After saying this he 
attained liberation. 

41. At the beautiful Rudrapada, Rama attempted to give 
pindas to the pitrs. His father Dasaratha came down from 
heaven extending his hand. 


♦The NP does not clarify to whom Bharadvaja gave the Pinda. The 
corresponding verse in the Vayu P. 101.63 states that Bharadvaja offered the 
Pipda at Kasyapa’s pada and transported his parents to Brahmaloka in an 
aerial car carried by swans. 



Uttarabhaga 46.42-51 


1813 


42. Rama, who was afraid of transgressing the purport of 
injunction of scriptures did not give the Pinda in the hand (of 
Dasaratha). He gave the Pinda on Rudrapada. DaSaratha then 
said to Rama. 

43. ‘‘O son, I have been redeemed by you. I am sure 
to go to Rudraloka (the world of Rudra) because the Pinda 
is offered at the foot of Rudra. If it had been placed in my 
hand I would not have attained the heavenly goal. 

44-45. You will rule kingdom for a long time. After 
protecting your subjects and after performing Yajnas with 
appropriate Daksinas, you will go to Visnu’s world alongwith 
the citizens of Ayodhya and even worms, insects and other 
beings. After saying this to Rama, the king went to the world 
of Rudra. 

46. After worshipping Kanakcsa, Kedara, Narasimha 
and Vamana on the high way (that is the path of the chariot) 
the devotee shall redeem the Pitrs. 

47. If the devotee performs the rite of Pindadana in the 
name of anyone at Gayasiras, they go to heaven even if they 
are in the hell and if they are in the heavenly world they will 
attain salvation. 

48. He who offers Pinda at Gayasiras, even of the size of 
a saml leaf, or with bulbous roots, roots, fruits, etc. shall lead the 
Pitrs to the heaven. 

49. By offering Sraddha in front of the Padas of Visnu 
etc. seen there, the devotee takes the Pitrs to those worlds of the 
deities at whose foot the Sraddha was offered. 

50. The mountain Mund a pr?fha is marked everywhere 
by these padas (footprints). The Pitrs who are worshipped there 
attain the region of Brahma. 

51. The Tlrtha here is known as Gadaloka since the head 
of the demon Gaya 1 had been split into two by Adi-Gadadhara 
with the Gada (iron club) and since the Gada was washed in the 
Tlrtha.* 


1. This must be a misprint. It was the head of demon Heti and 
not of Gaya that was split by Visnu (vide Vayu 11, 75). 

♦In the stream Phalgu. 












1814 


Narada Purdna 


52. A sage performad penance in the form of a Kraunca 
(heron), on the mountain Mundaprstha. Due to the markings 
of his feet on that hill it is remembered as Krauncapada. 

53. The feet of Visnu and others are stationed here in the 
form of Lingas. After performing the rite of Tarpana for the 
Devas and others the Sraddha should be performed at Rudrapada 
and other spots. 

54. O Mohini, after performing these rites on the fourth 
day, the devotee becomes sanctified. He then becomes eligible for 
the'rites. The performer of the Sraddha attains the world of 
Brahma. 

55. The devotee should take holy dips in the Sila Tirthas 
and perform the Tarpana rites. These on behalf of whom they 
perform the Sraddha along with the Pintjlas go to the world of 
Brahma. 

56-57. They will stay there and sport about as long as the 
living beings are not dissolved. All living beings whether sweat- 
bom, oviparous or viviparous, attain Sayujya with Visnu by aban¬ 
doning their bodies on the back of the rock. They attain salvation 
along with seven hundred members of their families. 


CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 

The Glory of Gaya 

Vasu said : 

1 *. On the fifth day, the devotee should perform the holy 
ablution etc. in the Gadaloka tlrtha as before and then perform 
the Sraddha alongwith the Pinzas under the Aksayavata 
(everlasting Banyan tree). 

2. By performing Sraddha there the pilgrim shall take 
Pitrs to the city of Brahma. Thereafter, he should feed and 
worship the Brahmanas appointed by Brahma. 

♦For w. 1-10 cf Vayu P. 111.79-83. This fifth day corresponds to. 
the seventh day after entering Gaya, vide Agni P. 115.69-73. 



Uttarabhdga 47.3-12 


1815 


3-4a. He who, with special efforts, performs the rite of 
Sraddha at the Aksayavata along with this and visits, salutes, and 
worships Vatesa (the Lord of the Banyan tree) with concentra¬ 
tion and purity of mind shall take his Pitrs to the everlasting and 
eternal city of Brahma. 1 

4b-8. “For the sake of purity and for attaining everlasting 
heavenly bliss I take my holy bath in the great and excellent 
Tirtha called Gadaloka wherein the iron club of Lord Visnu 
had been washed. He who assumes the form of a baby and sleeps 
at the tip of the banyan tree in Yogic slumber is called 
Yogasayin. Obeisance be to you the Yogasayin. Hail to you with 
the weapon with which the tree of worldly existence is cut. 

Obeisance be to you the destroyer of all sins. Bow to the 
giver of ever-lasting Brahman; obeisance to the everlasting Vata 
(Banyan tree.)” 

“In this Kali age the people are devotees (followers) of 
Mahesvara. Hence, Gadadhara assumed the form of a Linga. I 
salute to you the (great grandfather of that nature.” By bowing 
down to that great grandfather (of the Universe) at Rudrapada, 
the devotee leads the Pitrs to the region of Rudra. 

9-10a. The lord killed the Asura Heti. His head was 
split into two with the iron club. Where the club was washed by 
the Lord the Tirtha came to be called Gadaloka. It became the 
most excellent of all holy centres. 2 

10b. Heti was a Raksasa. He was the son of Brahma. He 
performed a great and wonderful penance, 

11-12. He chose the boon from the delighted bestowers of 
boons viz. Brahma and others. They had been pleased with him 
on account of his penance. So he chose the boon thus Cc I should 
become very mighty. I must not be killed by Krsna, Isana and 
others with their weapons viz. discus, etc. I must not be killed by 
human beings nor by Daityas and others with their different 


1. W. 6b-8a arc the same as V&yu 111. 83-84. 

2. Identical with Vdyu 111. 75. 




jglg Ndrada Pur ana 

weapons and missiles. “They said “So be it.” and then vanished. 
Thereafter, Heti conquered theDevas. 

13. Heti occupied the post of Indra. Then Brahma, 
Hara and other Devas resorted to Hari and requested him 
c Kindly kill Heti.’ 

14. Hari said “O Devas, this Heti cannot be killed, by 
Devas and Asuras. Give me the Brahmastra (the missile of 
Brahma) whereby I shall kill Heti.” 

15. Thus ordered, the Devas gave that Gada (iron-club) 
to Visnu. Aja (Brahma) and others said — “O Upendra kill 
Heti (with this) ”. 

16. Requested by the Devas, Gadadhara wielded that 
Gada. After striking Heti down in the battle with that iron club 
Gadadhara gave heavenly world to the Devas. 

17. The pilgrim should observe fast and take bath in 
the river Mahanadi, the Phalgu in front of the deity Gayatrl. 
Then he should perform Sandhya prayers. 

18-19a. After performing Sraddha along with Pindas 
the devotee shall be able to lead his family to the abode of Brahma, 
After taking bath in the Tirtha situated in front of Savitrl and 
performing Sandhya rites at Midday, the devotee shall be 
able to lead the Pitrs to the abode of Brahma. 

19b-20.* The pilgrim who takes bath in the (Eastern 
Sarasvatx and observes the rite of Sandhya prayers, in the evening- 
in front of Sarasvati shall lead the family to omniscience. He is 
purified from the sin of omission of the Sandhya prayers in the 
course of many births. 

21-22. He who performs Sraddha and offers Pindas in the 
following places shall lead a hundred ancestors to the world of 
Brahma. They are the holy centre of Lelihana in the Visala 
(city), the hermitage of Bharata, the Mundaprstha hill marked 
by the different foot-prints near Gadadhara, in the Tirtha of 
Aka$aganga(celestial Ganga) and at the confluence of Girikama 
(the Sabarmati). 


♦There are a number of identical verses : 19ff in NP here and Vayu P- 
112.23 ff (to the end of that chapter). 




Uttarabhdga 47.23-32 


1817 


23-24.* He who takes holy bath in the Gayavaitarani 
(Vaitarani at Gaya) shall uplift twentyone generations of 
his family. He who offers Pintjas in the following places shall lead 
Pitrs to the heaven.—They are the Gopracara in the divine 
river the region of Manasa lake, the Puskarini (lotus pond), 
the Tirtha of Gadaloka; the Amaraka, the Koti-Tirtha and the 
Rukmakun^a. 

25-26. The devotee shall be the redeemer of the Pitrs by 
bowing down to Kotisa and Markandeyesa. By the mere vision 
of the merit bestowing Pancjusila, even the persons stationed in 
hell shall be sanctified. The devotee shall lead them to the heaven. 
After saying this, Pandu attained the eternal and unchanging 
region. 

27. (The sacred rivers at Gaya are) Ghrtakulya, Madhu- 
kulya, Devika, Mahanada (Phalgu) and the Madhusrava 
is glorified where it comes in contact with Preta sila. 

28-29a. By taking bath there, a man attains the bene¬ 
fits of ten thousand horse sacrifices. By performing the Tarpana 
rite for the Pitrs and by offering Sraddha along with the Pindas, 
the man uplifts a thousand members of the family and takes 
them to the city of Visnu. 

29b33. Even the vegetable kingdom, the sweet-born ani¬ 
mals, the oviparous and vixiparous beings—all these dying on 
reaching the Madhusrava attained Visnu’s region. By perform¬ 
ing Sraddha in the Hamsa Tirtha that is as meritorious as the 
Dasasvamedha, the devotee shall attain heaven. 

31. By bowing down to the Tirthas called Dasasvame¬ 
dha and Hamsa the devotee shall attain the city of Siva. He 
who performs Sraddha at the Pada of Matanga shall reside 
in the city of Brahma. 

32. Brahma should churn fires within the Sami 
alongwith Visnu and others. The Tirtha formed thereby is called 
Manthakund a - It causes liberation of the Pitrs. 

♦These verses mention important spots at Gaya which can be located 
with the help of Vaju P. : Go-Pracara (111.35-37) where mango trees 
were planted by Brahma; Manasa (N. of tanks —Uttara AI, and Dak^i^a jV/. 
111.6 and 8; 2 and 22), PuskaranI (108.84), Gadaloka (111.75-76) is the 
stream of Phalgu; Rukma-Kunda is probably the same as Rukmini Kunqla 
(108.84U 



1818 


Narada Purana 


33. He who takes a holy dip therein, attains liberation 
by performing Tarpana and offering Pintfas. By bowing down 
to Rame£a and Karakesvara the devotee shall take Pitrs to 
the heaven. 

34. By offering Pintfas at the Gayakupa the devotee 
attains the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. By taking Bhasma bath 
(smearing the body with the ashes) at the holy centre Bhasma- 
kuta the devotee redeems the Pitrs. 

The man who takes holy bath at the confluence of 
Nikslra shall wash off his sins. He who performs Sraddha in 
RamapuskarinI shall take Pitrs to the world of Brahma. 

36. He who takes ablution in the river Susumna shall 
uplift twentyone generations of his family. By bowing down to 
Vasisthesa in Tirtha, the devotee has the same benefit as in 
a horse-sacrifice. 

37. He who offers Pinqlas in the forest Dhenuka at the 
footprints of Kamadhenu after taking bath and bowing to that 
lord shall take Pitrs to the world of Brahma. 

38a-39a. He who takes the holy dip and performs the 
Sraddha at Kardamala and Gayanabhi near Munqlaprstha 
hill shall take Pitrs to the heaven by bowing down to Oan- 
dika as well as by worshipping the lord of confluence named 
Phalgucandlsa. 

39b-40a. The following six Gayas are the bestowers of 
liberation viz. Gayagaja, Gayaditya, Gayatri, Gadadhara, Gaya 
and Gayasiras. 1 By setting a bull free at Gaya, the devotee shall 
uplift twentyone generations of the family. 

41. The devotee who has conquered his sense organs 
and who has been formally permitted by Brahmanas, wherever 
he stays, should meditate upon the primordial Gadadhara and 
offer Sraddha and Pindas. 

42-44. He shall then uplift a hundred members of his 
family and lead them to the world of Brahma. Thereafter, he 
should duly worship lord Janardana and offer the excellent 
Naivedya of cooked rice and curds alone. The Pinqlas should 


1- The same as Vayu P. 112. 60 ft. 




Uttarabhaga 47.44-54 


1819 


be deposited and offered and the pilgrim should sustain himself 
on the remnants. 


44. Since the rock was kept on the back or the head of 
the Daitya, the mountain Mundaprstha is the bestower of 
the world of Brahma on the Pitrs. 


45-47a. When Rama had gone to the forest, Bharata 
climbed on the mountain and stood there. After installing 
Ramesa he offered Pindas to his father. He who takes 
holy bath 'there, bows with concentration to Ramesa, Rama and 
Slta, performs Sraddha and offers Pinda- shall attain the city 
of Visnu. The righteous soul shall go to the city of Visnu 
along with his Pitrs, and hundreds of members of his family. 

47b-48. The deity is installed on the ridge of Kund a 
to the right hand of the slab. By performing Sraddha etc., there, 
the devotee shall lead Pitrs to the city of Brahma. Penance was 
performed by Kunda on the mountain to the south of Sitadn 
(the mountain of Slta). 


49. He who offers Pindas on the meritorious Pada of 
Matanga shall lead Pitrs to the heaven. To the left hand side 
of the rocky, slab, the mountain Antaka is held. 

50. The Udayadri (The mountain of the rising-sun) was 
brought here and established by Agastya, the great soul. He 
who offers Pindas there shall lead Pitrs to the city of Brahma. 

51. God Brahma created the sacred water Pool called 
Udyantaka. It was used by him for his own penance. Brahma 
was stationed there along with Savitrl and Kumara (i.e. 
Sanatkumara). 

52-53. Haha, Huhu and others sang songs, and played 
on instruments. He who takes holy dip in the Agastya ir , 
and worships Savitrl at midday shall be born as a ra ^ * 
endowed with wealth and mastery of the Vedas for crores of birth 
He who takes holy dip at the Pada of Agastya and offers Pindas 
shall lead the Pitrs to the heaven. 

54. The men who enter, the Brahtnayoni and Mn.e. °ut 
attain, the great Brahman. He will be liberated front the uterine 
distress, (i.e. further births) and attain Moksa. 



1820 


Narada Purana 


55. By bowing down to Gayakumara a man obtains 
Brahtnanahood. By means of ablutions etc. in the Somakuntja 
the devotee shall lead his Pitrs to the world of Soma (Moon). 

56. The oblation offered at Kakasila to the crows bestows 
salvation instantaneously. By bowing down to Svargadvaresvara 
(Lord of the Portals of the heaven), the devotee shall take his 
Pitrs from the heaven to the city of Brahma. 

57a. He who offers Pindas in the Vyomaganga shall 
become free from impurities and lead Pitrs to the heaven. 

57b-58a. To the right hand side of (Preta) sila, god 
Yama Dharma sustained the Bhasma-kuta hill. Hence god 
Siva gave it that name there. 

58b-59. O Mohini, in the place where this pile of ashes 
Bhasma-kuta) lies like a mountain and is designated Bhasma- 
kuta there is a Vata (banyan tree). The great grandfather of 
the world Brahma, is stationed there as the lord of the Banyan 
Tree. Just in front of it is the Rukminikunqla and to the west of 
it is the river Kapila. 

60. Lord Kapilesa is on the banks of the river where the 
meeting of Uma and river Siva takes place. The man shall take 
bath in the Kapila and bow down to and worship Kapilesa. 

61. He who offers Sraddha in the Mahesikunqla shall 
attain heaven. Gaurl and Mangala when worshipped there, are 
the bestowers of all good fortune. 

62-63a. Janardana is the deity on the Bhasmakuta. The 
devotee shall offer Pinda in his hand, with the right hand,* 
for his own sake and with the left hand for other’s sake but 
without gingelly seeds. Of course the Pinda shall be mixed 
with curds. All those people shall attain the world of Visnu. 

63b-65. <c O Janardana, this Pin<jla is given unto your 
hand by me in the course of Gayasraddha. * 1 When I am dead, the 
Pinda should be given to me by you. The person for whose sake 
the Pinda has been given to you by me, give that Pinrla at Gaya- 
slrsa when he dies. O Janardana, Obeisance to you. Salutation 
to you in the form of Pitrs. 

66. Hail to you O Pitrpatra (one who deserves to be wor¬ 
shipped by the Pitrs). Obeisance to you, the cause of salvation. 

♦Reading Dakseria for Mantretia. 

1. For offering Pi$da to oneself cf. Vayu 108.85, also AP. 115.68. 






1821 


Uttarabhaga 47.67a-77 


At Gaya, Janardana is himself present in the form of the 
Pitrs. 

67a. By seeing the lotus-eyed lord (Pundarlkaksa) one is 
liberated from the threefold indebtedness. “O Pundarlkaksa, I 
bow to you, O liberator from the threefold indebtedness, O lord 
ofLaksmi, obeisance be to you. Hail to you O bestower of 
salvation on the Pitrs.” 

By worshipping Pundarlkaksa Janardana the devotee shall 


attain heaven. 

69. Kneeling on the ground with the left knee bent, the 
devotee shall bow down to Janardana. After performing the Sra- 
ddha along with the Pindas the devotee shall attain the world 
of Visnu along with his brothers. 

70. On the left leg of the rocky slab (sila) is the moun¬ 
tain Pretakuta. It is held by Dharmaraja. The mountain consist¬ 
ing of Pretasila is sinful. 

71. It was cast off very far by means of the leg (by 
Gadadhara) since the weight of the rocky slab had been felt 
on the Pada (foot). The departed jivas catch hold of (the 

deities) in the form of archers. , 

72 Many of them cause obstacles and they are station , 

separately. For the liberation of the Pitrs the performance of 
Sraddha etc. in the Tirtha is a contributory cause. 

73 The Pretakuta attained sanctity, thanks to the contact 
with the Siladri (the hill called Sila). The Pretaku^s also 
there. The Devas are stationed thereby means of their Padas 

^ P 74-76a He who takes bath and offers Sraddha and 

Pindas shall liberate Pit F s from ghosthood. In thei land o 
Kikatas (Magadha), Gaya is highly sacred, the= forest t of R a 
grha is sacred and meritorious, the hermitage of C y avana « s 
ctifier, the river called Punapuna (mo . un P“ ’ . fe h 
of the Ganga in Patna District) is highly 
Lohadanda, Girikuta and Sonaga are hol Y « 1 • 

performs Sraddha and offers Pindas there, shall lead Puis 

the city of Brahma. f , ,< rockv s i a b (sila)”, 

76h-77 On the southern foot of the rooty v ) 

,h« mounuin -12 

stabilise themselves immediately, the great h iy g 


1822 Ndrada Pur ana 

the forms of vultures, performed penances and achieved 
siddhis. 

78. Hence the mountain is called Grdhrakuta, 1 the 
lord of vultures. There is Siva. By taking holy bath and 
visiting Grdhresvara, the man goes to the city of Sambhu. 

79. After going to the city of Grdhras, one whose oppor¬ 
tune moment has arrived, shall go to the heaven. By visiting 
Siva (in the holy centres of) Rnamoksa (that which liberates 
from indebtedness) and Papamoksa (that which liberates from 
sins), the devotee shall attain Sivahood. 

80. The silodaka (the spring-water from the rocky slab) 
is pervaded by the Adipada (portion) of the mountain. It is 
there that vighnesa (the destroyer of obstacles) is stationed in 
the form of an elephant. 

81. By visiting him one is liberated from obstacles. The 
devotee shall take Pitrs to the city of Siva. By visiting. 
Gayatri and Gayaditya after the holy dip, the devotee shall 
attain heaven. 

82. By visiting Brahma stationed at the Adipada, the 
devotee shall redeem the Pitrs. He who offers the Pindas at 
the Navel shall lead Pitrs to the city, of Brahma. 

83. An excellent lotus rose up for beautifying the Munqia- 
prstha hill. By visiting the Munqlaprstha and the lotus, the 
devotee is liberated from sins. 

84. (Defective) the devotee shall avoid from a pretty 
long distance the horned animals, fanged animals, serpents, 
poisons, fires, women and water. He who sports with them is no 
better than a dead person. 

85-90. The following are proclaimed as Patitas (fallen 
ones) Viz : He who is killed while offending the serpents; he 
who is struck down by lightning; he who is captured and 


1. Near Gaya there is a chain of sacred but rocky hills and their 
peaks are called Bhasma-Kuta, Grdhra-Kuta, Preta-Kuta, Naga-Kuta, 
Rama Sila, Preta Sila, Kraunca-Pada. 

Gayasirsa consists of this chain of hillocks extending to about two 
miles. But this spot was well-known even before the time of the Buddha as 
we find the record of Buddha’s visit to Gayasirsa (Pali for Gaya Si r a) in the 
Afigultara Nikaya , Vol. IV. P. 302. 






Uttarabhaga 47.91-94 


1823 


punished by the king himself due to the fault of thieving; those 
who indulge in sexual dalliance with other men’s wives and 
are killed by their husbands out of hatred; those who are killed 
after coming into conflict with Gandalas and others; those who 
are of unequal rank and of mixed caste; those who depend upon 
Candalas and others; those who poison and burn cows; heretics 
of ruthless intellect; those base men who commit suicide out of 
anger with fasts into death, poisoning, burning, inflicting wounds 
with weapons, hanging themselves, drowning themselves in water; 
and falling from the tops of mountains and tall trees; those who 
maintain themselves through reproachful ingenuity; those who 
are authorized in the Paflcasunas i.e. five household things 
namely, oven, grinding stone, broomstick, wooden mortar and 
water pots; those who are almost dejected in sacrifices and 
assemblies; the eunuchs; those who are struck down by the 
imprecations of the Brahmanas; those who are killed by Brah- 
manas and those who are guilty of great sins. 

91. All these fallen ones attain purity, thanks to the 
Bhasman of Gayakupa. Thus, O gentle lady, the excellent 
greatness of Gaya has been recounted to you. 

92-94. This is destructive of all sins; it bestows liberation 
on the Pitrs. The man, who devoutly listens to this during 
Sraddha or on Parvan days or daily, O fair lady, theman w o 
recounts this, shall attain the world of Brahma. This is the 
source of welfare; this is holy; this is conducive to wealth 
this bestows attainment of heaven on men; it is conducive to 
renown and longevity; it increases sons and grandsons. 


1824 


CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 

The Greatness of KaSi 


Narada Purdna 


Mandhata Said : 

1-4. “O holy sir, the meritorious life of Mohinl, that is des¬ 
tructive of great sins has been splendidly recounted by you who are 
omniscient and merciful. At the instance of her father, Mohinl 
had caused the release of her husband, son and co-wife from the 
ocean of worldly existence, after insisting too much on protection 
to Dharma. That daughter of Brahma was omniscient and 
engaged in the welfare of all the worlds. She sought refuge in 
her priest. After listening to the greatness of Gaya, the bestower 
of salvation on the Pit?s what did she once again ask' that 
Brahmana Vasu, the most excellent among the knowers of the 
Vedas.” 

Vasiftha replied : 

5. “Listen O king, I shall recount what Mohini who had 
been deluded and who was desirous of resorting to the holy 
places, asked Vasu once again”. 

Mohini submitted : 

6-10. “Well done, well done, O excellent Brahmana, 
interested in uplifting the worlds. Now I have been blessed by 
you of merciful soul. O Brahmana, the excellent greatness of 
Gaya, which is a great secret which is a pleasing narrative of 
Dharma, which bestows salvation on the Pitrs and which is 
meritorious, has been heard by me. Now O leading Brahmana, 
narrate the excellent greatness of Kasl. 

8-10. O Brahmana, a little of it had been formerly heard 
by me when orally repeated by Sandhyavall. Hence, it is being 
recollected by me. Now, tell it to me in detail. 

Vasiffha said : 

On hearing those words of Mohini, Vasu, her priest, who 
knew the reality of the Vedas and the Vedangas spoke to her 
again. 



IJttarabhaga 48.11-18 


1825 


Vasu said : 

May it be heard. The city of Kasi is blessed and auspicious. 
Lord Mahesvara is blessed. 


11-12. To him who continuously resorts to Kasi, it is 
the bestower of salvation. It was a city pertaining to Visnu. 
The eternal lord Siva requested for it from Hari. He remained 
there worshipping Hrsikesa and he was worshipped by Devas 


and others. 

13. Varanasi is a beautiful city. It is the essence of 
the three worlds. On being resorted to it, it is the bestower of 
good goal (salvation) on men. Persons who have resorted to 
this city, even though they might have committed various sins, 
become free from all blemishes and shine like gods. 

14. This holy centre is a mystically secret place. It is 
conducive to happiness to all living beings. It is the bestower 
of salvation on all creatures. It is pertaining to both Visnu 
and Siva. 

15. He may be a Brahmana-slayer, a killer of cows, a 
defiler of his preceptor’s bed or a betrayer of friends. He m ^y 
be guilty of misappropriation of deposits on trust or he 
might have practised usury or adopted the basest form o 
maintenance—the man who approaches Varanasi, the city ol 
Siva, shall have his self liberated from the strong bondage of 


worldly existence. 

16. Having reached this sacred place, frequented by gods 
and Siddhas, thanks to the power of his merit, the man s a e 
well-known amongst Devas and Asuras. When dead he may 
attain Moksa, the highest region. 

17. Those meritorious persons who stay in this io y 
centre, are the devotees of either Hare or Harl an f 

deity every day with great respect, are as pure an u rOTne 
Sambhu and whose aedvitiesand hoiynM are ve^ pureb^ ^ 
free from fear, sorrow and sms. After cu g 
thick net of birth in Samsara they obtain great liberation. 

Ifi This Kasi ksetra extends to two and a half 
Yojanas (1 yojana =3 km) from east to west and half a Yojana 

from North to South. 






1826 


Narada Purana 


19 From the river Varana (Mod. Barna) (the north) 
to the river As! of dry bed (to the south), is spoken of as the 

area ofthis holy place, by god W 1 

90 The Linga that is known as Timi Candesvara is the 
northern limit (or entrance of this ksetra). The southern end is 

Sankukarna based on Omkara. 

21. It is described that there is a sacred pool called 

Pingala in the south-east corner of this sacred place. The dry 
river Asi is to be known as the Pingala Nadi near which 

stands Lolarka. _ 

22. The mystic vein called Ida is described as being 

related to the moon and hence pleasing and auspicious. It 
should be known as the (river) Varana—the place where 
Visnu is stationed. 

23-24. The mystic vein that is in between the two 
mystic veins is glorified as Susumna which should be known 
to be the Ganga (the container of fish in her belly or stream). 2 
This great holy centre is traditionally known as Avimuktaka 3 as 
this has never been abandoned nor shall ever be given up 
(by Lord Siva or Visnu). Hence it is called quiet, soundless 
(visvara).* 

25. O auspicious lady, in this holy centre the attainment 
of liberation is possible without any strain, more easily than in 
such holy centres as Prayaga which is very difficult of access. 

26-28a. There are people of various castes; there are 
Candalas of despicable character; there are persons whose 


1. Cf. Mt. P. 184. 50-52 also Linga. Sufka-Nadi in the NP (for 
Svkla in Mt. P.) is correct, as the Asi is practically a dry stream. 

2. TheSk. P. -Kasi. 5.25 attaches the same Yogic .significance to 
the Varana and the Asi, but Avimukta is Sufumnd, the Linga P, quoted in 
the Tirlha-Cintamarjii , p. 341 repeats these NP. verses. 

3. Avimukta proper is the area lying in the circle with the old 
temple ofVisvesvara as the centre and with 200 dhanus (= 800 cubits or 
about 1200 feet) as the radius. But later on, it was extended to cover the 
whole of Kasi— 

avimuktam mahakfettam pafica-KroSa-parimitam —SK P.I V. i 26.31. 
even though elsewhere the SK. P. (74. 45-46) gives the following limits : 
West-Gokarnesa, East-Manikarnisa, South—Brahmcsa and North-— 
Bharabhuta. 

♦VV. 21-23 are found verbatim in the Linga P. (as quoted in the Tirtha - 
cintamapi , p. 341) but the reading for visvara is vifuva . 






1827 


Uttarabhaga 48.28b-38 

entire person is filled with sins and great evils. Learned men 
know that Avimukta is a great medicine for them. Hara takes 
pity on wicked persons, blind ones, indigent ones, miserable 
ones and those who commit sins. He leads them on to great 
salvation. 

28b-30a. O auspicious-looking lady, that city becomes 
holy and meritorious ever since the Ganga began to flow through 
the middle of the holy centre and then joined the ocean. The 
Ganga flows through towards the North. The Sarasvatl flows 
towards the East. 

30b-31a. The skull was left off there by Siva of great and 
noble soul. The worlds attained by those people who go to that 
holy centre and propitiate the Pitrs by means of Pinda-offerings 
in the Sraddhas, are refulgent ones. 

31 b-32a. If the murderer of a Brahmana goes to Avimukta 


at any time, the Brahmahatya (the sin of Brahmin-slaughter) 
recedes due to the greatness of that holy centre . 1 

32b-33a. Those men of great merits who go to Avimukta 
become everlasting, free from old age and attain salvation and 


liberation from bodily bondage. 


UUll UUU..J -- O . . i 

Tf a man or a woman, knowingly or unknowing y 



38. Those foolish men 
resort to Avimukta, stay again 
faeces, urine and menstrual blood 
frequently.) 





1828 


Narada Purdna 


39. Even those persons of evil actions who come into 
contact with the dust particles which were lying in Avimukta, 
and were wafted by the wind towards them attain the greatest 
goal. 

40. The man who stays there, who has controlled his 
mind and who has great concentration is remembered as equal 
to an ascetic feeding himself on wind although he may be 
enjoying all the three worlds. 

41. He who stays there for a month, who takes food 
regularly, but who has controlled his sense-organs is like 
a person by whom the holy vow of the great Pasupata Vrata 
has been performed. 

42. He conquers the fear of birth and death; he attains 
the greatest goal; viz. Moksa, he obtains holy salvation and he 
attains the Yogic goal. 

43. Indeed, the Yogic goal cannot be attained by ordi¬ 
nary persons even in hundreds of births. But it is attained 
here, thanks to the greatness of the holy centre and the super¬ 
human power of Sankara. 

44. If a man stays there for a month taking only a single 
meal a day, O fair-faced lady, his sins committed throughout 
his life perish in a month. 

45. The man who is endowed with the Vow of celibacy 
and who does not abandon Avimukta until the fall of the body 
(i.e. death) shall become Sankara himself. 

46. If anyone does not abandon Avimukta though over¬ 
whelmed by obstacles, he transcends old age and death as well 
as this transient life. 

47. Those who resort to Avimukta till the fall of their 
bodies, go to divine worlds by means of swan-yoked vehicles 
after death. 

48. A man s mind may be attracted towards worldly 
pleasures; he may have eschewed devotion and he may be un¬ 
thinking. But if he dies in this holy centre, he does not re-enter 
the worldly existence. 1 

49. On this earth, this excellent holy centre is the cause 
for the attainment of heavenly pleasures as well as salvation. 


1. Mt. P. 180.71; Lihga I. 92.63, Sk. P. IV. 86.122. 



Uttarabhfiga 48. 50-6la 


1829 


There is no doubt about this that he who dies therein, obtains 
salvation. 

50. The great salvation, the region that a Yogin attains 
in the course of a thousand births, one attains by merely dying 
here itself. 1 

51-52. Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, Sudras, persons 
of mixed castes, worms, outcastes alien tribes, persons of sinful 
birth and of intercaste origin, germs, insects, ants and all 
kinds of animals and birds who die here in due course of 
time (at the hands of Kala) are remembered as lords of gods. 

53-54a. They will attain identity of form with Rudra 
viz. all of them will have crests of crescent, eyes in the forehead 
and emblems of bull. O auspicious lady, those who cast off their 
vital airs there, in fact, attain Rudrahood. They rejoice in the 
vicinity of Siva. 

54b-55a. Whether willingly or unwillingly if one abandons 
one’s life at Avimukta, one shall undoubtedly attain liberation. 
This is true in the case of even animals. 

55b-56a. Those men who had ever been devotees of 
Siva exclusively and not of others, those whose minds and vital 
airs adhere to him (lord Siva), do become living liberated souls. 
There is no doubt about it. 

56b-57a. O MohinI, those who enter funeral pyre deli¬ 
berately, in the holy centre of Avimukta attain complete identity 
with Rudra, the destructive fire at the end of the world. 

57b-58a. There is no return to worldly existence even 
in hundreds and crores of Kalpas, in the case of those devotees 
of Siva who observe fast unto death with a steady resolve. 

58b-59a. At the time of death in Avimukta, the lord of 
all beings himself offers the prayerful word for repetition into 
the ears of living beings who are urged by their Karmans. 

59b-61a. It has been mentioned thus by Rama him¬ 
self with great pleasure in his mind to Siva who performs aus¬ 
picious things and who resides in Avimukta : — O Siva, if you 
yourself instruct my Mantra into the right ear of a dying 
person whoever he may be, he will become liberated. 


1. Mt. P. 180.74; Linga I. 92.66. 







1830 


jV dr a da Pur ana 


6lb-63. At the time of death when the Karmans of men 
are bein- split and when they are being urged by the wind, 
they lose°all memory. The Rudras who are stationed m Avi- 
mukta viz. Dimicandesvara and others are the bestowers of 
pleasures on devotees. They give the Taraka Mantra (by 
whispering it) into the ears. No sinner dying in Avimukta goes 
to the hell. 1 

64. All persons blessed by Isvara do attain great sal¬ 
vation. Here the attributes of Avimukta were recounted to you 

only by way of illustration. 

65-66. The detailed explanation of the attributes of 
Avimukta is like that of the jewels in the ocean. The intellect 
of the dead, on being led to the heaven, is the same as that of 
those established in perfect knowledge and wisdom and those 
who wish for the greatest bliss. A man who abandons his vital 
airs here, is never born anywhere. 

67. That endless salvation of that deity is like that of 
the Yogins. What is called Smasana 2 (cremation ground) is 
the pedestal of Yoga and the Tirtha thereof is Manikarnika. 

68-69a. Liberation is indicated in those places by means 
of their Karmans in the case of fallen men. In this connection 
Manikarnika 3 is the most excellent of all Tirthas, since O fair 
lady, there is perpetual presence ofDhurjati (Siva). 


1. Sk. P. IV. 32.115-116. The belief still prevails and persons who 
can afford to do so come to Varanasi in the last stage of their life. 

2. Smaiana or Mahd-fmaidna is another name of this holy centre. Cf. 
Sk. P. Kdii 30. ill. Pd, P. 1. 33.14; Mt. P. 184.19. The Sk. P. (IV. 30. 103- 
104) explains that at the end of the world all bhiitas or elements (bma) 
lie down here like corpses. Hence it is called Smaiana or Maha-Smafana. 

3. Manikarnika is the sacred-most pool ( Tirtha) out of the five 
important ( Tirthas) {PaOca-Tirthi) in Varanasi (Mt. P. 185. 68-69). Its 
north-south length is 105 hastas i.e. about 160 feet (Sk. P. IV. 99.54). Two 
popular etymologies of Manikarnika are recorded in the Sk. P. : (1) A 
jewel (Marti) among muktiksetras forms the pericarp (Karpikd) of the lotus¬ 
like feet of Moksa-Laksmi. (ii) God Siva is the wish-bestowing jewel (Mapi) 
who whispers in the ear (Karxiikd) of dying man the Taraka Mantra (Sk. P- 
IV. 7.79-80). 



Utlarabhaga 48.69b-82a 


1831 


69b-70a. O fair-faced lady, by taking his bath there, 
the righteous soul attains that fruit which ten horse sacrifices 
are remembered to yield. 

70b-71a. He who gives away all his wealth to a 
Brahmana who has mastered the Vedas, like the Homa-offerings 
into the blazing fire attains splendid goal. 

71b-72a. The man who observes fast and propitiates 
Brahmanas decidedly attains the benefit of Sautramaniyajna 
(the sacrifice pertaining to India). 

72b-73a. By offering lights, the sense-organs throb with 
knowledge. By offering incense, he attains that place resorted 
to by Rudras. 

73b-74. He who marks a young gentle bull and sets it 
free along with four heifers, attains the greatest goal. Undoub¬ 
tedly he derives liberation along with his ancestors. 

75. Of what avail is much talk ? Infinite benefit accrues 
to one who performs Dharma etc., with Siva in view. 

76. The merit of ten horse-sacrifices is glorified to accrue 
to one on giving flowers. In giving incense one gets the bene¬ 
fit of Agnihotra; in giving scents, the benefit is that of making 
charitable gifts of plots of land. 

77. In Marjana (wiping off) the benefit glorified is that 
one gets by gifting away a cow; ten times the usual benefit 
accrues to one who offers unguents. While in offering garlands 
the benefit is ten-times that of the usual. 

78-79a. In (offering vocal) music the benefit is a 
thousand-fold; in instrumental music the benefit is hundred- 
thousand fold. 

Those who worship and eulogise Mahadeva at Avimukta 
are liberated from all sins, freed from old age and death. They 
stand in the heaven. 

79b-80. If on reaching Avimukta a man worships the 
Linga, he has no rebirth even in hundreds and crores of 
Kalpas. Unaging and devoid of death he sports in the presence 
of Siva. 

81-82a. The liberated souls who perform the Japa oi 
Satarudriya with great concentration along with requisite 
meditation and after restraining the groups of sense-organs, 





1832 


jVarada Purana 


the excellent Brahmanas who are stationed in Avimukta conti¬ 
nuously are blessed and have their objects achieved. 

82b-83. O famous lady, he who observes fast for a single 
day undoubtedly derives the benefit of observing fast for a 
hundred years. Henceforth the identity arising from the con¬ 
fluence of Ganga and Varuna. 

84. When the twelfth day of the month of Sravana 
coincides with a Wednesday a man should take a holy bath 
therein. By his mere presence he derives the benefit. 

85. He who performs Sraddha rites at that time and 
place, O fair faced lady, redeems the Pitrs and goes to 
Visnu’s world. 

86. By giving a horse as gift in accordance with the 
injunctions, in the world-famous confluence of the Ganga with 
Varana and Asi, 1 the devotee is not born again (i.e. he gets 
Moksa). 

87. The devout man who worships the lord of the 
Sangama (confluence) there, is the Lord of the chiefs of Devas 
himself. He is competent to restrain and bless. 

88. Kesava 2 himself stands to the east of the lord of the 
Devas. To the east of Kesava is the well-known Sangamesvara. 


1. This is a bit confusing statement. The confluence of the Varana 
and the Ganga and that of the Asi with Ganga are two different holy spots 
in the famous Panca-Tirthi of Varanasi. The temple of Lolarka is near the 
confluence of the Ganga and the Asi. 

2. Mt. P. (185. 68-69) regards this Kesava or Adikesava of the 
Sk. P. and the inscriptions of Gahadwal ruler of Kanauj (as in E. I. XIV. 
197-198) as one of the holiest shrines. It is near the confluence of the 
Ganga and Varana. Saiigamcsvara mentioned in this verse is near Adi- 
Kcsava shrine. 





Ultarabhdga 49.1-10 


1833 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 

Pilgrimage to Kafi 1 

Vasu said : 

1. O beautiful lady, to the north east of that seat of the 
deity (Sangamesvara), four-faced Linga had been installed by 
Sagara. 

2. In the north-west corner of the holy centre pertaining 
to Sagara is the lake Bhadradeha made out of the milk of 
cows. It is destructive of all sins. 

3. O MohinI, merely by taking bath therein, a man 
attains the benefit of charitable gift of a thousand Tawny- 
coloured cows. 

4. The period when the constellation Purvabhadrapada 
coincides with the full moon day, is highly meritorious and 
it yields the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. 

5. The goddess who is seen in the cremation ground is 
well known as Bhisma Candika. By worshipping her, a man 
never faces a mishap. 

6. Krttivasesvara 1 is to the East of Antakesvara, to the 
South of Sarvesvara and to the north of Matallsvara. 

7-8a. O gentle lady, by visiting Krttivasesvara and by 
worshipping him, one attains the greatest goal even in a single 
birth. This is derived in Krttivasa. Usually the sin commit¬ 
ted in the previous birth is not dispelled even by penance. 
But by visiting that Linga (i.e. Krttivasa) that sin perishes 
instantaneously. 

8b-9. In the Kftayuga, the Tryambaka Linga is to be 
worshipped, in the Tretayuga the linga of Krttivasas is to be 
worshipped. It is the Mahesvara Linga that is sung about in the 
Dvapara. The Linga Hastipalesvara is sung about in the Kali 
age by the Siddhas. 

10. If one desires to get eternal knowledge that absolves 
one from Samsara and grants immortality one should visit the 


1. This chapter describes some of the important holy spots in 
Varanasi. 



1834 


Narada Pur ana 


god Krttivascsvara 1 again and again. 

11. By seeing the lord of the Devas even a murderer of 
a Brahmana is liberated from the sin. By touching and 
worshipping the Linga one derives the benefit of all Yajnas. 

12-16a. On the fourteenth day in the dark half of the 
month of Phalguna, the devotees should worship the eternal 
lord with great faith and concentration by means of flowers, 
fruits, leaves and diverse kinds of foodstuffs as well as by means 
of milk, honey, water and ghee. They propitiate and worship 
the auspicious Linga by means of the sound of small hand-drums 
(Damarus) bowing, dancing, singing, playing on mouth organs, 
recitation of Stotras (hymns) and chanting Mantras. After 
observing fast for one night and worshipping lord Siva with 
deep devotion, they attain the supreme region, O Mohini. 

16b-17. He who worships Paramesvara on the fourteenth 
day in the month of Vaisakha, 2 attains the world of Vaisakha 
(lord Karttikeya) and becomes his follower. 

18-19a. He who worships Hara faithfully in the month 
Jyestha on the fourteenth day, attains the heavenly world and 
remains there until the time of dissolution of all living beings. 

19b-20a. O gentle lady, he who worships Siva with 
purity on the fourteenth day in the month of Asadha attains the 
world of the sun and sports himself about as much as he pleases. 

20b-21a. By worshipping Yogin Sankara in the month 
of Bhadrapada with various flowers and fruits the devotee attains 
the same world as that of Indra. 

21b-23a. By worshipping Isvara on the fourteenth day in 
the Pitrpaksa (dark half of the Bhadrapada month) the devotee 
attains the world of the Pitrs and being honoured by them he 
sports about. 

23b-24a. By worshipping Mahcsvara, the lord of the 
Devas, in the month of Prabodha (i.e. Karttika), the devotee 


1. VV. 6-10 describe the glory of Krttivascsvara. It was in the Hara- 
Tirtha lane. It was destroyed by Aurangzeb and a masjid was constructed on 
its site where the site of original Krttivasa Linga can be located. Now a new 
shrine for Krttivasesvara is built near the Mosque (The Kalyapa XXX-I 
Tirthdnka , p. 133). 

2. VV. 16b-27 describe the various Yatras to be performed in various 
months. 




Uttarabhaga 49.24b-37 


1835 


attains the world of the moon and sports about as long as he 
pleases. 

24b-25a. By worshipping the Pinaka-bearing lord in the 
dark half of the month of Margasirsa, the devotee attains 
the world of Visnu and sports about there for endless Ages 
(time). 

25b-26a. By worshipping Sthanu in the month of Pausa 
with a dilighted mind the devotee attains the spot pertaining to 
Nirrti and rejoices alongwith him. 

26b-27a. By worshipping Siva with auspicious flowers, 
fruits and roots in the month of Magha, the devotee eschews 
the ocean of worldly existence and attains Sivaloka. 

27b-29. If one wishes for attaining the region of Sankara, 
one should reside in Avimukta and assiduously worship lord 
Krttivasesvara. Towards the west of Vyasesa, there is the deep 
pool called Ghantakarna. By taking bath in that pool and by 
visiting Vyasesa, O gentle lady, wherever one may die one shall 

have the benefit of dying in Varanasi. 

30. If the man takes a holy bath in Dandakhata and 
performs Tarpana rite for his deceased ancestors O gentle 
lady, those who are detained in the hell go to the world of Purs. 

31. The uplift of those men of evil deeds who have 
attained Pisaca-hood (the state of an evil spirit), O gentle 
lady, is through the offerings of Pintfas. 

32-33. By seeing that pond, one has his objects achieved. 
Goddess Lalita stays there and she bestows happiness on the 
people. Those who stay in that spot and worship her aie 
given various pleasures by her, O bestower of honour. 

34. O Mohini, she confers the imperishable worlds upon 
those persons who keep awake with lamps in front of her. 

35. Those who erect temples for her, those who sweep 

the ground thereof shall have the charitable gift of eight thou¬ 
sand gold pieces. , 

36 Listen to the meritorious benefit of the person, who, 
O gentle lady, feeds those Brahmanas who are masters of the 
Vedas, w'ith sweet cooked rice for the sake of the deity. 

37 Whether the devotee is a man or a woman, he will 
be blessed with all worldly pleasures. He will reside in the 


Ig36 Narada Pur ana 

world of Durga for the period of a Kalpa and thereafter he will 
come here again. 

38. The couples will be endowed with plenty of wealth 
and food grains. They will be born in the family of great per¬ 
sons. They will be fortunate, comely in features and proud, 
thanks to their beauty and youth. 

39-40a. O gende lady, they will be like this :— They 
will be the object of all pleasures. Whence is the fear of rebirth 
to that person who, after attaining the rare human birth as 
fickle as the fall of lightning, visits Lalita ? 

40b-4la. By seeing Lalita at Varanasi, the man attains 
the same benefit as one derives after circumambulating the 
earth. 

41b-42. The devotee should observe fast on the fourth 
day in every month. He should then worship that goddess and 
keep awake during the night. O gentle lady, he gains pros¬ 
perity of the three worlds. 

43. O Mohinl, after worshipping the praiseworthy 
Nalakubarakesana who is the bestower of all Siddhis, the man 
shall have all his objects accomplished. 

44. O gentle lady, to the south of it is the holy centre 
Manikarnl. There is a great Tirtha in front of it. It is destruc¬ 
tive of sins. 

45. By seeing lord Manikarnl svara 1 abiding in the 
Kunda (the holy pool), by bowing down and then by worshipp¬ 
ing him, one shall cease to stay in a belly once again (i.e. 
one is liberated from Samsara). 

46. By worshipping the great Gangesvara who is install¬ 
ed in the Ganga to his southern side, the devotee shall attain 
the world of gods (Svarga). 

47. O Mohinl, I shall describe another shrine at Varanasi. 
The beautiful spot dear to the lord of the Devas is there. 

48. Once, O blessed lady, the Linga of the moon-crested 
lord was being taken away by Raksasas who were moving 
speedily through the sky. 2 


1. Vide note 3 on p. 1830 

2. VV. 47-56 describe the Linga known as Kukkutesvara. The sage’s 
is an attempt to give a popular etymology of the name. 





Uttarabhaga 49.49-62a 1837 

49. When they reached this place, the lord thought— 
“How will it be possible for me to avoid being separated from 
the spot of Avimukta ?” 

50. O auspicious lady, even as the lord of the Devas was 
thinking about this, a cock crew there. (There arose the crow¬ 
ing sound of a cock.) 

51. O gentle lady, on hearing that sound, the Raksasas 
became mentally afraid. They abandoned the Linga there itself, 
at the time of the early dawn, and fled away. 

52-53. When the Raksasas ran away thus, the Linga 
remained lying there in an extremely beautiful spot. O beautiful 
lady, the lord of the Devas himself reappeared in the middle of 
Avimukta. Hence the place is known to be superior to (other 
places). 

54. Then the name Hara was remembered by the 
Devas as Avimukta consisting of the most sacred syllables. 
Avimukta is the bestower of salvation on mobile and immobile 
beings, particularly on those living beings who die there. 

55. O blessed lady, cocks had always been there in that 
holy spot. Even today they arc seen there being worshipped 
by auspicious souls. 

56. O gentle lady, the man who always resorts to it 
and observes it with his eyes is not reborn even in the course 

of hundreds and crores of Kalpas. 

57. To the south of the lord, there is a splendid tank. 
If one drinks its water there is no return to the world here. 

58-59a. There are three Lingas in the hearts of man. 
Those men by whom the waters of that pool are drunk get their 
desires accomplished. There is no doubt about this that these 
persons possess perfect knowledge which redeems them. 

59b-60a. By taking bath in the waters of the tank, by 
seeing the deity named Dandaka and by visiting Avimukta 
thereafter, one attains Kaivalya (salvation) instantaneously. 

60b-61a. If a Brahmana performs the Sandhya utes 
there even once, it is as good as performing the Sandhya rites 

for sixtyfive years. . , . . 

61b-62a. By visiting the city of Varanasi (also known 

as) the cremation ground (Smasana) Avimuktaka, and the lord 
of Avimukta one becomes the lord of the Ganas. 




1838 


Narada Purana 


62b-63a. Bv seeing the Liriga Avimuktesvara, 1 the man 
is immediately liberated from sins, ailments and bondages with 
which jivas are fettered.* 

63b-64. In front of Avirnukta, there is a Linga stationed 
there facing the West. O gentle lady, it is called Laksanesvara. 
If a man secs Avirnukta and Laksanesvara he immediately 
becomes one possessing perfect spiritual knowledge. 

65. To the north of it, O gentle lady, there is a fourfaccd 
Lihga. It is named Caturthesvara. It is excessively destructive 
of sins and fears. 

66. To all living beings in the world the holy centre 
Varanasi is the bestower of salvation. But the Lihga Avimuk¬ 
tesvara there is glorified as Jlvanmukta (i.e. which bestows 
upon devotees liberation even while they are alive). 

67. If a man stays anywhere there, the lordship of Ganas 
is ordained in respect of him. By abandoning the vital breaths 
there, one shall attain the ultimate salvation. 

68. The first Avarana (enclosure) is remembered to be 
the area within the above limits. In the second Avarana 
(enclosure) the Manikarnika is to the east. 

69. There are seven crores of Lingas. abiding in that spot. 
Merely by seeing them one shall attain the benefit of (perform¬ 
ing) Yajnas. 

70. These are Siddha (self-manifested ?) Lingas. (In 
Kasi) all wells, tanks, ponds, rivers and pools—all of them are 
glorified as sacred. 

71. A person who will take bath in these with concentrat¬ 
ed mind and touch the Lingas (while bowing, worshipping etc.) 
will never re-enter Samsara again. 

72. All the important holy centres that are on the Earth 
and in the firmament have been recounted to yon by me. 

73. O fair lady, the pilgrimage to the holy centres, that 
is destructive of sins, has been described by me. He who 


1. W. 6lb-66 glorify Avimuktesvara which a Lihga in Avimukta- 
Ksctra for which vide note 3 on p. 1826 above. 

♦According to the Paiupata dariana , the five Paias with bind jivas are 
the products of Mala, Karman, Maya, tirodhdnasakti and bindu. 




Uttarabhaga 49.74—50.3 


1839 


undertakes the pilgrimage and he who sees him attains salva¬ 
tion. 

74. O lady of beautiful hips, Avimukta is the splendid 
middleAvarana (enclosure) .This is named Kantaka too. At the 
time of death it is the bestower of final liberation from samsara. 


CHAPTER FIFTY 

The Glory of Ka$i 

Vasu Said :— 

1. Henceforth, O MohinI, I shall recount the proper 
time for the Yatra (pilgrimage) which has been undertaken by 
the Devas and others 1 and which yields befitting benefits. 

2. Formerly, in the month of Gaitra, this pilgrimage was 
performed by the heaven-born gods staying there at Kama- 
kuntja. They were exclusively and devotedly engaged in per¬ 
forming ablutions and worship. 

3. In the month ofjyestha, O splendid-faced lady, the 
pilgrimage was undertaken by the Siddhas devotedly engaged 
in the performance of religious bath and worship in the 
Rudravasa Kun<ja(pool) which was the residence of Rudra. 


1 . 

VV. 1-10 enumerate the month and 

holy centres visited by gods 

and others for pilgrimage. 

Category of 

Month of 

Holy spot {Kityda) 


The Pilgrim 

Pilgrimage 

visited etc. 

1 . 

Gods 

Caitra 

Kama Kun^a 

2. 

Siddhas 

Jycstha 

Rudra-Vasa Kunda 

3. 

Gandharvas 

Asatfha 

Priya-dcvi Kunda 

4. 

Vidyadharas 

Sravana 

Laksmi Kun^a 

5. 

Yaksas 

Asvina 

Markand c y a Kunda 

6. 

Pannagas 

Margaslrsa 

Koti-Tirtha 

7. 

Guhyakas 

Pau?a 

Kapala-mocana Kuflda 

8. 

Pisacas 

Phalguna 

Kalesvara Ku^tfa. 





1840 


jVarada Purana 


4. In the month of Asadha, the pilgrimage was carried 
out by the auspicious Gandharvas who peifoimed then ablution 
and worship in the Kunda of goddess Pi iyadcvi. 

5. O Mohini, in die month of Sravana this pilgrimage 
was performed by the Vidyadharas who stayed near Laksmi- 
Kunda and who were devoutly engaged in the performance of 
ablution therein and the worship of the deity. 

6. O fair-faced lady, in the month of Asvina this pilgri¬ 
mage was undertaken by Yaksas who, stationed at the deep pool 
of Markandeya were engaged in the worship and ablution 
therein. 

7. O Mohini, in the month of Margaslrsa, this pilgrimage 
was performed by the Pannagas (serpents) who stayed at the 
Kotitlrthas and performed ablutions and worship. 

8. O splendid-eyed lady, in the month of Pausa this 
pilgrimage was undertaken by the Guhyakas stationed at Kapala- 
mocana (kunda) and were engaged in the regular practice of 
ablution, meditation and worship. 

9. O splendid lady, in the month of Phalguna this 
pilgrimage was undertaken by the Pisacas stationed at the 
Kunda (pool) Kalesvara who were devoutly engaged in ablu¬ 
tion, worship etc. 

10. Hence, O gentle lady it is well-known that the four¬ 
teenth day in the bright half of the auspicious month of Phal¬ 
guna is called c< Pisaci (Caturdasl) n . 

11. Henceforth, O splendid-faced lady, I shall tell you 
the duties and procedure in respect of the pilgrimage, by per¬ 
forming which the man shall attain the full benefit of 
pilgrimage. 

12. Waterpots should be given as gifts accompanied with 
sweet-cooked rice. They should be beautiful and be covered 
with cloths and be presented alongwith fruits and flowers. 

13. The third day in the bright half of the month of 
Caitra is highly fruitful. On that day, Gaurl must be visited by 
men with devotional feelings. 

14. O fair-faced lady, after taking bath the devotee should 
go to the holy centre Gopreksa. At Svargadvara (heavenly 
portals) KalikadevI should be assiduously worshipped. 





Uttarabhaga 50.15-24 


1841 


15. Another deity is also mentioned to be very great. She 
is Samvarta, the auspicious Lalita. She should be visited with 
devotion. She is the bestower of all desired benefit. 

16. Thereafter, he (the pilgrim) should feed Brahmana 
devotees of Siva who are observers of pure vows, and offer them 
clothes and sumptuous monetary gifts of befitting nature. 

17. With Panca-Gaurls in view the devotee shall dedicate 
tasty juices and sweet scents to a Brahmana. He will obtain 
excellent and great welfare and be endowed with good fortune. 

18. I shall now mention the Vinayakas, the creators 
of obstacles and troubles in the residence of holy centre Kasl. 
O gentle lady, by worshipping them, a man attains benefit 
without any hindrance. 

19-20. Having visited Dhundhi-Vinayaka first (one 
should next visit) Klla-Vinayaka, Devi-Vinayaka, Go-preksya 
Vinayaka, Hasti-hasti-Vinayaka and lastly the famous 
Sindurya Vinayaka. O queen, all these Vinayakas be visited 
on the Caturthi (fourth Lunar) day. 1 

21. With these (Vinayakas) in view, sweet-meats (sweet- 
balls) should be given to a Brahmana. When this duty is per¬ 
formed the man realises Siddhi (accomplishment of his desire) 

22. Henceforth, I shall enumerate the Candikas 2 who 
protect the holy place (Kasi). Durga protects in the south; 
Antaresvarl protects in the south-west. 

23-24. ArigaresI protects in the west; Bhadrakalika in 
the north-west; Bhlmacanda in the north; Mahamatta in the 
north-east, Sankari accompanied by Ordhvakes'I in the east, 
AdhahkesI in the south-east and Citraghanta in the middle. 


1. Vinayakas were originally trouble-mongering spirits. They were 
to be propitiated at the beginning of any undertaking lest they should spoil 
the work. Their identification with god Ganesa and attribution of auspicious 
nature to them is a later development in epics. It is reported that there 
were 56 Vinayakas at Varanasi. The most frequented is Dhundi-raja Ganesa 
to the west of Annapurna temple. 

2. Like Vinayakas, Candikas are the other category to be propitiated 
for one’s protection, though their main job is to guard Varanasi. Their 
postings are enumerated in W22-27. 





1842 


jYdrada Purana 


25 These goddesses (Cantfkus) when visited by men 
become delighted with them. All of them eagerly protect the 
holy place. 

26. O gentle lady, they continuously create obstacles 
for sinners. Hence, for the sake of protection, the goddesses 
should always be worshipped along with the Vinayakas. 

27 . Jf one wishes for the greatest Siddhi, progeny, 
prosperity and happiness, one must offer scents, fragrant 
flowers, Naivedyas etc. with devotion. 

28. O lady of beautiful eyes, I shall recount to you 
another thing in that holy spot (city). There are three 
rivers Rowing there with splendid wateis. 

29-31. Merely by seeing them the sin of the murder of 
a Brahmana recedes. The first of these is Trisrota (the thiee- 
currented). The next one is MandakinI and the third is 
Matsyodari. These three bestow merits. Among them Manda¬ 
kinI is highly meritorious. It is stationed in Madhyamesvara. 
Trisrota that exceedingly bestows merit, flows in Avimukta; 
Matsyodari is stationed at Omkara; it is always the bestowei 
of merit. 

32. O MohinI, the time when the Ganga flows into that 
holy spot is extremely meritorious. It is difficult even to the 
Devas to get its advantage. 

33. Will anybody bewail if he takes bath in the 
meritorious (holy centre) Nadesvara sprinkled with the waters 
ofjahnavl? (No). 

34. O auspicious lady, Siva got rid of the skull by 
bathing in it at a time when the Ganga got mingled with the 
Matsyodari. 

35. The great lake named Kapalamocana is there itself. 
It is glorified as sanctifying of all living beings. It bestows 
merit on them. 

36-37. The Ganga gets mixed with the waters of the 
Matsyodari near Omkaresvara. If at that time a man takes 
bath in its waters end visits lord Omkara, he is not 
contaminated by grief, old age and the bondage of death. 
One who takes bath therein himself becomes that deity, called 
Omkaresvara. 




Uttarabhaga 50.38-50 


1843 


38-39. O fair-faced lady, out of affection for you, this 
esoteric secret has been communicated to you. 1 . The (consti¬ 
tuents) there are Akara (letter ‘A’) Ukara (letter C U’) and 
Makara (letter C M’). The letter ‘A* should be known as the 
bestower of the goal of Visnu’s world. The letter < U > is 
reputed to be on its southern side. 

40. Brhaspati the preceptor of the Devas attained great 
Siddhi there. Orhkara should be known as the unchanging 
region of Brahman. 

41. To the north side of both of them is the letter < M > 
termed as Visnu’s syllable. Sage Kapila, the great ascetic 
achieved Siddhi at that Linga. 

* 42. After coming to Varanasi, Bhlsma stayed there, 

worshipping the lord of the Devas, the excellent Pancayatana 
(five-aboded Siva). 

43. In that highly hallowed spot, Siva manifested him¬ 
self. Pie is well-known as Gopreksaka. He is eulogised by all 
the deities. 

44. After approaching, visiting and worshipping Gopre- 
ksesvara, a man never attains wretchedness. He is liberated 
from sins. 

45. The cows staying in the forests and wandering about 
on being scorched by the forest-fire approached this deep pool 
of water and became calm. They drank water then. 

46. Ever since then, this came to be called Kapilahrada 
(the Pool of Kapila cows.) There also Siva (who manifested 
himself) is as Vrsabha-dhvaja (bull-emblemed one). 

47-49a. The lord always maintains his presence there 
and is always seen at that place. By taking bath in this holy 
Tirtha of Kapilahrada, and by visiting the bull-emblemed Siva, 
the devotee of well-controlled mind shall attain the benefit 
of all the Yajnas. On dying there, he attains the heavenly 
world. By worshipping Siva he becomes Siva himself. With a 
different physical body, he attains Gana-hood which is very 
difficult to attain. 

49b-50. In this spot itself, cows were retained .by 
Brahma himself for peace in all the worlds and certainly to 

1. This is an esoteric way of identifying the three matris of the sacred 
syllable Om with the three rivers. 







1844 


jVarada Purana 


sanctify all. (It is from their milk that) the holy splendid 
lake Bhadradoha is created there. It is holy and destructive 
of sins. 

51. A man who lakes bath in that spot (Tirtha) shall 
himself become the lord of speech. Siva was brought there and 
installed by Paramesthin (god Brahma). 

52. Collecting it from Brahma, another Linga was 
installed by Visnu. Siva then remained there by the name 
Hiranyagarbha. 

53. Thereafter, again, Brahma installed a Linga which 
was named Svarlokesvara (lord of heavenly world) which 
exhibited the divine heavenly sports at times. 

54. By visiting that lord of the Devas, the devotee is 
honoured in Siva’s world. By abandoning the vital breath here, 
the devotee is not born again anywhere. 

55-56. His state becomes eternal which is the same as 
in the case of Yogins. In this very same part of the earth, a 
certain Daitya, the thorn to the deities, had assumed the form 
of a tiger. This proud and strong Daitya was killed (by 
the lord), who became famous as Vyaghresvara. 1 He abides 
here continuously. 

57-58a. By visiting this lord of the immortals, the 
devotee never faces wretchedness. The Linga that is installed 
by the mountain Himalaya is stationed (and known as) Saile- 
svara. O gentle lady, by visiting this no man will ever attain 
wretchedness. 

58b-59. There were two Daityas Utpala and Vidala. 
As a result of the boon granted by Brahma, they became 
arrogant. Seeing that they became indulgent to women out of 
lustfulness, Parvatl killed them with bow and with a spear.* * 
As a memento of it, this Linga has been established. 

60. By visiting this Linga that has occupied the most 


1. Purana-writers are fond of giving popular etymologies vide our note 
on Kukkutesvara. 

*The text Sarahgam kantukenatra is corrupt and obscure. It is emended 
Jarngepa kuntakendtra and translated as above. 






UUarabhaga 50.61-69 


1845 


important spot, no man is subjected to grief. O gentle lady, he 
becomes a Siddha in every one of his births. 

61. All round it, Lingas were installed by the Devas. 
By visiting there a man shall become a Gana with a different 
body assuming a new form after death. 

62-63. This river Varanasi (combined name for Varana 
and Asl) is sacred and destructive of sins. After embellishing 
this holy centre, it meets with the Jahnavi. In this confluence, 
an excellent Lihga was installed by Brahma. It is wellknown 
in the whole universe as Sahgamesvara. May it be seen. 

64. Whence is the fear of a rebirth to that person who 
takes holy dip, O auspicious lady, in the confluence of the 
two divine rivers and worships god Sahgamesvara (lord of the 
confluence). 

65. O gentle lady, the Lihga installed by Sukra, the son 
of Bhrgu, is known by the name Sukresvara. It is worshipped 
by all Siddhas and immortal ones (i.e. gods). 

66. By visiting this (Lihga) a man shall immediately be 
liberated from all sins. After death, the man is never born in 
the world. 

67. O MohinI, Jambuka, a great Daitya was killed here 
by Mahadeva. By visiting that Lihga, a man shall attain all 
desires. 

68-69. Know that all these meritorious Lingas were 
installed by the Devas, the leader of whom was Indra. They 
bestow all desires. Thus, O MohinI, all these Siva Lingas in 
the holy place of Avimuktaka have been recounted to you by 


me. 








, „ Narada Parana 

1846 

CHAPTER feftyone 

The Greatness of Kaii ( concluded) 

Vasu said :— 

1 Now I shall narrate to you the excellent glory of the 
Gahga as it flows through Varanasi. It yields worldly pleasure 
as well as Liberation from Samsara after death. 

2. Whatever meritorious deed is performed in Avi- 
mukta shall attain everlasting benefit. No sinner, after going 
to Avimukta, falls into the hell. 

3-4a. O auspicious lady, the sin that is committed at 
Avimukta shall remain adamantine. 1 All the salvation-yielding 
Tirthas in the three worlds, all of them entirely resort to the 
Ganga which flows towards the north at Kasi. 

4b-6a. He who takes bath, at Dasasvamedha and 
visits Siva, Visvesvara (Lord of the universe) shall immediately 
become free from sins and is liberated from worldly ties. Every¬ 
where the Ganga is holy and dispeller of the sin of murder 
of a Brahmana. Especially it is so at Varanasi where (the 
Ganga) flows towards the north. 

6b-7a. Merely by taking bath at the confluence of 
Vararta, Asi and Jahnavi, a man is liberated from all sins. 

7b-8a. By taking the holy dip in the Gahga that flows 

towards the north at Kasi, in the months of Karttika as well 

as Magha, men are liberated from Mahapatakas (great sins) 
and other evils. 

8b-9. O highly blessed lady, the well-known Tirthas 
in all the worlds come always to the Jahnavi at Kasi at the 
time of Parvans (holy occasions) alongwith the holy shrines. 

10-1 la. It is to wipe off their own sins originating from 
their contact with persons defiled by the defects of great sms, 
that they go everyday to the Gahga that flows towards the 
north at Kasi. The waters of Gahga are conducive to liberation 
from all sorts of sins. 


1. Sk. P. — KaSi. 33-115. 






1847 


Uttarabhaga 51.11 b-20a 


1 lb-13a. O gentle lady, salvation may or may not be 
obtained in the course of a hundred births by an intelligent 
devotee who is engaged in holy rites in other holy centres. But 
here, by the death in the Ganga at Kasi, salvation is attained in 
the course of a single birth by a man whose Atman is not turned 
round (to the good path ?). 

13b-14. O beautiful lady, a deep pool named Dharma- 
nada is famous there itself. Dharma (piety) stands embodied 
there and destroys great sins. The dust thereof purges all sins. 
It is auspicious and it consists of all Tirthas. 

15-16. The river Dhutapapa shall dispel multitudes of 
great sins like the tree on its banks. The following five rivers 
have been glorified viz : Kirana, Dhutapapa, Sarasvati of 
the holy waters, Ganga and Yamuna. Hence, the holy centre 
Pancanada 1 (spot of five rivers) has become well-known mall 


the three worlds. 

17-18a. He who plunges into that holy river does not 
take up the physical body consisting of five elements (i.e. is 
liberated). Merely by taking bath in this confluence of five 
rivers, that dispels all sins, a man pierces through the bower ol 
cosmic egg and goes to the Brahman and realises salvation. 

18b-l9a. Certainly, one attains in a single day by a holy 
dip in the Pancanada at Kasi, the same benefit as is obtained 
by means of an elaborate bath and ablution at Prayaga through¬ 
out the month of Magha. 

19b-20a. By taking the holy dip in the TIrtha of 
Paflcanada, by performing .he rite of Tarpana for .he P,.r» 
and by worshipping Visnu, the lord of Laksmi, one never take, 


rebirth. 


1. VV. 15-40 describe the glory of Panca-nada. It is so-called as 
is a confluence of five rivers viz. the Kirana, Dhuta- ^ ^ 

and Yamuna. And Paiicaganga ghat at Varanasi is r g P 

or d* confluence. Ac.ua,,, *=" £ X—“ 

existence of other four rivers is a centre 

Papaka, Bindu-saras and Panca-nada are the names of the -me holy ^ ^ 

chronologically in Krta, Treta, Dvapara an * . regarding 

59.115-117. VV. 101-113 of the same 

the names of tributaries (to the Ganga) vu. Dhuta-Papa, Kira. . 












1848 


Ndrada Purana 


20b-21a. The satisfaction of the Pitrs lasts for as 
many years as the number of gingelly seeds offered to the 
Pitrs in the course of the water libation in the holy Tirtha of 
Pancanada. 

21b-22a. The ancestors of those by whom the Sraddha 
rite has been performed in the splendid Tirtha of Pancanada 
with great faith, shall be liberated, though they may have been 
born in different wombs. 

22b-24a. In the world of Yama this song is being sung 
by the groups of Pitrs. “After seeing the greatness of Pancanada 
in regard to the performance of Sraddha rites, some-one be¬ 
longing to our family may perform Sraddha whereby we may 
be able to go to the Pancanada Tirtha at KasI and be 
liberated”. 

24b-26a. If any wealth is given as gift in the holy 
centre of Pancanada, the merit that accrues to one does not 
dwindle even after Kalpas pass away. Even a barren lady 
will certainly give birth to a son if she takes her holy dip 
in the deep pool of the Pancanada for a whole year and 
worships Mangala Gaurl. 

26b-27a. By performing holy ablution of the goddess 
well-known in all quarters (Dik-Sruta) with the holy waters 
of the Pancanada filtered by means of the cloth, one attains 
great benefit. 

27b-28a. A drop of the water of the Pancanada was 
weighed against pots of Pancamrta hundred and eight in 
number and was found to be superior to it. 

28b-29a. By drinking a drop of the waters of Pancanada 
with great faith, one attains that purity which is said to be 
acquired when Panca-gavya is drunk. 

29b-32, By taking the holy dip in the waters of the 
Pancanada, one attains hundred times the benefit acquired by 
Rajasuya and Asvamcdha sacrifices. The Rajasuya and 
Asvamedha sacrifices may be the means for attaining heaven, 
but through the waters of Pancanada liberation is attained 
from Dvandva (mutually opposing pairs e.g. Pleasure-Pain) 
that covers up even the Brahman (i.e. Avidya). Even the 
ablution with the waters of heavenly river is not so much 
approved of by good men as that of the Pancanada. It is the 






Uttarabhnga 51.33-46 


1849 


bestower of boons not obtained from others. By taking the 
holy dip for once in the Pancanada in the month of Karttika, 
one derives the same benefit as is obtained by performing 
penance in the Krta age for a hundred years. 

33-36. In the bath through the waters of the Pancanada, 
one gets more benefit than is obtained through the holy rites 
of Istapurta performed in the course of whole life else¬ 
where. There is no other TIrtha on the whole of the Earth, 
like Dhutapapa since, through a single bath therein, the entire 
sin accumulated in the course of three births perishes. In the 
Krta age Dharmanada is the holy TIrtha, in the Treta, it is 
Dhutapapa; in the Dvapara it is Bindutlrtha and in the Kali 
it is Pancanada. By making the gift of gold of the weight of 
a Gunja-berry in the Bindutlrtha, no man shall ever become 
indigent. He is never devoid of happiness. 

37-38a. By giving anything, whether it is a cow, a plot 
of land, gingelly seeds, gold, a horse, clothes, cooked rice, 
position or ornament, in the Bindutlrtha, one shall attain an 
ever lasting benefit. 

38b-39a. Bv offering a single Ahuti in accordance with 
the injunctions in a well-kindled fire in the holy TIrtha of 
Dharmanada, one shall attain the benefit of a crore of Homas. 

39b-40. No one is competent to describe adequately the 
endless greatness of the Pancanada TIrtha that is the abode of 
all splendour of the four-fold aims of life. Thus, O gentle 
lady, the excellent greatness of KasI has been recounted to 

you. 

41-42. It bestows happiness. It bestows salvation on men. 
It is destructive or sins. Even a Brahmana-slayer, a drink-addict, 
a thief of gold, a defiler of the preceptor’s bed or a person 
guilty of principal and subsidiary sins shall attain purity on 
hearing the greatness of Avimukta. 

43. A Brahmana shall become a great scholar of the 
Vedas; a Ksatriya shall be victorious in battle; a Vaisya shall 
be the lord of wealth and a Sudra shall be an associate of the 
devotees of Visnu. 

4*1-46. O blessed lady, by listening to this, by reading 
this frequently, one attains all those benefits that are mentioned 



1850 


Karada Pur an a 


in the case of all Yajnas (sacrifices) and all the merits in the 
■case of all Tirthas. He who seeks learning shall obtain 
learning. He who seeks wealth shall obtain wealth. He who 
seeks wile shall get a wife and he who seeks son shall obtain 
a son. The greatness of Avimukta has been recounted to you 
by me. 

47-48. This must be imparted to a devotee ofVisnu or to 
one engaged in devotion to Siva or to a devotee of the mother 
of the universe or to one who serves the sun and Vighnesvara. 
By giving this to a person rendering service to his preceptor, one 
shall attain the benefit of the holy dip in a Tirtha. By giving 
this to a rogue, a person who censures, a person who hates 
Brahmanas, cows, and Devas, a person who is malicious towards 
the elderly persons or a person who is jealous of them, one may 
attain death. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTWO 

The Greatness of Purusottama 1 (Jaganndlha of Puri) 

Mohitii said : 

1. O excellent Brahmin, you are blessed. You are 
merciful to all embodied beings. (I am blessed) because the 
excellent greatness of Kasi has been heard from your lotus-like 
mouth. 


1. It is significant that the NP. attaches the highest importance to 
Purusottama Ksctra (Jagannatha of Puri—Orissa) as it devotes 843 verses to 
it, while Kasi is described only in 279 verses and Prayaga, the so-called 
King of all Tirthas only in 229 verses. According to the author of the NP., 
the traditionally famous Tri-sthali —Prayaga, Varanasi and Gaya is less 
important than Purusottama Ksctra. And his order of priorities in describing 
Ksetras is Gaya, Kasi, Purusottama Ksetra and Prayaga. Thb data gives 
credence to the theory that the author of the NP must be a person from a 
state in East India. 






Ultarabhdga 52.2-11 


1851 


2. I feel that I have accomplished my objects in life 
since now I have been enlightened by you. Although I had fallen 
into the ocean of worldly existence, I have been redeemed by 
you, the merciful one. 

3. Now I wish to hear, O bestower of honour, the great¬ 
ness of a holy place of Hari, by going to which men become 
contented. 

4. It is reported that a holy centre of Visnu, the most 
excellent among other centres is described in the Puranas by sage 
and Brahmanas as efficacious in granting Liberation from 
Samsara. 

5. May that be recounted, O blessed one, if I am liked 
by you as a disciple of yours. Indeed good men are always 
engaged in rendering continuous service to all the people of the 
world. 

Vasu said : 

6. O gentle lady, listen. I shall recount to you about 
the excellent greatness of the holy centre named Purusottama as 
narrated by god Brahma. 

7-8a. In the whole of this earth, Bharata is said to be a 
Karmabhumi (the land of holy rites). There, in theBharatavarsa, 
on the shores of the southern sea, is a land known as 
Utkala. It is the bestower of heaven and Moksa (salvation) 
on all. 

8b-9a. It is to the north of the ocean and it extends upto 
Virajamandala (a country stretching for ten miles round Jaipur 
on the river VaitarnI). This land is embellished with all the 
attributes of those who are habituated in performing meritorious 
deeds. 

9b-11. O lady of large eyes, it should be known that there 
are many Tirthas and holy shrines. In Utkala, on the northern 
shores of the ocean, in that land which is the most excellent of 
all, there is a great holy centre which yields salvation and dis¬ 
pels sins. It is in a place covered with sand everywhere. It is 
sacred and it bestows piety and love. 

A large no. of verses on this topic are common to the NP and the 
Brahma Purana (BM. P.), the NP, being presumably the borrower. 



1852 


JVarada Purana 


12-13a. The holy centre which is difficult of access is ten 
Yojanas in extent. Just as the moon is the best among constell¬ 
ations; 1 just as the ocean is the best among lakes (water-reser¬ 
voirs) , so is the holy centre Purusottama the best among sacred 
places. 

13b-14a. Just as the fire-god is the best among Vasus* 
Just as Sankara is the best among Rudras, so is the holy 
centre Purusottama, the most excellent of all holy centres. 

14b-15a. Just as the Brahmana is the best among the 
castes, and Vainateya (Garuda) (the excellent most) among 
birds, so also Purusottama is the most excellent among holy- 
centres. 

15b-16a. Just as Skanda is among commanders; Kapila 
among Siddhas. 

16b-25a. Airavata among leading elephants; Bhrgu among 
great sages; Meruamong the mountains; the Himalayas among 
the immovables (i.e. mountains); Uccaissravas among the 
horses; Usanas among the wise thinkers; Vyasa among the 
sages; Kubera among Yaksas and Raksasas, the mind among 
sense-organs; the earth among the elements; the Asvattha 
among the trees; the wind-god among those who purify; Arun- 
dhatl among women; the thunderbolt among weapons; like the 
letter ‘A’ among letters; like the Gayatrl among metres; the 
head (Uttamanga) among limbs; the spiritual lore of salvation 
among all lores; the king among men; Kamadhenu (the wish- 
yielding cow) among cows; gold among all metals; Vasuki 
among serpents; Prahlada among Daityas; Rama among the 
wielders of weapons; sharks among fishes; lion among beasts;. 
Varuna among water deities; Yama among those who restrain; 
the milk ocean among oceans; Narada among divine sages; 
Brhaspati(Jupiter)among priests; Kala(Time)among reckoners; 
Bhaskara (thesun) among planets. Pranava (Om) among the 


1. VV. 13-24 are an echo of BG (Bhagavad-gita) X. 21-33. In the 
BG., the best specimen of individual is the Vibhuti of the Lord, here 
Purusottama Ksetra is the best in all holy places as the Lord’s Vibh&lh 
arc the excellent most ones in their respective categories or species. 





Uttarabhaga 52.25b-36 


1855 


mantras and virtuous rites among duties—so should be known) 
Sripurusottama among holy centres. 

25b-26. By visiting at least once, Purusottama who 
stands on the shore of the ocean, by knowing the Brahmavidya 
once, there is no further stay within the womb. 

Thus the holy centre is endowed with all attributes. It is 
highly difficult of access. 

27. O fair lady, Purusottama, the lord of Devas, the 
Atman of the Universe, pervading the universe stays where the 
holy centre Purusottama is. 

28-29a. Where the lord of the universe, the source of 

origin of the universe is present, everything is established there. 

All the following are present therein Aja (B^hma), ilnd a 
Rudra, Agniand other Devas; O highly blessed lady, all these 
stay there always in that land. 

29b-35 The following too are present : The 

Gandharvas, the celestial damsels Siddhas Pitrs^ Devas 
human beings, Yaksas, Vidyadharas, the sages of praise-worthy 
holy vows; die sages Valakhilya and others; Kas >' a P a an< J 
other Prajapatis; Suparnas; Kinnaras; Nagas, an 
residents of heaven; the four Vedas along with their ancil- 

laries- the different scriptures; Itihasas, Puranas, sacrifice, 

wherein many monetary gifits (as religious fees) are given, 
the different sacred Vivers; the holy centres and shrines 
the ocean and the mountains were established in 
land Who will not like to live in such a meritorious land - 
habited by the gods, sages and Pitrs and fully equipped 

of ^at! surpassed that whereTn the lord of 

Devas. 

ZJ %“to the heaven and no. in .he abode of a Rajasa 
nature. 


1854 


Narada Purdtia 


37. Fruitful is the life of those residents of Utkala of 
great intellect who habitually reside in the meritorious holy 
centre of Srlpurusottama in Orissa. 

38-40a. (Blessed are they) who see the lotus-like face of 
Krsna, wherein the lips are very red like copper, the eyes are 
pleasant and large, the eyebrows, the tresses and coronets are 
very beautiful; which is embellished with beautiful ear-rings, 
which is beautified with smiles, and charming earrings; wherein 
the teeth are beautiful and the nose, cheeks and forehead have 
all good characteristics and which cause delight to the three 
worlds. 

40b-41a. O gentle lady, it is reported that formerly, in 
the Krta age there was a glorious king wellknown as Indradyu- 
mna. His exploits were like those of Indra. 

41b-42. He was truthful of speech, pure, cleverand com¬ 
petent. He was the most excellent among the warrious wielding 
weapons. He was charming and blessed, brave and a liberal 
donor. He was an enjoyer of pleasures, and pleasing in 
speech. He was the performer of all Yajnas, and he was friendly 
to Brahmanas. 

43. He was truthful of promise. He was an adept in the 
Vedas, Scriptures and the science of archery: He was contented. 
He was popular with men and women like the moon on a 
Full-moon day. 

44. He was like the sun in being too dazzling to be seen 
directly; he was as sweet as the moon; he was a devotee of 
Visnu;hewas endowed with truthfulness; he had conquered 
anger, he had subjugated sense-organs. 

45. He was engaged in spiritual learning; he was fond 
of virtue and piety and brave. Thus the king, the abode of 
all attributes, protected the earth. 

46. He became inclined to the propitiation of Visnu. 
He thought, “How shall I propitiate Janardana, the lord of 
the Devas. 

47. In which holy centre, Tirtha, or hermitage shall I 
do So.” Thinking thus he mentally surveyed the whole of the 
earth. 

48-49a. He reviewed before his mind’s eye the various 
holy centres of the earth that dispel sins. Finally, he decided on 




1855 


Uttarabhaga 52.49b-59a 

the well-known great holy centre Purusottama that bestows 
salvation. 

49b-50. The king went there with the full complement of 
his vehicles and army. He got a lofty palace erected there. He 
performed a horse-sacrifice in accordance with the injunctions 
and distributed wealth by way of monetary gifts. 

51-52. The powerful king installed Sankarsana, Krsna 
and Subhadra there. He caused five Tirthas 1 to be constructed 
there. With great devotion he performed ablution, charitable 
gift, Japa, Homa and the visit to the deity. He propitiated 
lord Purusottama every day in accordance with the injunctions 
and with great devotion. Thanks to the grace of the lord of the 
Dcvas, he attained salvation. 


Mohini enquired : 

53-56a. O Lord, was there an already installed image of 
Visnu in that excellent, meritorious sacred Vaisnavite place 
called Purusottama, for the sake of which the king went ere 
along with his army and vehicles and established the images of 
Krsna, Balarama and Subhadra, the bestower of auspicious 
things. I have great doubt, O excellent Brahmana and feel a 
great surprise too. I wish to hear everything. Tell me the reason 

thereof. 


Vasu narrated : 

56b. Listen to the anecdote forming its background-a 
story which destroys sins. 

57 I shall succinctly narrate to you what was formerly 
asked by goddess Sri on the top of the golden peak of mount 
Sumeru which was full of all wondrous things. 

58-59a The goddess bowed down with her head to or 
Jagannh.hat the tapenshab.e (e.ernal), creator of .he „orid 

sub-Urthas which are called jo y - th K rsna), Balarama, 

Indradyumna here. 




1856 


jSTarada Purana 


who was residing there. Out of her desire for the benefit of the 
world, she asked this following question regarding the excellent- 
most holy place on the earth. 

£ri said : 

59b-61. cc O lord of all the worlds, tell me now clear¬ 
ing the doubts in my heart. The mortal world, the earth, is full 
of great miracles. It is very difficult to perform auspicious 
Karmans leading to Moksa here. It is a great ocean of lust and 
fury and contains big sharks (crocodiles) in the form of covete- 
ousness and delusion. What is it, then, whereby the Atman is 
liberated from impassable ocean of worldly existence ? Except¬ 
ing you there is no one in the world who will propound every¬ 
thing and dispel my doubt.” 

62. On hearing her words thus, Janardana, the lord of 
the Devas, spoke with great pleasure and explained the great 
means of happiness that is comparable to the nectar and great 
essence of everything—the means that is easily achievable 
yield great benefit and will not cause any strain. 

The glorious Lord said : 

63-64. 1 O goddess, there is a wellknown excellent holy 
centre named Purusottama. In the three worlds there is nothing 
else equal to this. O goddess of the Devas, by glorifying it, one 
is liberated from all sins. 

65. It is not fully comprehended and realised by men; 
Daityas or Danavas. O fair-faced lady, this is pointed out 
by Marlci and other excellent sages. 

66-67a. On the shore of the southern sea, there is a holy 
(Indian) fig (Nyagrodha) tree. Even during the (close of the) 
kalpa, when everything is destroyed by means of great meteors 
(?) it is not destroyed. It remains by itself there. 

67b-69a. As soon as one sees that banyan tree or if one re¬ 
sorts to its shade frequently, the sin of even Brahmana-slaughter 


1. The rest of this chapter from vv. 63-87 is a prolonged quotation 
(with a few verses deleted in between) from the BM. P. Ch. 45 vv. 53-89, the 
only difference is that in the NP. the interlocutors are Sri and Sri Bhagavan 
(Visnu) and in the BM. P. god Brahma and sages. 




Uttarabhaga 52.69b-81a 


1857 


perishes. What then about other lesser evils ? Those creatures 
(living beings) which circumambulate it and make obeis¬ 
ance to it, shake off their sins. All of them go to Kesava’s 
abode (Vaikuntha). 

69b-71a. On the southern side of the shrine of Kesava and 
to the north of the holy fig tree is the region of holy Dharma. 
By seeing the image made by the lord himself at the place, men 
go to my mansion without any exertion. 

71b-72a. Going (along that way) once Dharmaraja 
(Yama) saw me, approached me and bowing down his head, 
spoke to me thus :- 

72b. <c Obeisance to you O lord, to the brilliant reful¬ 
gence, to the lord of worlds. 

73-8la. I bow down to that lord who stays in the milk- 
ocean; who lies down on the extensive body of Sesa; who is the 
most excellent one; who is the bestower of boons; who is the 
everlasting maker of the worlds; who is Visnu. the unborn 
(eternal) lord of the universe; who is omniscient; who is uncon¬ 
quered; who is dark in complexion like the blue lily; whose 
eyes resemble the lotuses; who is present everywhere, who is 
devoid of attributes, quiet, the unchanging creator of the 
universe; who is the maker of worlds; who is the lord of 
worlds; who is conducive to happiness; who is the ancient 
Purusa, worthy of being known; who is both manifest and un- 
manifest, who is the eternal ancient Being, who is the creator; 
who is a sanctifying holy being unto all the worlds; who is the 
preceptor of the universe; who is endowed with Srlvatsa on his 
chest; who is bedecked in Vanamalas(garlands of sylvan flowers); 
who is clad in yellow garments; who has four arms who wields 
conch, discus and iron club; who is beautified with necklaces 
and armlets; who wears coronet and bracelets; who is endowed 
with all auspicious characteristics; who is devoid of all sense 
organs; who is as steady and firm as a mountain; who is subtle, 
eternal and of the form of fiery brilliance; who is devoid of 
both existence and nonexistence; pervasive and beyond Prakrti. 
I bow down to that I$vara, the lord of the universe, the lord 
bestowing happiness. Thus the lord of Dharma (Yama) eulogised 
me with different hymns in the vicinity of the holy fig tree. 
Then he made obeisance to me. 




1858 


Narada Parana 


81b-83. “O highly blessed lady, on seeing him standing 
with palms joined with reverence after obeisance, O gentle 
lady, I asked the god of Death, the reason for the eulogy, ‘O 
mighty armed Vaivasvata, you are identical with all Devas. 
Why did you eulogise me thus. Tell me succinctly . 

Tama said : 

84-85. In this holy shrine, well-known after Purusottama 
there is an idol made of Indranlla (sapphire). It bestows all 
desires. O lotus-eyed deity, men devoid of desires see that 
idol with faith and (single-minded) emotional feelings and go 
to the world called Sveta (Dvlpa). 

86. Hence, O destroyer of enemies, I cannot proceed 
with my usual work of chastising the sinners. O great lord, be 
pleased. Withdraw this idol, O lord.” 

87. On hearing these words of Vaivasvata Yama, I 
spoke to him thus— "O Yama, I shall conceal this idol with 
sands all round”. 

88. Thereafter, O gentle lady, that idol was concealed 
with creepers, so that men desirous of going to heaven could not 
see it. 

89. O gentle lady, after hiding it with creepers of golden 
coverings (?) I bade farewell to Yama to the southern 
direction”. 

90-91. Janardana, the Lord of the Devas, narrated to her 
the following incidents that happened thereafter in the holy 
place, the famous sacred shrine of Purusottama, when the sap¬ 
phire idol was concealed—all the following incidents occurred.- 

92-97. Indradyumna’s departure; visit to the shrine; des¬ 
cription of the holy centre; O MohinI, its prosperity, the 
vision of Baladeva and of Krsna in particular and that of Subha- 
dra; the greatness of them all; the vision of Narasimha; the 
glorification of prosperity; the vision of Ananta and Vasu- 
deva; the glorification of his attributes; the greatness of Sveta- 
madhava; the description of the gateway of heaven; the sight of 
the ocean; the ablution therein and the performance of 
Tarpana rite: the greatness of ablution in the sea and of 
Indradyumna pool (saras) ; the benefit of the Paiicatlrthas (five. 





Uttarabhaga 53.1-6 


1859 


shrines and holy pools) on the full moon day in the month of 
Jyestha; the bath of Krsna and holy Balarama; the benefit 
of all pilgrimages; the description of the world of Visnu and 
again of the holy place. Thus Purusottama himself described 
to her the truth of all these things. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 

The Greatness of Purufottama ( Contd .) 


Mohini said : 

1-2. O leading sage, kindly narrate to me what I ask. 
about the ancient Being; as to how those idols were formerly 
made by Indradyumna and in what manner was Madhava 
pleased with him; O, Brahmana. elucidate everything to me, as 
I am eager to hear about it. 

Vasu said : 

3. O lady of beautiful eyes, listen, I shall recount the 
ancient story of the origin of the idols, the mythological tradition 
that is on a par with the Vedas. 

4. When the great Sacrifice commenced and the mansion 
had been built, king Indradyumna began to worry about the idols 
day and night. 1 

5. He pondered : “By what means can I see Purusot¬ 
tama the lord of the Devas, the conceiver and creator of the 
worlds and the cause of creation, maintenance and dissolution 
of the worlds ?". 

6. The king who was anxious and worried „ould not 
sleep properly by day or by night. He did not enjoy the various 

j 4_g arc selected Verbatim from BM, P. 48.4-12* Thus NP„ 

4, 5, 6, NP 7, 8, 9-BM.P 10, 11, 11. 






1860 


Kara da Purana 

worldly pleasures nor was he interested in taking bath or 
bedecking himself. 

7 “On the surface of the earth three types of idols befit¬ 
ting Visnu and marked with all characteristics are seen. Viz. : 

the idols* made of stone, of wood or of metals. 

8 The idols made of these three, when installed shall give 
pleasure. They shall be the beloved of the deity and worshipped 
by the Devas”.—Thus the king pondered over in his mind. 

9 After worshipping Purusottama in accordance with 
the injunctions in the scripture ‘Pancaratra’, the anxious ruler 
of the Earth began to eulogise him. 

Indradjumna prayed i 1 

10. O Vasudeva, obeisance be to you, O cause of libera¬ 
tion, homage to you, O lord of all the worlds, save me from the 
ocean of births (and deaths) and the worldly existence. 

11. Hail to you, O Purusottama, resembling a pure silken 
garment, O Samkarsana, obeisance be to you. Rescue me, O 
supporter of the earth. 

12. Obeisance be to you (the deity) with the golden 
womb; Bow to you, the shark-emblemed lord. O lover of Rati, 
obeisance to you. Save me, O destroyer of Sambara. 

13. Hail to you (the deity) resembling the cloud (in 
complexion) ; salute to you (the deity) favourably disposed to 
the devotees. O Aniruddha, obeisance be to you. Redeem me. 
Be the bestower of boons. 2 

14. Bow to you the seat of residence of the Devas. Obeis¬ 
ance to you who are dear to the Devas. O Narayana, obeisance 
be to you, protect me who have sought refuge in you. 

15. Hail to you, O most excellent one among powerful 
beings; Obeisance to you O ploughshare-armed one. Bow to 
you, the most excellent one among the Devas. Obeisance to you 
the lotus-born. 

1, This prayer by Indradyumna—vv. 10-68 (the end of the chapter) 
is a prolonged quotation (with a few deletions) from BM. P. ch. 51. 1-59 
which is also the prayer by Indradyumna. 

2. VV. 10-13 are salutations to the four Vyuhas (manifestations of 
Visnu). The NP. is depicted by the Pancaratra Agama. 



1861 


Uttarabhaga 53.16-28a 


16. O four-faced god, O creator of the universe; protect 
me O great-grandfather of the universe, obeisance to you, 
who have the lustre of the blue cloud. Hail to you, one 
worshipped by the gods. 

17. Redeem me, O Visnu. O lord of the universe, Rescue 
me who am immersed in the ocean of worldly existence—O 
deity resembling the fire of dissolution, obeisance to you, the 
destroyer of the Daityas. 

18-19.' O Narasimha of great prowess, protect me, O 
deity of blazing eyes. O great boar, just as the earth that 
was formerly sunk into the waters had been lifted up from the 
nether-worlds, so also you rescue me from the ocean of 
misery. O Kr?na, the forms of your limbs (your ancillary forms) 
that bestow boons have been eulogised by me. 


20-22. You and these viz. Baladeva and others are sta¬ 
tioned in separate forms. O lord, O lord of the Devas, Garuda 
and others are your ancillaries. So also are the guardians of the 
quarters along with their weapons, such as Vasava ( Indra) and 
others. O Acyuta, O lord of the universe, O lord of the Devas 
with large eyes expressing delight, all your forms, ese an 
others, have been mentioned by learned men-all have been 
worshipped and eulogised and bowed to by me. 


23-25 Grant ye unto me that boon which bestows virtue, 
love, wealth and liberation. O Hari, your different formse.g 
Samkarsana and others that have been glorified are re 
your worship. Hence, they have been incorporate m ^ n( j 
lord of Devas. No factual difference exists betwe y 
these forms of yours. The different forms 
mentioned so, only in a secondary sense. How can man 
you who are the non-dualistic one, as dualistic. 

26. O Hari, you are but out, the 

the nature of consciousness and unsu • PV istence. 

is that which is devoid of existence as wel as no 


27-28a. It is unsmeared, free from impurities, S ^^ cteris ! 

steady and eternal, ft is ^ ^11 Stabilised. Even a 

tics : It is pure existence only and 







1862 Narada Pur ana 

Deva does not know about it. O lord, how can I, a human 

being know it ? . 

28b-30a. The other form of yours, that which is yellow- 

robed, four-armed, wearing the conch, discus and iron club, 
having coronet and armlets, embellished with Srivatsa in the 
chest and bedecked in garlands of sylvan flowers, is worshipped 
by the Devas and others that are dependent on you. 

30b-32. O lord, the most excellent one among all gods, 
the bestower of fearlessness (or Moksa) on the devotees, 
save me, O deity of beautiful lotus-like eyes, rescue me who 
am immersed in the ocean of worldly existence and mundane 
affairs. O lord of Devas, O lord of Kamala, O Madhusudana, 
excepting you I do not see anyone else in whom I can seek 
refuge. Be pleased. I am over-whelmed by hundreds of ailments 
and old age; I am afflicted by many miseries. 

33. I am confounded, sometimes delighted and sometimes 
aggrieved; I have been bound by the nooses of Karman. I have 
fallen into the extremely fierce and terrible ocean of worldly 
existence. 

34-35. O lord, I am deluded by your Maya for a long 
time. I have been wandering (in the ocean of mundane exist¬ 
ence) which is very difficult to cross, the ocean with worldly 
objects as its waters, which is highly agitated with passion and 
hatred; which is deep due to the whirlpools of sense-organs, and 
is turbulent due to the billows of greedy thirst and grief which 
has neither receptacle nor a support which is actually 
insignificant but heavily moving to and fro. 

36-37a. I am bom again and again in thousands of 
species of creatures. O Janardana, in this world thousands 
and ten thousands of different births have been undergone 
by me. 

37b-38a The Vedas have been learned by me along with 
their ancillaries. The different kinds of scriptures, the Itihasas 
the Puranas and many kinds of arts and crafts have been 
learned by me. 

38b-39a. Dissatisfaction and satisfaction have been met 
with by me. Many times I have hoarded wealth. Many times 
I have spent (squandered) much. O lord of the universe, dec¬ 
line and increase, rise and fall I have faced in my life. 



Uttarabhaga 53.39b-51a 


1863 


39b-40. I have experienced association with and separation 
from wives, friends and kinsmen. Different kinds of fathers and 
mothers have been seen by me. Many sorrows have been experi¬ 
enced by me and many happy occasions too. 

41. Relatives, sisters, brothers and kinsmen have been 
acquired by me. I have occupied the bellies of women, bellies 
that are slimy due to faeces and urine. 


42. O lord, while staying in the womb, great misery has 
been experienced by me. Miseries have been experienced during 
childhood as well as during haughty youth. 


43-44a. O Hrslkesa, miseries have been experienced in 
the course of old age by me. Those miseries that are usually 
experienced at death, in the secret path of Yama’s abode, and 
in the hell, full of tortures, have been experienced by me. 

44b-46. I have been born again and again in various 
species, such as those of germs, insects, trees, elephants, horses, 
deer, birds, buffaloes, cows, and every other wild animal. I 
have been born in the wombs of Brahmanas, Ksatriyas Vaisyas 
as well as Sudras. I have been bom in the abodes of rich 
Vaisyas, Ksatriyas, pious ascetics (Brahmanas), of kings and 
kings’ servants and other embodied beings. 

47. O Lord, I have been born in their houses again and 
again, O lord, I had worked as a slave for the servants of many 
men. 


48. I have attained poverty or affluence. Many have been 
killed by me. I have been killed by many others. Things 
belonging to me have been destroyed. Many have been caused 
to be killed by me. 


49-50a. Things have been given to me by others and 
things have been given by me to others. I have suffered by 
what has been done by fathers, friends mothers and wives and 
have been delighted too (by what they did). On many occasions, 
due to misery my face has been washed by my tears. 

50b-5 la. O lord, there is no such spot among the Devas, 
animals, human beings, the mobile and immobile beings, 
where I have not been. 



1864 


Narada Purana 


5lb-54. O lord of the universe, sometimes I stayed in 
hell and sometimes in heaven. Sometimes in human worlds 
and sometimes in animal kingdom. Just as someone, in the 
mechanical device for lifting water fixed to a hole falls up 
and down or remains in the middle, so also O excellent one 
among Devas, I have had recourse to the series of my 
Karmans. Thus in this wheel of worldly existence, that is very 
terrible and that causes hairs to stand on their ends, I 
have been whirling for a long time. I do not see the end 
thereof. 

55. O Hari, I do not know what I am doing. All my 
sense-organs are worn out and agitated. I have been over¬ 
whelmed by grief and greed. I am a terrified fugitive. I have 
lost consciousness. 

56. O lord, utterly maimed and crippled, I have now 
sought refuge in you. Save me, O Krsna, rescue me who am im¬ 
mersed in the ocean of worldly existence. 

57. O lord of the universe, be merciful if you consider 
me that I am your devotee. Excepting you, I have no other 
kinsmen who will be worrying for my sake and take my care. 

58. O Lord, after resorting to you as the lord, I have 
no fear from anywhere either in life or death or about my well- 
being. 

59. How can there be good states and liberation from the 
bondage of worldly existence in the case of those base men who 
do not duly worship you, O lord ? 

60. O what use is their nobility of birth, or good conduct 
or learning or even life, if they have no devotion to Kesava, the 
creator of the universe ? 

61. Those who have Asuraic character and those who are 
deluded and those who censure you, do fall into the terrible hell 
and are bom again and again. 

62. O lord, those who are of evil activities and those who 
speak ill of you are base men. They do not have any way of 
escape from the hellish ocean. 

63. O Hari, where I am destined to be born as a result of 
my Karmans, may my devotion to you be ever unimpaired. 

64. By propitiating you, the great one, Daityas, 



Uttarabhaga 53-65—54.3 


1865 


human beings, and others too in a body have attained the 
greatest Siddhi. O lord, who would not like to worship you ? 

65. Even Brahma and others are not competent to eulo¬ 
gise you who are beyond Prakrti. O lord, out of my ignorance, I 
too have eulogised you imperfectly. 

66. Hence, forgive my guilt if you have mercy towards 
me, O Hari, even if others commit offence, good men forgive 
them. 

67-68. Hence, O lord of the Devas, be pleased. With 
devotion I have resorted to your affection. O lord, you have 
been eulogised by me with the mind full of devotion. May 
that be fruitful. O Vasudeva, obeisance be to you. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 

Ths Glory of Purufoltama (Contd.) 


Vasusaid : 

1 .* Eulogised thus by him then, the Garu<ja-emblemed deity 
Visnu became delighted, O blessed lady, and gave him every¬ 
thing mentally desired by him. 

2. The man who worships the lord of the universe every¬ 
day and intelligently eulogises him with this hymn, certainly 
attains liberation. 

3. The pure and learned man who performs the Japa of 
this excellent hymn during the three junctions (i.e. the dawn, 
dusk and midday) accomplishes (the four objectives of life, viz.) 
virtue, wealth, love and liberation. 

1. VV. 1-12 are the same as BM.P. 49-60-71. Although the NP begins 
anew chapter (54), vv. 1-12 the Phala-Sruti constitute the eulogy by 
Indradyumna in the previous (53) chapter. As such these verses should have 
formed part of the previous chapter as is done in the BE.P. ch. 49 where 
vv. 60-71 (the Phala-Sruti verses) follow Indradyumna’s prayer in a natural 
context. 



1866 


Narada Purana 


4. He who reads, listens to and narrates this with concen- 
tration and purity of mind, will shake off all sins and go to the 
eternal world of Visnu. 

5. This is conducive to wealth. It dispels sins. It is aus¬ 
picious and it yields worldly pleasures and salvation. It is an 
esoteric secret very difficult to be attained. It is meritorious. It 
should not be given to anyone and everyone (indiscriminately). 

6. None shall ever impart this to an atheist, a foolish 
fellow, an ungrateful one, an arrogant person, a man of wicked 
intentions or one without devotion. 

7. It should be imparted to one endowed with devotion, 
to one endowed with good qualities and conduct, to a devotee 
of Visnu, to a quiescent person and to one who is by nature 
faithful and who practises befitting rites and observances. 

8. This great hymn of Purusottama narrated by me is 
the cause of destruction of all sins; it is designated as mercy; 
it yields happiness and liberation. It is the most excellent one 
bestowing the desired benefits. 

9. Those who continuously meditate on the ancient 
Purusa who is very subtle and who resembles the pure 
firmament, attain salvation. They enter Visnu like the 
ghee that has been consigned to the sacrificial fire with 
Mantras. 

10. The lord alone is the destroyer of the miseries of 
Samsara. He is greater than the greatest. There is none supreme 
to him. He is the creator, sustainer and the annihilator of all. 
Visnu is the same (impartial and good) to all. He is the 
essence of everything. 

11. Of what avail are these—viz. learning, good quali¬ 
ties, Yajnas, charitable gifts and severe penances to those per¬ 
sons who have no devotion to Krsna, the preceptor of the 
universe and the bestower of happiness and salvation. 

12. He who cherishes devotion to the deity called 
Purusottama is blessed in this world. He is pure, he is a learn¬ 
ed scholar; he is affluent speaker, he has righteous conduct. 
He is the knower. He is the donor. He is the speaker of 
truth. 

13-14. O daughter of Brahma, after eulogising thus and 
bowing down to the eternal Vasudeva, the lord of the universe 



Uttarabhaga 54.15-27 


1867 


and the bestowerof all desired benefits, the worried king spread 
Kusa grass on the ground and spread his cloth over it. With 
his mind dwelling on the deity, he went to sleep on the bare 
ground. 1 

15. He thought to himself thus—“How will Janardana, 
the lord of the Devas, manifest himself to me ? When shall 
this lord dispel my anxieties ?** 

16. When the king went to sleep, Vasudeva, the precep¬ 
tor of the universe, revealed himself to him in the dream in the 
form of) the wielder of the discus. 

17-19a . He saw in his dream the lord of the Devas, the 
lord of the universe, who holds the conch and the discus; who is 
calm; who wields the iron club and the lotus by the tip of 
his hands; who is armed with the bow Sarriga, the arrows and 
the sword; who is encircled with the dazzling halo of brilliant 
refulgence: who displaced the lustre of the sun at the time 
of the end of the Yuga; who resembled the blue lapis lazuli in 
complexion, who was seated on the back of Garutja and who had 
eight arms. 

19b. On seeing him, the lord said “O king of great 
intellect, well done, O ruler of the earth, I am satisfied with 
this divine sacrifice, your devotion and faith. Why do you worry 
unnecessarily ? 

20. O King, I shall tell you the means whereby you will 
get the idol that is eternal and worthy of being worshipped by 
the kings. 

21-24. When this night is over and the pure sun rises up 
you must find out this tree. It is inside the waters of the sea. 
The place is beautified with various trees. On t le s ore a so 
much water can be seen, O King, that has accumulate tom t e 
tides of the sea. Supported by the shore, the great ir ® e stan 
there partly in water and partly on the ground, he ti waves 
lash against it but it is firm and steady (and immova 

does not quake or move. , •*. 

25-27. Take an axe in your hand and wade alone (with-. 

out taking any companion) through the waves sportingly. You 

1 . W. 13-14 to 71 in the NP « PCh. 50 wtoa 

few v.ls. The description of the Pi,m}otU»na idols in Sk. r. 
differs from that in the NP. 





1868 


Narada Puranct 


will notice the tree by means of snigs indicated; unhesitatingly 
cut it down. On seeing the huge tree of wonderful appearance 
felled down, you make an idol of the lord from that tree. You 
should cast off your anxiety that deludes you. 

28. After saying this, Hari, the highly blessed one dis¬ 
appeared. The king too was extremely surprised by what he saw 
his dream. 

29. He spent the remaining part of that night keeping 
awake with his mind dwelling on the lord, repeating the Man¬ 
tras of Visnu and the hymn pertaining to him. 

30. When the night dawned, with his mind not dwelling 
on anything else, he duly took his bath in the sea. 

31. He gave villages and cities by way of religious gifts 
to the Brahmanas. The excellent king performed the duties 
of the forenoon and went ahead. 

32. He did not take any chariot, footsoldier, elephant or 
charioteer along with him. The ruler of the earth entered the 
great seashore, alone. 

33. He saw the lofty tree, the brilliant great tree, the 
great destroyer (?) and one that has grown immensely. It was 
auspicious but had no fruit (viphalam) .* 

34. It was a means of great festival for him (Mahotsavam) * * 
(?) It had such a huge stem. It lay as though it was sleeping 
by the side of the water. It had the colour of the dense Indian 
madder. It had no name or genus. 

35. On seeing the tree of Visnu, the lord of men rejoic¬ 
ed. With the sharp axe he cut it off steadily. 

36. The mind of Indra’s friend (Indradyumna) was in 
a dilemma. While he was looking at the wood (i.e. the tree cut 
by him) there appeared a miraculous sight. 

37-39. Visvakarman and Visnu assumed the forms of 
Brahmanas. Those two noble souls came there. They were shin¬ 
ing brilliantly with great lustre. They had divine scents, gar¬ 
lands, and unguents; they then approched king Indradyumna, the 


♦This verse is he same as Brahma P. 50.21 where that Purana reads 
Mahatigam i.e. great transcending (all in height), and Vibula 'extensive for 
Viphala of the NP above. 

** Brahma P . 50.2 reads mahotsedha : ‘of great height and thickness.’ 






Uttarabhaga 45.40-50 


1869 


friend of Indra, and enquired : “O great king, what will you 
do here ? O mighty-armed one, why was this tree felled down ? 

40. Unaided by anyone, in this great impassable lonely 
and dense forest on the shores of the great sea, this huge tree 
has been felled down.” 


41-42. O lady of beautiful eyebrows, on hearing their 
words, the king was filled with joy. On seeing those two Brah- 
manas who had come there like the moon and the sun, he bowed 
down to them, the lords of the universe, and stood there with 
the head bent down. Then he addressed these sweet words to 
them :- 


43. “It is my intention that I should make an idol of 
this wood in order to propitiate the god of the Devas, the lord 
of the universe who has neither a beginning nor an end, the lord 
who cannot be measured or comprehended. 

44. In the course of a dream, I have been advised by 
the lord of the Devas, the greatest and noblest Atman; I have 
recounted that to you also”. 


45. On hearing the words of the king who was on a par 
with Devendra, the lord of the universe became delighted. 
Laughingly he spoke these words : 


46-48. “O ruler of the earth, well done. Your mind had 
been excellent, since you had an inclination towards the propi¬ 
tiation ofVisnu. This ocean of mundane existence is very terri¬ 
ble. It is like the leaf of a plantain tree (that can be torn casi y). 
it is insignificant, yet it is full of miseries. It is bois .^ roUs and 
turbulent due to lust and furry. It is full of whirlpools of 
sense-organs. It is impassable and generates lorn aQ Q f 
Hundreds of ailments repeatedly assail the people, 
worldly existence is like a transient bubble. 

49-50. O leading king, you are blessed; you f r ® 
with the good attributes. The whole <.aiti m overlord, 
subjects is blessed. The earth where you ar . • man y 
inclusive of mountains, forests and C1 '- ies ’ c . people of 
cities, villages and towns and ad ^^ p "fthe 
four castes, is blessed, since you are the lord and p 

subjects. 





1870 Ndrada Purana 

51. O highly blessed one; Come on, come on. Stay under 
this tree which is cool and pleasant. Sit here with us discussing 
pious and virtuous matters. 

52. This most excellent one among sculptors and artisans 
has come here to render help to you. He is equal to Visva- 
karman himself. He is an adept in all arts and crafts. 

53-54. He will make the idol thought of by you for me. 
Leave off the seashore”. On hearing these words of the Brah- 
mana, the king left the seashore and went near him. The most 
excellent king went and sat under the cool shade of the tree. 

55. Thereafter, O daughter of Brahma, the Atman of the 
universe instructed the chief of artisans—“Make these idols in 
their respective shapes and sizes. 

56. The first idol shall be the form of Krsna. It shall 
be extremely peaceful with eyes large and resembling the petals 
of lotus. It must have the mark of Srlvatsa and the jewel Kaus- 
tubha. It must wield the conch, discus and iron club. 

57. The second idol should be white in complexion. 
It must have the lustre and colour of cow’s milk. It must be 
marked with the sign of Svastika. It is the lord wielding the 
ploughshare as his weapon. It is the highly mighty lord named 
Ananta. 

58. His final limit for nature has not been known by 
the Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas and serpents. 
Hence he is remembered as Ananta. 

59. The third idol shall be that of the sister of Vasudeva. 
She has the golden complexion. She is extremely beautiful. She 
is Subhadra marked by all the auspicious characteristics.” 

60. On hearing these words of his, Visvakarman, the 
expert in excellent artisanship, instantaneously made those idols 
with beautiful and auspicious characteristics. 

61. He made the idols shine resplendently with ear-rings 
of diverse kinds in their ears. Markings of the discus and the 
ploughshare were clear in the hands. They shone like the 
sun (?) 

62. The first idol had white colour like the lustre, of the 
autumnal moon. The eyes were red and the body huge and there 
was a hood over the head. It was Bala wearing the blue cloth. 
He was fierce and had wonderful earrings. He held a great 





Uttarabhaga 54.63-73 1871 

ploughshare and a big threshing rod. He was divine in 
form. 

63. The second idol resembled the blue cloud in com¬ 
plexion. It had eyes resembling lotuses. The lord resembled 
the flower of AtasI (Hemp or flax) and his eyes were as large 
as the petals of the lotus. 

64. He was Hari, Acyuta, with the Srlvatsa mark on the 
chest, with shining yellow robes. He was divine in character, 
holding the discus and the conch. He dispelled all sins. 

65-67. The third idol had the golden lustre. It had eyes 
as large as the petals of a lotus. (It was that of Subhadra) cover¬ 
ed with various garments, bedecked in necklaces and armlets 
and equipped with ornaments of different kinds. There was 
a necklace of gems and jewels. The bosom was plump and 
protruding. Visvakarman thus made a beautiful idol. 

68-69. The king saw that wonderful feat and was surpris¬ 
ed very much. Within a moment, he saw those beautiful idols 
covered with pairs of divine robes, embellished with different 
kinds of jewels and richly endowed with all characteristics. Being 
very much surprised, he spoke these words. 

70 “Is it possible that both of you are Devas who 
have come here assuming the forms of Brahmanas ? Both of 
you achieve wonderful feats and divine activities. You are 
super-human. 

71-72 Are you Devas or human beings, or excellent 
Yaksas or Vidyadharas,' or Brahma and Visnu or Van. and 
Rudra or the ttrin gods Alvins ? I do no.know you,trno 
nature (since) you are present here assuming a m 
I seek refuge in you. Kindly reveal yourselves to me. 

The Brahmana replied : 

73 1 “I am neither a god nor a Yaksa. I a™ ”^ udra> 
Daitya nor a king of Devas. I am neither Brahma 
Know me as Purusottama. 


- P ch. 51. 1-58 with 

1. VV. 73-125 in the NP. are the same as 

a few deletions, and some v.l.s. 



1872 


Narada Puraria 

74. I am the destroyer of the anguish of all the worlds, 
I possess infinite might and manliness. I am worthy of being 
worshipped by all living beings. I have no end. 

75. Iam that which is learnt (i.e. described) in all 
scriptures and is so recounted in the Vedantas (Upanisads). I 
am) that which has been spoken of by Yogins as Vasudeva who 
is approachable through meditation. 

76. I alone am Brahma himself. I am Visnu; I am Siva. 
I am Indra, the king of the Devas. I am Yama, the restrainer 
of the universe. 

77-78. I am all the elements such as the Earth etc. : I 
am the three sacrificial fires as well as the devourer of what is 
consigned as offerings. I am Varuna, the lord of the waters, the 
earth, the mountains, whatever there is in this world worthy of 
being spoken about (in words)—whether mobile or immobile. 
Know me to be the embodiment of the universe. There is 
nothing other than I in the whole universe. 

79. O excellent king. I am pleased with you. O king of 
good holy rites, choose a boon. I shall give you whatever is 
desired by you, whatever is fixed into your heart. 

80. A vision of mine is not possible even in a dream lor 
non-meritorious persons. But, as for you, you have seen me 
directly, thanks to your steadfast devotion.” 

81. On hearing these words of Vasudeva, O MohinI, the 
hairs stood on ends on the body of the king. He sang the 
following hymn : 

The King prayed : 

82. “O lover of Sri, obeisance be to you, O lord of Sri, 
Hail to the yellow-robed one; O bestower of fortune, lord of 

rl, O abode of Sri, salutations to you, O abode of good 
fortune. 

83. I bow down to the primordial Purusa, Isana, the 
lord of all, having faces all round; the greatest Deva devoid of 
any stigma; I bow down to the eternal one. 

84. I bow down to him that is beyond all words, and 
all attributes, and devoid of existences as well as nonexistence. 

1 salute to one that is unsmeared i. e. extremely pure, free from 



1873 


Ullarabhaga 54.85-97 


attributes, subtle, omniscient and the conceiver and creator 
of all- 

85. I pay obeisance to the lord holding conch, discus, 
iron club and threshing rod. I shall bow down to the lord 
who bestows boons and has the complexion of the petals of 
blue lotus. 

86. I shall salute to Hrslkesa, Hari who lies down on 
his serpent couch, who stays in the milk ocean and who dispels 
all sins. 

87. O lord of the chiefs of the Devas, I shall again pay 
obeisance to you, the lord and bestower of boons, Visnu the 
lord of all the worlds and the immutable cause of liberation”. 

88. After eulogising the lord thus, after bowing down 
with palms joined in reverence, he laid himself prostrate on 
the ground again and said : 

89-92. “O lord, if you are pleased with me, I shall 
choose this excellent boon. I wish to go to that region of yours 
which all these meditate upon :— viz. The Devas, Asuras, 
Yaksas, Raksasas and the great serpents along with the 
Gandharvas, Siddhas, Kinnaras, Guhyakas, Sages; those 
blessed persons who are experts in different scriptural 
texts; who are endowed with renunciation and Yogic 
practice; who ponder over the real meaning of the Vedic texts 

and who know the path of salvation as well as others; who 

meditate upon that highest state. Your region is devoid o 
impurities, free from attributes and quiescent; learned men 
see it. It is very difficult of access; yet I wish to attain it 
through your grace.” 


The glorious Lord (Sri Bhagavdn) said : 

93. “May everything concerning you be auspicious and 
conducive to welfare. Attain everything as desire y } 
Everything will happen as you desire, thanks to my grace. 

There is no doubt about this. 

94. O excellent king, rule oyer your great king om 
without any break for ten thousand nine hun r years 

95-97. I, therefore, shall reveal to .?T ' 
state called Vijheya which is the highest, divin , y 


1874 


Narada Purdna 


to attain even by gods and demons; is perfect and bestower of 
all desired objects; quiescent; deserves to be kept as secret; 
unmanifest, unchanging, greater than the greatest, subtle, 
perfectly pure (unstained), devoid of attributes, eternal, per¬ 
fectly free from worries and sorrows, transcending causal 
relationship. After attaining it you will get the highest bliss 
and reach the supreme goal. 

98-99. May your fame spread here on the earth as 
long as the earth, sky, moon, sun, stars, seven oceans, Meru 
and other mountains exist here. It shall be steady as 
long as the eternal Devas stay in the heaven and everywhere. 

100. Here is the Tirtha named Indradyumna saras. 1 It 
is evolved out of the ghee used in the Yajna. By taking ablution 
even once in this, people will attain Sakra’s world. 

101. He who offers Pinqlas here, on this auspicious shore 
of the ocean, shall redeem twentyone generations of his family 
and go to Sakra’s world (Heaven). 

102. As long as fourteen Indras reign he will continue 
there, worshipped by the Apsaras and sung about by Gandh- 
arvas with their harmonious notes. He will move about by 
means of the aerial chariot. 

103-104a. On the southern bank of the lake, to the 
south-west side of it, there is a holy fig tree. Near it a 
Mandapa (pavilion) will be erected. It will be covered with a 
cluster of Ketakl trees and surrounded by many trees. 

104b-107a. On the fifth day in the bright half of the 
month of Asaqlha, when the constellation Magha is there, and 
people will take us there for seven days and instal us in the 
pavilion with splendid courtesans expert in diverse types of 
dalliance and charming in their dances and songs. They will 
have chowries with gold handles and fans bedecked in jewels. 
The great ladies must be standing there fanning us. 2 


1. This is one of the important sub-TIrtlias forming the Paiica-tirlhi at 
Purusottama Ksctra. It is near Gundica Mandira (or Janakpur) at a 
distance of about a mile and a half from Jagannatha temple. 

2. W. 104b-107a refer to the famous Ratha Tatra. 





Uttarabhdga 54.107b-l 19 


1875 


107b-109a. Other people, the religious students, Sann- 
yasins, lifelong students of Veda, excellent Brahmanas, house¬ 
holders, forest-hermits, Siddhas, and other twice-boms will be 
chanting hymns from Rk, Yajus and Saman, the hymns 
consisting of many words and syllables. O king, they will 
eulogise Rama and Kesava. 

109b-110. Then after eulogising, bowing to and visiting 
the deity with great devotion, such a man shall stay in the 
glorious city of Hari for ten thousand divine years, being 
worshipped by Apsaras and sung about by Gandharvas with 
harmonious notes of music. 


111. He sports there as an attendant of Hari with 
Kesava. 

112. He shines with a jewelled necklace, in an aerial 
chariot of the refulgence of the sun. All that he desires is to 
abide in the excellent abode that is highly blessed. 

113. After the merit of penance dwindles down, he 
comes here to the earth as a human being and is born as a 
Brahmana. He shall be the lord of crores of wealth. He shall 
certainly be a glorious master of the four Vedas. 

114. After granting him this boon and stipulating the 
conditions thus, O gentle lady, Hari vanished along with 
Visvakarman. 

115. The king became delighted. His hairs began to stand 
on their ends. Thanks to the visit of Hari, he considered, 
himself blessed and of having accomplished all objectives in 


life. ... , 

116-117. The king accompanied by his ministers and 

family priests carried the idols of Krsna, Rama and Subhadra, 
the bestowers of boons, by means of chariots resembling aeria 
chariots, variously decorated with jewels and gold pieces. After 
carrying them along to the accompaniment of auspicious shouts 

of victory, he brought them to his city. .. 

118-119 The intelligent king along with the fami y 

priests and ministers installed the idols in a splendid spot to 
the accompaniment of different musical instruments and the 
recitation of Vedic Mantras. After keeping them m a holy, 
charming and splendid spot for a few days, he formally got 


1876 


Narada Purana 


these installed through the Brahmanas on an auspicious Tithi 
when the constellation was favourable and on the whole the 
time was characterised as splendid, on an auspicious Muhurta. 

120-121. In accordance with the Sastric injunctions and 
following the prescribed procedure to be observed and according 
to the precepts approved by the chief priest, the king performed 
every rite and gave the requisite monetary gift to the preceptor. 
The lord distributed wealth among the Rtviks and others in 
accordance with injunctions. 

122. He installed those idols made by Visvakarman, 
duly, in an excellent apartment in the palace. 

123. He worshipped them duly with different fragrant 
flowers, gold, jewels, pearls as well as with different kinds 
of splendid clothes. 

124-125. He granted large tracts of lands, cities and towns 
to the Brahmanas. He ruled over the kingdom in a befitting 
manner. He performed sacrifices in various ways. He made 
over charitable gifts. Contented with everything, the king 
eschewed all possessions. He went over to the greatest place, 
the great region of Visnu. 


CHAPTER FBFTYFIVE 

The Greatness of Purufottama ( Conld.) 


Mohini said :— 

1. “O excellent Brahmana, what is that time when one 
should go to the shrine of Purusottama ? O bestower of 
Honour, what are the modes whereby the Pancatlrthl 1 (the 
pilgrimage to the five holy centres) should be performed ? 


1. This chapter deals with the Paflca-Txrthi (five important 
sacred spots) at Jagannatha Puri. 



1877 


Uttarabhaga 55. 2-12 

2. Kindly tell me, everything, the benefit accruing from 
the holy ablution in each of these Tirthas severally. Tell me 
the benefit of charitable gifts, visiting the deities separately”. 


Vasu said :— 

3-4. “A devotee may eschew all food and perform a 
penance standing on a single foot for seventy thousand years 
controlling his sense-organs and suppressing his anger. But, if 
one observes fast for once on the twelfth day in the bright half 
of the month of Jyestha and visits Purusottama, one derives a 
superior benefit thereby. 

5. Hence, O blessed lady, it is in the month of Jyestha 
that Purusottama is to be visited ardently by self-controlled 
men who desire to attain heavenly world. 

6. The excellent man should duly make a pilgrimage 
to the Pancatlrthl and visit Purusottama on the twelfth day in 
the bright half of the month of Jyestha. 

7. Those who visit the eternal lord Purusottama on the 
Dvadaii (twelfth) day attain the world of Visnu. They 
never fall off therefrom. 

8 Hence, O daughter of Brahma, one should go there 
ardently in the month of Jyestha. After duly visiting the five 
holy Tirthas (Pancatlrthl) and (or after the due ablutions m 
the five sacred water reservoirs) Purusottama should be 

visited. , „ 

9 Even if the pilgrim is far off but he glorifies Puru¬ 
sottama with a pure soul and a delighted mind day by day, he 

too shall go to the city of Visnu. 

10 He who, with full concentration and faith, under- 

“ the Z shan't CLd from hi, sins 

““otohini, I shal, now narrate the p-edure ibr 

the holy ablution in the five Tirthas (Pahcatlrth.). Listen. 


1878 Narada Purana 

If this is performed duly, the man shall become a favourite 
of Madhava. 

13. The clean and pure devotee should go to the 
Markandeya-Hrada 1 (the Pool of Markandeya). Facing the 
north he should plunge therein three times. He should repeat 
the following Mantra :— 

14. “O Bhaganetraghna (he who destroyed the eye of 
Bhaga). OTripurari (the destroyer of the Tripuras), save me 
who am immersed in the ocean of worldly existence, who have 
been possessed by sins and have fallen senseless. Obeisance 
be to you. 

15. Obeisance to Siva, the quiescent god, to the 
destroyer of all sins. O lord of the Devas, I am taking bath. 
May my sins perish.” 

16. The intelligent pilgrim should stand in navel-deep 
water. With water and gingelly seeds he should duly perform 
theTarpana rite of the Devas, sages, Pitrs and others. 

17-18. After the bath and Acamana rite, the pilgrim 
should go to the temple of Siva. After entering the shrine, he 
should circumambulate three times. With the Mula Mantra* 
he should respectfully worship the deity Markandeyesa. 
Repeating the AghoraMantra** (as in Tait. Aranyaka 10.45.1 
he should make obeisance and crave forgiveness. 

19. “O three-eved god, obeisance be to you. O moon- 
bedecked one, bow be to you. Redeem me, O lotus-eyed one 
(?) salute to you, O Mahadeva.” 

20. After thus taking ablution in the Markandeya 
Hrada and by visiting Sankara, the man derives the benefit of 
(the performance of) ten horse-sacrifices. 

21-22. Liberated from all sins; he goes to the world of 
Siva. Till all the living beings are dissolved, he enjoys 
excellent pleasures there and comes back to this world. He is 


1. Markandeya Hrada or pool is at, a distance of 4 furlongs from 
the Jagannatha shrine. It is near the water pool called Candana (Kalya^a 
31-1. P.198). 

♦viz. oih namah Sivaya / 

♦♦ Aghora Mantra : Om aghorebhyo ghorebhyo ghoralarebhyah sarvebhyah 
namasUstu Rudra-rupephyah 





Utlarabhaga 55.23-32 


1879 


born as a highly learned Brahmana. Thereafter, he adopts the 
Yoga of Sankara and attains salvation. 

23. The devotee shall then go to the Kalpa tree (i.e. 
the Banyan tree) and circumambulate it three times. He should 
then worship that holy Banyan tree with great devotion, 
repeating the following Mantra : 

24. “Om obeisance to you of unmanifest form, to 
the great one, to the protector of one who bows down to you. 
Obeisance be to you, the holy Banyan tree growing seated 


in the great waters. 

25. You resided in the banyan tree that is the abode of 
Hari, always during the Kalpa. O Nyagrodha tree dispel my 
sin. O Kalpa tree, obeisance be to you”.* 

26. By approaching the Kalpa tree** the Banyan tree, 
and by circumambulating it with devotion, the man instanta¬ 
neously dispels the multitude of sins like a serpent casting off 


its slough. 

27. O MohinI, by coming under the shade of that Kalpa 
tree, a man shall dispel even the sin of the murder of a 
Brahmana. What then of other sins ? 

28-29. O daughter of the creator, by visiting Visnu in 
the form of the holy banyan tree that is born ofKrsna’s limbs 
and that has the greatest brilliance of Brahman, and by bowing 
down to it, one attains more benefit than that of the Rajasuya 
sacrifice and the horse-sacrifice. He uplifts his family and goes 

to the world of Visnu. . , . 

30 By bowing down to Vainateya (Garucla) stationed in 

front of Krsna the devotee shall be liberated from all sins and 

he will go to the city of Visnu. , 

31. He who sees Purusottama, Samkar sana and Subhadra 

after visiting the banyan tree and Vainateya, attains e 

greatest goal (viz. Moksa). 

32 After entering the shrine of Visnu and circumambu¬ 
lating the deity three times, the pilgrim should worship and 
propitiate Samkarsana and Subhadra with devotion. 


*cf. BM. P. 57.13-14. 

••The Banyan tree is styled as Kalpa-rrkja in 


BM P. 57. 12; 60, 18. 








1880 


Narada. Purana 


33 “Obeisance to you, the deity named Haladhara 
(wielder of the ploughshare); Hail to you, O deity armed with 
the threshing pestle, salute to you, the lover of Revatl; 
obeisance to you O deity favourably disposed to the devotees. 

34. Obeisance to you, O most powerful one among the 
strong persons; Bow to you the supporter of the earth; obeisance 
be to you, O enemy of Pralamba; 1 save me, O elder brother of 
Kr?na.” 

35-37. Thus propitiating Ananta, who is unconquerable, 
who is worshipped by the Devas; who has the shape of the 
peak of Kailasa; whose face is as excellent and resplendent as 
the moon; who is clad in blue robes; whose head is formidable 
due to the hood; who is highly mighty; who is wielding the 
ploughshare and who is bedecked only with one earring by 
worshipping the son of RohinI thus with devotion, a man may 
attain the desired benefit. Liberated from all sins, he goes to 
Visnu’s world. 

38-39. The learned devotee shall enjoy all pleasures 
there, till the ultimate dissolution of all living beings. When 
the merits are exhausted, he comes here in the world and is 
born in the family of Yogins. He becomes an excellent 
Brahmana and masters all the scriptural texts and their 
meanings. After attaining perfect knowledge, he attains liber- 
ation that is usually very difficult of access. 

40. After worshipping Balarama (Lit. one armed with 
the ploughshare) thus, the clever devotee should, with great 
concentration, worship Krsna by means of the twelve-syllabled 
Mantra (viz. Orh namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya). 

41. Those self-possessed men who devoutly worship 
Purusottama always by means of twelve-syllabled Mantra attain 
salvation. 

42. O daughter of Brahma, neither the Devas, nor the 
Yogins nor the imbibers of the Soma juice attain that 
state which those who are devoted to the twelve-syllabled 
Mantra attain. 


1. N. of a demon killed by Balarama at Gokul, vide Bh. P. X. 
57. 26. 





1881 


Uttarabhdga 55 . 43-53 


43. Hence, the devotee should worship Kfsna, the 
preceptor of the universe, devoutly by means of scents, fragrant 
flowers etc., repeating that Mantra alone. After bowing to him, 
he should propitiate him :— 

44 . “Victory to you O Krsna; O lord of the universe, 
be victorious; victory to you, O slayer of Canura and Kesin, 
O slayer of Kamsa, be victorious. 

45 . O deity with eyes resembling the petals of the lotus, 
be victorious; victory to you, O bearer of the discus and the 
iron club; O deity dark-complexioned like the blue cloud, be 
victorious; O bestower of all happiness, be victorious. 


46. O lord worthy of being worshipped by the universe, 
be victorious; O destroyer of worldly existence (Samsara) be 
victorious; O lord, O lord of the worlds, be victorious; victory 
to you, O deity bestowing the desired benefits. 

47-48. O Purusottama, rescue me. I am immersed in 
the terrible ocean of worldly existence, though factually it is 
insignificant. Miseries constitute its foams; it is turbulent with 
furious temperament constituting its sharks and croco l es. 
The mundane affairs arc its flood of waters; the different kinds 
of ailments are its waves; it is impassable due to the w ur poo 

of delusion.” . 

49-52. By visiting Purusottama, with palms joine in 
reverence and by prostrating oneself flat, like a staff (before 
him) one attains, O MohinI, the benefit of thousand o orse- 
sacrifices. By propitiating the lord of the Devas (t e evo 

attains great benefits); the lord who is the bestower of boon , who 
is favourably disposed towards the devotees; who is the destroyer 
of all sins, who grants all desired benefits, that lardRrwa * as 
two arms and plump shoulders. His eyes are as Urge: as the 

petals of the lotus. His chest is large; his arms arc m g y, 

Le is splendid. He is clad in yellow robes^ H ho d the 
conch discus and iron club in h.s hands. He s bedecked 
with c’rown and armlets. He is endowed with a l auspicious 
characteristics. He is adorned with garlands of sylvan flowers. 

53 By visiting and bowing to Kr?na, a man attains that 
benefit which has been glorified in the case of ablution in 
the Tirthas and the offering of charitable gifts. 



1882 


J\ r arada Purdna 


54. By bowing down to Lord Krsna, a man attains that 
benefit which is linked up with the Vedas and Yajnas. 

55. Bv visiting and bowing down to Krsna, a man attains 
that benefit which results from all charitable gifts, holy rites 
and observances. 

56. By visiting and bowing down to Krsna, a man attains 
that benefit which is reputed to result from celibacy duly 
observed. 1 

57. By visiting and bowing down to Krsna, a man 
attains that benefit which is cited as the benefit of the life of a 
householder duly practised. 

58. By visiting and bowing down to Krsna, a man attains 
that benefit which is glorified as being yielded by dwelling in the 
forest to one who practises Vanaprastha stage of life. 

59. By visiting and bowing down to Krsna, a man 
attains that benefit which has been cited as resulting from the 
due observance of the life of an ascetic Sannyasin. 

60. O beautiful, woman, of what avail is much talk 
about its greatness ? By visiting Krsna with devotion, a man 
attains salvation which is so difficult to attain. 

61-62. He will be liberated from the sins originating 
since crores of Kalpas. He will be endowed with the greatest 
glory and all attributes. After uplifting twentyone generations 
of his family, the man shall go to the city of Visnu by means 
of an aerial chariot of great brilliance richly equipped with all 
desirable things. 

63. Then for the duration of a hundred Kalpas, he will 
be enjoying pleasures sweet to the mind. He will be sporting 
about with Gandharvas and Apsaras like the four-armed 
Visnu. 

64. Falling off from that world, he comes down here 
and is born in the excellent family of Brahmanas. He becomes 
omniscient. JHe knows everything. He eschews malice and 
jealous rivalry. 


1. VV. 56-59 affirm the superiority of merely visiting Purusottama to 
the life-long observance of all Asramas (stages of life). 






Uttara Dhaga 55.65-74 


1883 


65. He will be engaged in his own righteous duties. He 
will be quiescent and charitable. He will be engaged in the 
welfare of all living beings. After acquiring perfect knowledge 


pertaining to Visnu, he shall attain liberation. 

66. Thereafter, bowing down to Subhadra with palms 
folded in reverence and with the following Mantra, the devotee 
should propitiate Subhadra, who is favourably disposed towards 
her devotees, O daughter of god Brahma. 

67. “Obeisance to you, O omnipresent goddess; 
obeisance to you the bestower of auspiciousness and happiness. 
Protect me O KatyayanI, you who are possessed of eyes 


resembling the petals of a lotus.” * 

68-70. Thus propitiating that goddess, the mother of 
the universe, Subhadra, the sister of Baladcva, the auspicious 
bestower of boons, the man shall go to the city of Visnu by 
means of an aerial chariot that can go wherever he desires to 
go. After sporting about there like a god till the time of final 
dissolution of the universe, he will take birth as a human 
being. He shall then be a Brahmana who knows the Vedas. 
After acquiring the Yoga of Hari, he certainly attains 

liberation. 

71. After coming out from the shrine, the man shall 
have the feeling of satisfaction (of having obtained his life s 
objects). After bowing down again to the deity in the shrine, 
the devotee should depart from there with great concentration. 

72. Even though he has disappeared, one should bow 
down to the place where the sapphire idol of Visnu is 
buried in sand. The devotee who bows down to this place 


shall go to the city of Visnu. 

73 O queen, the lord with half of his body being 
that of'a lion (viz. Narasimha) ispresentthere always.lt 
was he who uplifted Hiranyakasipu. He is identical with all 


74. There is no doubt in this that by visiting that lord 
Nrhari and by devoutly bowing to him, O splendid lady, the 
man is liberated from all sins. 


*Cf. BM. P. 57.58. 



1884 


Narada Pur ana 


75 Those men who are devotees of Narasimha on this 
earth have no sin attached to them at all. They derive the 
benefit as desired by them. 

76. Since he grants the benefit of all Purusarthas, viz. 
virtue, wealth, love and liberation, the devotee shall by all 
means resort to Narasimha. 

77. Hence, O daughter of Brahma, the devotee should 
always devoutly’worship the highly powerful lord of animals 
(Nara-Simha), the bestower of all desired benefits. 

78-80. (All the people)—the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, 
Vaisyas, Sudras, women, Antyajas (outcastes) and others 
shall, by worshipping with devotion, the most excellent 
of all gods, possessing the physical form of a lion, be 
liberated from inauspicious misery originating from crores 
of births. They attain all desired things such as the state of 
being a god, of being the lord of the immortal beings, the 
state of the lord of wealth and the state of being Yaksas and 
Vidyadharas. O beautiful woman, he bestows these and other 
things. 

81. O daughter of the creator, listen to the powers ot 
Narasimha, the unconquered deity, the incomprehensible god, 
the bestower of worldly pleasures and salvation. 

82. O lady of good rites, who is competent to recount 
fully the attributes of that deity half of whose body is that of a 
lion ? I shall tell you succinctly. 

83. There is no doubt about this that, thanks to his 
grace, one shall realise those Siddhis (super-human powers) 
both divine and human, that are heard about. 

84. Thanks to the grace of that lord, one will have 
unimpeded movement in the heaven, mortal world, nether 
worlds, firmament, water, landmass or on a mountain. 

85. O blessed lady, in this world consisting of the 
mobile and immobile beings, there is nothing that is 
unachievable to lord Narasimha who is always sympathetic to 
the devotees. 

86. I shall narrate the procedure that will facilitate 
devotees and whereby the deity half of whose body is leonine 
(i.e. Narasimha) is delighted. 



1885 


Uttarabhaga 55.87a-98 

87a. The real nature of that lord is unknown even to 
the Devas and Asuras. 

87b-89. The leader of the Sadhakas (aspirant devotees) 
sustains himself by means of vegetables, roots, fruits, barley 
grains, oil cakes, powdered fried grains or milk. He wears only 
a lion cloth or woven Kasa grass. With the sense organs fully 
conquered, he meditates on the lord seated in a secluded 
spot the confluence of rivers, the mountains, the Siddhaksetra 
(the sacred places of the Siddhas), in a barren land or in the 
hermitage of Narasimha. 

90-9la. He himself instals the idol and performs the 
worship in accordance with the injunctions. There is no doubt 
about this that, even if the Sadhaka is defiled by subsidiary 
sins or great sins, he is liberated from them. 

9lb-93 The devotee should circumambulate and worship 
Narasimha with scents, fragrant flowers *5? 

bowing down the head to the lord, he shall offer J 
flowers smeared with camphor and sandal-paste on the he 
of Narasimha. Thereby, Siddhi is realised. In none of these acts 
or (bestowing of Siddhis) the lord is thwarted. 

94-95. Brahma, Rudraand other gods are not competent 
to cross him. What then is the case of Danavasm.the wor , 
and of the Siddhas, Gandharvas, human beings, Vid>adharas, 
Yaksas, Kinnaras and • serpents ? All those divine g 
annihilated by the splendour of divine fire, (of Narasim )• 

96-97. By performing the Japa once, the devotee shall 
smite all harassing persons by the flame o fi - 

a T ur) 

thrice cannot be split by .he Devas and sura,. 

98 Lord Narasirilha of great strength and exploits, O 
highly ble^ed iady, always protects the devotees w.thtn 
twelve Yojanas (I Yojana - 4 krosas or 8 mtles). 


'i 




1886 


JVarada Puratia 


99-100. The devotee should thereafter go to the 
opening of the cave and fast there for three nights. By means 
of the Palasa twigs, he should ignite the fire and perform 
Homas with the Palasa twigs soaked in Trimadhu (honey, 
ghee, sugar) for twenty thousand times. O lady of lotus-like 
eyes, a cart shall come into the view of the Sadhaka. 

101-102. Then, the Kavallivivara (the opening of 
Kavalll 1 (?) shall be revealed instantaneously. The learned 
devotee should unhesitatingly enter the opening. As the cart 
proceeds, darkness and delusion perish. O MohinI, wide 
highway is seen there. 

103. Remembering Narasimha, he should enter the 
nether worlds. After going there, the pure devotee should 
perform the Japa of the immutable Narasiriiha. 

10 k Thereafter, thousands of women shall come out of 
the city with lutes, chowries etc. in their hands and speak 
words of welcome to him. 

105. O lady of beautiful eyes, they will grasp the 
leading Sadhaka by the hand and take him into the city. 
They will make him drink divine Rasayana (elixir of life). 

106. The moment he drinks, he will be endowed with a 
divine body. He will become very strong. He will be sporting 
about with divine virgins until the dissolution of the universe. 

107. (?) With a different body, he is taken to Vasudcva. 2 
When these virgins do not appeal to him, he will come out of 
that place. 

108-109. (Through the grace of Narasimha) the excellent 
Sadhaka shall obtain a magic tablet, trident, sword, yellow pig¬ 
ment, jewel, mercury, elixir and the collyrium and the sandals. 
He shall grasp the Vidyas (lores) of Gutika (magic pills) 


1. kasalli is not traced to any Sk. Dictionary. The text in the NP. here: 
taio vtiet lu nihSahkam kavalli-vivaram budhah / is obscure. Brahma P. 58.35a 
reads : tato vtiet tu nihjahkaiji Kavacl vivaram budhah ‘The wise man who has 
armoured himself with Narasimha kavaca should enter fearlessly. 

2. The text is corrupt. This verse in the Brahma P . 58.40 reads: ( bhinna- 
deho Vasudcve liyate naira Samiqyah ) “There is no doubt that though his body 
is different, he is absorbed in Vasudevu.” 






1887 


Utlarabhaga 55.110-119 


Manahsila (red arsenic), Krsnanjali (handful of Krsna?)* 
Mandala**(?) (kamandalu-water-pot) Aksasutra (string of 
rosary) and the sixth Saiijivam) the lifcgivcr). i.e. the lore of 
restoring a dead man to life). 

110-113. It is as though the lord in the heart is enveloped 
by the blazing flames of the fire. Placed but once, it burns all 
sins originating from crores of births. Having (mastered) the 
mystic lore (Siddha-Vidya) and Sastras (scriptures), the 
lord of Sadhakas, if places in his heart the fire enveloped with 
flames and burning sparks only once, it burns down all of his sins 
and evils perpetrated in a crorc of births. Placed in poison, it 
destroys poison; kept on the body, it dispels even leprosy. 

If one kills a foetus and commits similar sins and places 
that divine fire on his person, he is absolved of the sins (by that 
divine fire). One should think of the blazing deity when over¬ 
whelmed by great evil planets. The evil and terrible planets 
begin to cry and they perish quickly. When the amulet is tied 
round the necks of children it is a perpetual protection. 

114. It certainly destroys evil spirits such as the Garuja, 
Pindaka and Krtyas. In order to dispel ailments, the devotee 
should perform Homa with the sacrificial twigs, ghee an 


milk. ,. 

115. If tliis is performed during the three Sandhyas (i.e. 

dawn, dusk and midday) for the period of a month, it will 
destroy all ailments. I do not find anything in the world consist¬ 
ing of the mobile and immobile beings, anything that is un¬ 
achievable to this Tattva (principle or lore). 

116. By worshipping the lord of beasts alone for hundred 
and eight times, the devotee certainly attains all those Siddhis 
whichever he may desire. 

117-119 In the ant-hill, in the cremation ground, and in 
the crossroads, the devotee should smear the oil mixed1 with red 
sandal paste and cow’s milk. With this paste he should*“ 
idol of the lion six Angulas in length; should then wnte (the 


.An obvious error for k t wj™ vide the some verse repeated in the 

BTakm lS^£hna P. ibid reads kamavdalum. -Masala' in the NP. is 
obscure. Hence the reading of the Br. P. is adopted. 




1888 


N&rada Puraija 


Mantra) on the leaf of Bhurja with Rocana (yellow pigment) 
This leaf with Mantrashould be tied to (the idol of Narasimha). 
He should then perform thejapa of the Mantra for unlimited 
number of times after worshipping it near a water reservoir. 


120. By the time the devotee with all his sense-organs con¬ 
trolled, performs the Japas for seven days, the whole earth shall 
be showered with water. Within a Muhiirta the earth will be 
flooded with water. 

121-122. Alternately, the devotee should sit on the top of 
pure tree and worship Narasimha. By performing a hundred and 
eight Japas of the Tattva (Narasimha Mantra) , the devotee 
shall ward off that rain. After placing (the idol) in a cage the 
excellent Sadhaka shall whirl it. Within a Mahurta a great vio¬ 
lent gust of wind shall blow. 

123-124 He can ward it off once again by sprinkling 
the idol with’ water charged with the Mantra seven times. 
If the aspirant were to put that idol under the ground at 
the threshold of anyone the whole of his family shall be ex¬ 
terminated. When it is taken out, it shall accord peace. Hence 
O daughter of Brahma, one shall always worship it with 

devotion. 

125-126. By visiting, eulogising, bowing to and worshipp¬ 
ing Nrhari, the lord of beasts who has great prowess and w o 
bestows all desired benefits, O splendid lady, men obtain king¬ 
dom, heavenly pleasure, and liberation (from samsara) 
which is very difficult to get. By seeing Narasimha, a man shall 
achieve the desired benefits. 

127-128a. He shall be liberated form all sins. He 
shall go to the world of Visnu. By visiting that lord having the 
leonine body, with great devotion even for once, the devotee is 
liberated from all sins, whether physical, verbal or mental m 

origin ‘ . 

128b-130a. A man shall necessarily remember that lord in 

the following circumstances : When there is a war; when there 
is any difficulty; when in misery, when afflicted by thieves, 
tigers, etc., in the forest, when there is doubt about the safety of 
life, when oppressed by poison, fire or water, when there is fear 
from the king etc., during the day of battle, when one is afflicted 





1889 


Ultarabhaga 55.130b—56.7a 

by evil planets ailments etc., By remembering the lord, the 
man is liberated from difficulties. 

1 30b-l3la. Just as dense darkness perishes at the rise of 
the sun, so also all torments perish when the lord is visited. 

131b-132. When Narasimha is delighted the devotee 
achieves theGutikas (Mystic pills), Aiijana (magical collyrium), 
the Padalepa(unguent for the foot)and the elixir of life, enabling 
one to go anywhere. He achieves other desired benefits too. 
If a man worships Nrhari meditating on other desired results, he 
shall undoubtedly attain those objects.” 


CHAPTER FIFTYSIX 

The Greatness of Purufoltama ( Contd.) 


Vasu said : 

1-2. “O blessed lady, listen to another group of Tirtha 
in the holy centre of Purusottama. It is highly meritorious. By 
the mere sight, it destroys sins. By visiting Vasudeva termed 
Ananta with devotion and by bowing down to him, a man shall 
be liberated from all sins, he shall attain the greatest region (viz. 

Vaikuntha) ... 

3. By taking bath in the Svetaganga 1 and by visiting 

Sveta-Madhava as well as Matsya-Madhava, the devotee goes 
to Sveta Dvlpa (the abode of Narayana). 

4-7a. Visnu’s devotees of great concentration and purity 
shall attain heaven by visiting the pure deity which resembles 
snow in complexion; who bears conch, discus and iron club, 
who is endowed with all auspicious characteristics; whose chest 
‘ has the mark of Srlvatsa, who is delighted, who has four arms, 
whose chest is covered with garlands of sylvan flowers ;who 

1. Sveta-Ganga pool is on the way to the sea (from jagannatha 
Temple). The two Madhava shrines (Matsya and Sveta) are near it. 




1890 


jVarada Purana 


wears coronet and armlets; whose garments are yellow m col¬ 
our; whose shoulders are plum and who is bedecked m earrings. 
By touching the leading king, Svetagangeya (god Sveta- 
Madhava), even with the tip of a Kusa grass they go to 

7b-9a. He who sees this idol of lustre called Madhava, 
that resembles conch and cow’s milk and that destroys all sms, 
he who bows to that idol with eyes resembling lotuses even but 
once, with devotion and eschewing worldly desires is honoured 
in the world of Visnu. 

9b-10. For many Manvantaras, he enjoys extensive plea¬ 
sures as he pleases, along with the Devas, surrounded by 
Divine virgins, sung in praise by the Gandharvas and worshipped 

by Siddhas and Vidyadharas. 

11. Falling off from these, he comes to the mortal world 
and is born as a Brahmana knowing the Vedas and the Vedan- 
gas. He will be intelligent, long-lived and enjoying worldly 
pleasures. 

12. He will be richly endowed with elephants, horses, 
chariots and other vehicles. He will be pure and blessed with 
wealth and food-grains. He shall be handsome and very fortu¬ 
nate. He will have sons and. grandsons. 

13. He goes again unto Purusottama on the seashore at 
the root of the holy Banyan tree. After abandoning the body 
and remembering Hari he shall go to the region of calmness 
and peace. (Moksa) 

14-16. By visiting Svctamadhava and Matsya-madhava 
near him and by bowing down to him with purity, the devotee 
should leave off all distressing features. When formerly the 
whole universe was vast sheet of water, the lord had at the out¬ 
set assumed the form of a fish of the Rohita type. It was to 
redeem the Vedas (from the demon who had stolen them) that 
the lord thus stationed himself on the surface of Rasatala. Think¬ 
ing about the earth, the fish established itself there. Then the 
Matsya (fish) assumed the form of a youth. That is Matsya 
Madhava. 

17. He goes to that highly excellent place where lord 
Hari is present himself. In due course of time, he comes down 
here and shall be the king on the surface of the earth. 





Utlarabhdga 56.18-30 


1891 


18. By resorting to Matsya-Madhava, a man will be in¬ 
vincible. He will be a liberal donor, enjoyer of pleasures, a 
warrior, a devotee of Visnu and true to his word. 

19-20a. Afterwards, by being enlightened in the Yoga 
leading to Hari, he shall attain liberation. The greatness of 
Matsyamadhava has been recounted by me to you. On seeing 
him, O daughter of Brahma, the devotee shall attain all 
desires. 

20b-22. I shall now describe the rite of Marjana in the 
sacred and auspicious pool of water called Markanqleyahrada. 
The ablution in the Markan<Jeyahrada at all times is praised. 
It is an ancient rite to plunge into it with a singlcminded 
devotion. Particularly on the CaturdasI day, the ablution is 
destructive of all sins. Similarly, the ablution in the ocean at 
all times is praised. 

23-24a. Particularly, on the full moon day, (the ablution 
in the ocean) makes one attain the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. 
On the full Moon day in the month of Jyestha, when the con¬ 
stellation is also Jyestha, the devotee shall particulary visit that 
king of holy centres which is exceedingly splendid. 

24b-25. He should have pure and holy Sattvaic feelings 
physically, verbally and mentally, and his mind should not be 
directed towards anything else. He should be liberated from 
all mutually clashing opposites. He should be devoid of passions 
and malicious rivalry. He should circumambulate the beautiful 
Kalpa-trec, the banyan tree, where Janardana himself abides. 

26-27a. With great concentration, he should circumam¬ 
bulate it three times. On seeing it, the sin originating from 
seven births perishes. O MohinI, he attains an extensive merit 
and his desired goal. 

27b-28. I shall mention to you its names in the different 
Yugas. The names of the banyan tree in the Krta and other 
Yugas have been glorified as follows: (They know them as) 
Vata, Vatesvara, Santa and Purana Purusa. 

29. In the Krta and other Yugas, the girth of the banyan 
tree has been respectively one Yojana, three-fourths of a Yojana, 
half a Yojana and one-fourth of a Yojana. 

30. After bowing down to the banyan tree, repeating the 
Mantra mentioned above, the devotee should go to the south at 


1892 Narada Pur ana 

a distance of three hundred Dhanus (bows or twelve hundred 
hastas or cubits). 

31. It is the place where the sign, the beautiful portals 
of heaven, become visible within the ocean, a log of wood 
equipped with all auspicious attributes has been drawn. 

32. He should bow down to it, worship it and then stand 
by. He shall then be liberated from all the mulitudes of sins, 
effects of evil planets and other inauspicious things. 

33. Formerly, Ugrascna looked at the ocean through 
heavenly portals. He went there. With purity of word, mind 
and deed, he meditated on the supreme Narayana and per¬ 
formed the Acamana rite. 

34. Thereafter, the devotee should fix the eight-syllabled 
Mantra on the hand as well as on the body. 1 The Mantra is 
what learned men utter viz. ‘Om namo Narayanaya’. 

35. What purpose is served by many Mantras causing 
the richness of the mind ? The Mantra “Namo Narayanaya” 
is that which achieves all objects. 

36. Apah (waters) are glorified as Nara since they are 
the offsprings of Nara (Man). They were the former abode of 
Visnu. Hence Visnu is remembered as Narayana. 

37. The Vedas are devoted to Narayana. The Brahma- 
nas are devoted to Narayana. Perfect knowledge is concerned 
with Narayana. Holy rites are related to Narayana. 

38. Dharma (virtue) is concerned with Narayana. The 
penance is connected with Narayana, charitable gift is concern¬ 
ed with Narayana; holy rites are related to Narayana. 

39. The worlds are concerned with Narayana, the Devas 
are devoted to Narayana; the Nitya rites (routine holy rites) 
are related to Narayana. The region (to be reached) is 
concerned with Narayana. 

40. (All the elements are concerned with Narayana, 
such as the earth is devoted to Narayana; the water is relat¬ 
ed to Narayana; the fire element is concerned with Narayana; 
the firmament is devoted to Narayana. 

1. W. 34-54 disclose the powerful influence of the Pancaratra system 
on the NP. 





Uttarabhaga 56.41-54 


1893 


41. The Vayu (wind god) is devoted to Narayana; the 
mind is concerned with Narayana: the Ahamkara (Ego) and 
the Buddhi (Intellect) both of these are of the nature of 
Narayana. 

42. The things of the past, present and future, whatever 
is termed as Jlva (living individual), the gross, the subtle 
and the huge, everything is of the nature of Narayana. 

43. O Mohini, I do not see anything here different than 
Narayana; this world consisting of the visible and the invisible, 
the mobile, and immobile beings is pervaded by him. 

44-45. Waters constitute the abode of Visnu, the ocean 
is the lord of waters. Hence, he is in the waters. Particularly, 
at the time of ablution, the devotee should worship Narayana 
the dispeller of sins. He should remember Narayana and medi¬ 
tate on him. He should then perform the Nyasa rite on the hand 
and on the body. 

46-47. He should fix the syllable Orh on the left hip, the 
syllable ‘Na’ on the right hip, the syllable ‘Ra 5 in the um¬ 
bilical region, the syllable c Ya 5 in the left arm and the sylla¬ 
ble ‘Na 5 in the right arm. He should fix the syllable ‘Ya’ 
on the head and then fix beneath, above, sideways, in the heart 
behind and in front. 

48-50. The learned devotee should meditate on Narayana 
and thereafter begin the Kavaca (protective Mantras of mys¬ 
tic syllables) : In the east of me may Govinda protect; may 
Madhusudana protectme in my south; may lord Sridhara protect 
me in my west; may Kesava protect me in the north; may 
Visnu protect me in the south-east; may the unchanging Madhava 
protect me in the southwest; may HrsIkeSa protect me in the 
north-west; may Vamana protect me in the north-east; may 
the Boar protect me in the earth and may Trivikrama protect me 
in the upward direction. 

51. After assigning the Kavaca to various parts thus, 
the devotee should contemplate about himself, thus “I am 
lord Narayana. the wielder of the conch, discus and iron 
club. 55 

52-54. After meditating on the Atman thus, the devotee 
should repeat this Mantra : “You are the fire-god, O lord of 
bipeds; you are the discharger of the semen; you are the 



1894 


Narada Purdna 


igniter of love’s fire. You are the chief of all living beings 
and individual souls; you are the unchanging lord; you are the 
Arani of the nectar; O lord of waters, you are the source of 
origin of the Devas; dispel my sins, O king of Txrthas obeisance 
be to you”. 

After uttering thus duly, he should perform the rite of 
ablution according to injunctions. 

55. Otherwise, O daughter of Brahma, the bath there is 
not commended. The devotee should perform the rite of ablu¬ 
tion and Marjana (sprinkling) within water with those 
Mantras the deities of which are the waters. 

56-57a. Then he should repeat the Mantra of Agha- 
marsana. O gentle lady, just as the horse-sacrifice is a Yajna 
that dispels sins, so also the hymn of Aghamarsana 1 dispels 
all sins. 

57b-58.He should then come out of water and wear clean 
washed clothes. He should then restrain his breath, perform 
Acamana rite and worship the sun by way of Sandhya. He 
should then offer in the upward direction a handful of water and 
flowers. 

59. With the arms raised up, he should worship the 
sun by means of the Mantras his symbols. Thereafter, he 
should repeat the holy and divine Gayatrl Mantra hundred 
and eight times. 

60. Standing there with concentration, he should repeat 
other Mantras, also pertaining to the sun. He should then 
circumambulate and bow to the sun and be seated. 

61-62a. He should then face the east and recite Veda- 
Mantras as Svadhyaya. Then the Tarpana rite of the Devas, 
human beings, sages and the Pitrsofhis own family should be 
duly performed by the devotee who is the knower of names 
and Gotra. He should perform the Tarpana rite with water 
mixed with sesame seeds, according to prescribed injunction 
and with concentration of mind. 

62b-64a. During Sraddha and the Havana (oblations to 
fire) rites the devotee should perform the same with a single 

1. Aghamarfana hymns (RV. X. 190. 1-3) arc supposed to wash off 
sins of men. 




Uttarabhaga 56.64b-68c 


1895 

. rUe ° fTarpa ^ a sha11 be Performed with both the 
hands. This is the standing injunction. He should perform the 
rite with the right hand supported by the left (?) “May they 
be satiated”. He shall utter these words clearly uttering the 
name and the Gotra but silently otherwise. 

64b-65a. If anyone out of delusion performs the Tarpana 
rite for the Pitrs, by means of gingelly seeds clinging to the 
body, it is as though the Tarpana rite has been performed by 
means of skin, flesh, blood and bones. 

65b-67a. The water libation will not reach the Pitrs, 
if the devotee stands in water and offers on to the ground or 
if he stands on the ground and offers it into the water. The 
water should be offered standing on the ground and on to the 
ground. What is not offered on the ground does not reach (the 
Pitrs). The earth has been given by Brahma as the imperishable 
(eternal) place of the Pitrs. Hence (the libation) should be 
given only there, by the person who wishes for the pleasure 
of the Pitrs. 

67b-68a. The earth is born out of water; the water is 
present therein and gets dissolved in the earth. Hence, one 
should offer water on the ground. 

68b,c. He should spread the Kusa grass on the ground 
and invoke the Pitrs or the Devas by their respective Mantras. 
In respect of the Devas, the tips of the Kusa grass shall be 
towards the east, and in the case of the Pitrs (manes) they shall 
be towards the south. 


1896 


Narada Purania 


CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN 

The Glory of Purusottama : The Procedure of Worship 1 * * * 
Vasu said : 

1-3. After performing the rite ofTarpana to gods, sages, 
Pitrs and others, the pilgrim should silently perform 
Acamana (religious sipping of water). O daughter of Brahma, 
he should draw a square of the side of a Hasta (a cubit 
of about eighteen inches). Is should be beautiful and should 
have four entrances. It represents the city of Purusottama on 
the shore of the great ocean. In its middle, he should draw the 
mystic diagram of a lotus with eight petals and the pericarp. 

O MohinI, he should draw the mystic diagram and worship 
in it, Lord Narayana, the unborn eternal deity, in accordance 
with the same injunctions as in the case of eight-syllable 
Mantra. 

4. Henceforth, I shall explain fully to you the excellent 
mode of purification of the physical body. The* syllable 
Ksa in the company of the syllable Ra is red and should 
be thought of in the heart. 

5. On his head, he should think of the syllable ‘E as 
stationed in the middle of the dice of the moon and having three 
blazing ‘Sikhas 5 burning down the heaps of the sins of the 
world. 

6. It is white in colour and it showers nectar flooding 
the earth**. The devotee who has shaken off sins, thus shall 
thereafter become one with a divine body. 

1. This chapter gives the application of Panca-ratra Agama to the 
worship of Purusottama. The esoteric application of the mantra Om , n ™ l ° 
Ndrayapaya and Vifnave namah to the various parts of one’s person (technically 
known as Nydsa) is an essential part of Tantrism. 

This chapter is practically the same as the Brahma P. Ch. 61. Thus the 
Brahma burapa 6l.l-\2 are the same as the NP 57.1-12; so also Brahma • 
61.23-58 and the NP. 57.23-58 are identical but with the difference ot tew 
readings here and there. 

♦Here Brahma P. V. 46 reads : 

akdram hrdaye dhydtvd cakra-rekhd-samanvitam / 

The Andhata Cakra is presumed to be at the heart. But neither K?a nor 
Ra or A form the bfjas and the ‘Petals’ of that Cakra. 

♦♦The qualities of blazing and burning sins may be those of the 
syllable Kfa, in case the first half of verse 6 is taken along with the 5th verse). 








Uttarabhdga 57.7-16 


1897 


7. The learned devotee, should then fix the eight syllabl¬ 
ed Mantra in the body as well as in the Atman. He should 
fix it beginning with the left foot and proceed gradually. 

8. With the Mula mantra, the aspirant should perform 
the rite of purification of the hand. The Nyasa rite shall 
have five subsidiary limbs and four manifestations of Visnu. 

9. He should fix each of the syllables separately on the 
fingers. The syllable OM is the earth. He should fix it on the 
left foot. It is white in colour. 

10. The syllable na is dark-coloured. It is the Bhuvah 
(the world). It is fixed on the right foot. They call the syllable 
mo as Kala (Time) alone. It must be fixed in the left hip. 

11. The syllable na (which is the previous seed*) is 
established in the southern right side. They call ra. the reful¬ 
gence (the Fire element) and it is stabilised in the umbilical 
region. 

12. The syllable ya is of gaseous nature and it has 
resorted to the left shoulder. The syllable na shall always be 
known to have been stablished in the right shoulder. 

13-14. The syllable ya is stationed on the head, where 
the worlds are also stabilised. After fixing Omkara in the heart, 
the syllable ‘vi* on the head, the syllable ‘sna* on the tuft and 
the syllabic ‘vc* in the Kavaca (coat of mail). He shall fix 
na in the eyes. The syllabic mah is said to be the ‘Astra* 
‘miraculous weapon*. 

15. The (deity) Vasudeva is of white colour. It is fixed 
in the forehead. (He is stationed on the forehead) The deity 
Sarhkarsana is red. He is fixed in the mouth. He resembles the 
fire and the sun. 

16. (The manifestation called‘Pradyumna’ is yellow in 
colour and is assigned in the heart and the Vyuha (mani¬ 
festation) known as Aniruddha is stationed at the sex-organ. 
Hari thus pervades all limbs. The Almighty one is worshipped 
thus in his four-fold manifestations (Vyuhas) 


♦ ♦*Br. P. 57.11a reads: Sarva-bija. 



1898 


jVarada Purana 


17. Visnu is present in front of me; Kesava abides 
behind me; Govinda is present on the right side; Madhusudana 
is present on the left side. 

18. Vaikuntha is present above, and Varaha (the 
Divine Boar) on the ground. Madhava is present in all those 
intermediate quarters between the main directions. 

19. My protection is effected by Narasimha whether I 
go or stay, whether I keep awake or am asleep. I am identical 
with Vasudeva. 

20. After becoming identical with Visnu thus, the 
devotee should begin the rite. He should combine all the 
principles with the Deva, just as is done in the case of the 
physical body. 

21. That which ends with the syllable ‘pha’ is cited to 
be auspicious and destructive of all obstacles. He shall think of 
the spheres of the sun, moon and fire. 

22-23. In the middle of the lotus of the internal side of 
the cosmos, the devotee shall fix Visnu. Thereafter, he should 
mentally think of the excellent lustre, Pranava (om) seated in 
the pericarp, the eternal being of the form of brilliance. There¬ 
after, he should perform the Nyasa* rite of the eight-syllabled 
Mantra in due order. 

24. The worship by means of that Mantra in the state 
of analysis and synthesis (Vyasta-Samasta) ** is remembered to 
be great : He should then worship the eternal lord by means of 
the twelve-syllabled Mantra. 

25. He should then retain in the heart the immense 
being with four arms and lustre equal to that of crores of suns. 

26-29. After thinking about the great Yoga, he should 
invoke the following deities in due order : 

(The Mantra for invocation) : c< 0 Narayana, may these 
Devas, the bestowers of boons come in front of me viz. he who 
has assumed the form of the Fish, Narasimha and Vamana.” 


*Nyasa is the assignment of the various parts of the body to different 
deities (or syllables of Mantras). It is accompanied with particular Mantra, 
syllable or prayer to corresponding gesticuladons. 

♦♦Literally : Vyasta ='inherent in or pervading all the several parts of 
anything, while Samasta ='inherent in or pervading the whole of anything. 







Ultarabhaga 57.30-36 


1899 


(The Mantra for offering a seat.) “Sumeru is the pedestal for 
your feet. The scat has been made in the form of the lotus O 
Madhusudana, stay behind for the benefit of all living beings” 
(The Mantra for Padya) “O eternal lord Padmanabha, the 
Padya (water for washing feet) is offered at your feet. O 
Visnu, O deity with the eyes like the petals of the lotus, O 
Madhusudana, accept it. 

(The Mantra for Madhuparka and Arghya) ‘O great lord, 
accept Madhuparka prepared by me. Accept it in the com¬ 
pany of Brahma and others. O Purusottama, accept the Arghya 
devoutly offered by me. 

30-33. (The Mantra for Acamaniya) : “The water of 
the Mandakini (the Ganga) is auspicious. It dispels all sins. 
Accept that as the water for the rite of Acamana. It has been 
offered by me with great devotion.” 

(The Mantra for bath) : “You are the water, the earth, 
the fiery (element) and the wind (element). I am bathing you 
with the water that alone supports the worlds.” 

(The Mantra for offering clothes) : “May these two 
clothes be accepted; they are woven with the divine yarn; they 
have the colour of the Yajiia and they have the lustre and the 
glitter of gold.” 

(The Mantra for smearing the Lord with unguents) : “O 
Kesava, neither your body nor your activities do I know 
perfectly. 

34-36. May the unguent offered by me be accepted and 
smeared.” (The Mantra for offering a sacred thread): “The 
sacred thread which has been made of three turns by the Lotus- 
born god with Mantras of Fi, Yajus and Saman and is equipp¬ 
ed with the knot called Savitri, has been dedicated to you.” 

(The Mantra for decorating with ornaments) : “O 
Madhava, the ornaments consisting of divine jewels and having 
the lustre of the fire and the sun will make your limbs splendid- 
looking”. 

The Mantra for waving lights): “O lord of the luminaries, 
you alone are the fiery refulgence of the sun and the moon 
of the lightning and the fire. May this light be accepted.” 


1900 


Narada Purana 


37. (The Mantra for offering incense) : “This fragrant 
vegetable juice divine and presented along with sweat scents is 
for you. May this incense offered to you devoutly by me be 
accepted.” 

38. (The Mantra for offering food as Naivedya) : “Tasty 
cooked foodoffour kinds has been offered to you with devotion. 
It has six tastes in the varieties of dishes. O Kesava, this is 
the Naivedya unto you.” 

39-41. The devotee should perform the Nyasa in the 
petal in the east; that of Samkarsana in the petal in 
the south; that of Pradyumna in the petal in the west, 
and that of Anuruddha in the petal in the north. He should 
perform the Nyasa of the Varaha incarnation in the south-east; 
that of Narasimha in the south-west; that of Madhava in the 
north-west, that of Trivikrama in the north-east. He shall per¬ 
form the Nyasa of Garuqla, in front of the lord of the eight- 
syllabled Mantra. 

42-43. He should fix the discus on the left side and the 
conch on the right side. The great iron club also should be 
fixed on the right hand side of the lord. Then the scholarly 
devotee should fix the bow to the left of the lord. The divine 
quiver shall be fixed on the right hand side and the sword 
on the left. 

44-45. After fixing Sri to the south side, the devotee 
should fix Pusti to the north side and the Vana-mala (the 
garland of sylvan flowers) as well as the Srxvatsa mark and 
Kaustubha gem in front of the Lord. He should fix the 
heart etc. in the four quarters beginning with the east. 
Thereafter, he shall fix the weapou of the lord of the Devas in 
the corner. 

46-48a. He should worship the following deities (the 
guardians of the quarters) : Viz. Indra, Agni, Yama, Nirrti, 
Varuna, Vayu, Dhanada (Kubera), I§ana, Ananta and 
Brahma. He should worship them with their respective Mantras 
(in the respective quarters) and below as well as above. By 
worshipping thus the lord of the Devas, Janardana, stationed 
in the Mystic diagram, the man shall attain cherished desires. 



Uttarabhaga 57.48b-57a 


1901 


48b-50a. He who sees this Janardana stationed in the 

mystic diagram worshipped in accordance with this injunction, 
shall enter the unchanging Visnu. He, by whom Kesava is wor¬ 
shipped at least once in this manner shall surmount (the 
difficulties of bath, old age and death and attain the region of 
Visnu. 

50b-51a. Svetadvlpa is glorified for the daily residence 
of that person who devoutly remembers Narayana continuously 
and diligently. 

51b-52a. That Mantra which begins with ‘Om 
Namah’ (Lit : that which contains ‘Namaskara’ accompanied 
with Om at the beginning) and is embellished with word 
‘Namah’ at the end (that is the Mantra : Om namo Naray- 
anaya namah) is regarded as the name (or illuminator) of 


all principles. 

52b-53. In the same order of procedure, he should otter 
scents and fragrant flowers unto each in the manner prescribed. 
He shall show the eight mystic Mudras (gestures) as indicated 

in the order mentioned above. 

54. He should perform Japa by means of the Mula 
Mantra eight, twentyeight or hundred and eight times. The 
knower of reality shall do thus. 

55a. In those rites with specific desires in view, the 
devotee should do everything as mentioned with concentration 
and in accordance with his capacity. 

55b-56a. The following eight are glorified as the Mudras 
(mystic gestures) via. : Lotus, Conch, Srtvalsa, Gada, Garuda, 
Cakra (discus), Khadga (Sword), Sarnga (bow). 

56b-57a. (Bidding farewell). “O Ete™a. Atuten, 
Supreme Being, go, go into the greatest abode the greate 
region which Brahma and other Devas do.notknow. O a »P»« 
ous lady, those who do not know, the mode ofworflupas 
mentioned by means of the Mantras o art s t 
Acyuta by means of the Mula mantra. 


1902 


Narada Purana 


CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT 


The Creation of the Cosmic Egg* 

Vasu said :— 


1. After duly and devoutly worshipping Purusottama. 
the devotee should bow down his head and propitiate the 
ocean with the following Mantra. 

2. “In the whole universe, O lord of rivers, you are the 
vital air (Prana) of all living beings, O Tirtharaja (King of 
holy centres), obeisance be to you. Save me, O favourite of 
Acyuta.” 


3-4. After duly taking the holy dip in the ocean, in that 
auspicious and excellent holy centre and after duly worshipping 
Narayana devoid of ailments and blemishes on the shore (of 
ocean), and after bowing down to Rama, Kfsna and 
Subhadra, the devotee should worship the ocean. Thereby, 
the man attains the benefit of hundreds of horse-sacrifices. 

5-6. He shall be absolved of all sins. He shall be freed 
from all miseries. LikeHari, he shall be glorious and surrounded 
by the Devas. He can justifiably feel proud of beauty and 
youth. In an aerial chariot having the lustre of the sun and 
with the harmonious divine music of the Gandharvas, he 
shall take twentyone generations of his family and go to the 
world of Visnu. 


7. After enjoying various excellent pleasures there and 
after playing with the Devas (he will exhaust his merit and) fall 
offfrom that world. After coming here, he becomes a Brah- 
mana, the most excellent knower of the Brahman. 


truthff.l H ! ha n , thCn bC fam ° US) ^IHgem., glorious and 
truthful. He shall have mastery over the sense-organs. He shall 

become aBrahmana fully conversant with the meanings of the 

Vedic and scriptural texts. Then he shall be a devotee of 
Visnu. 


)W vide the Brahma P. Ch. 62 for comparison. Most of the verses (Viz 

fVn heS ;.f aP ‘ erSOfthe NP - “ d *»*». P. are common. S ho" 
ever tells a different episode about the transformation of the sea-water from 
sweetness to saltishness (from v. 23 onwards) 




Uttarabhaga 58.9a-18 


1903 


9a. After attaining the Yoga pertaining to Visnu, he shall 
attain liberation. 

9b-l 1 - The men of good intellect should offer charitable 
gifts on the following occasions—during the eclipses, during the 
transit of the sun (from one house of Zodiac to another), 
and on both tropical and equinotical transits, on the inaugural 
days of the Manvantaras and Yugas, during Vyatlpatas, when 
the days dwindle in length, during the full-moon days in the 
months of Asa<;lha, Karttika and Magha and other auspicious 
Tithis. They then attain thousand times the benefit (as com¬ 
pared with that) derived from other holy centres. 1 

12. If the devotees offer balls of rice to the Pitrs there, 
in accordance with the injunctions, the Pitrs derive everlasting 
satisfaction. 

13-15. Thus, O gentle lady, the benefit of the holy bath 
in the ocean has been recounted by me. So also the benefit of 
the charitable gifts and the offerings of Pirujas has been 
mentioned. 

14. It is the bestower of the benefit of virtue, wealth, 
and liberation. It grants longevity, fame and renown. It yields 
worldly pleasures and liberation (from Samsara) for men. It is 
conducive to wealth. It dispels the effects of evil dreams. It is 
meritorious. It annihilates all sins and bestows all desired 
benefits. It (this knowledge) should not be imparted to an 
atheist, to a knave or to a miser. 

16. As long as the greatness of the Tirtharaja 2 is not 
described by the Brahmanas, other holy centres roar with their 
own respective greatness separately. 

17. Puskara and other Tirthas grant only their own 
respective benefits. But the Tirtharaja, the ocean is the 
bestower of the benefit of all the Tirthas. 

18. Whichever Tirthas, holy rivers and the lakes exist 
on the surface of the earth, they enter the ocean. Hence it has 
verily attained the excellence. 


1. Compare the list of auspicious oceans for Dina JJJg" 
gift) in Mbit. Vana 200. 125, • Laghu Sititapa 145, 150 Vyattp&la is already 

^2* Tirtharaja <The King of all Tirthas’u the ocean (Bay of Bengal 
in this case). This title is explained in w. 18-21. 




1904 


Narada Pur ana 


19. The ocean, the lord of the rivers, is the king of all 
Tirihas. Hence, it is superior to all other Tlrthas. It is the 
bestower of all desires. 

20a.* When the sun rises up, the darkness perishes, (so 
also the sin perishes in a place). 

20b. On the ocean there are ninety-nine crores of 
Tlrthas. Hence whatever is performed there (on the sea¬ 
shore) such as ablution, charitable gift, Homa, Japa and 
worship of the Devas, is declared to be everlasting in the 
Sastras. 

Mohitii enquired : 

21-22. Among all the oceans, how did this lord of rivers 
become briny ? O Preceptor, tell me, since O Brahmana, you 
are omniscient. * 1 

Vasu narrated : 

23. O lady of good fortune, listen. I shall explain the 
saltish state of this ocean and how this had been cursed by his 
mother who was the mother of the worlds. 

24. O Mohini, formerly in the process of creation there 
had been born seven oceans, born of the womb of Radha. 
They had divine physical bodies of various kinds. 

25. Once, the lord of Radha, the lord of cowherds, 
cowherd-lasses and cows was indulging in sexual intercourse 
with his lady love in the Vrndavana forest. 

26. In the middle of the group of Rasa dances, in the 
brilliant-jewelled Manclapa, he was in passionate union with 
his affectionate lady love. 

27-28. Those seven children, the oceans, could not see 
their mother, the mother of the universe, when the time for 


*A ref. to the Brahma P . shows that 20a and 20b in the NP. form parts 
of totally different verses. 20a in the NP becomes complete by the line 
“Similarly all the sins become totally annihilated by a bath in the Tirtha-raja 
(ocean)” 20a in B. M. P. Ch. 62. 

1. The story about the saltish taste of the sea due to the curse of 
Radha as given here in vv. 23-38 has no basis in the Bh. P. or the Vi$nu P. 
This story is not at all complimentary to Radha. 








Uttarabhaga 58.29-39 


1905 


their breast-feeding had arrived. Weeping on being over-whelm¬ 
ed with hunger, they reached the jewelled Mandapa. They 
went near it, eager to have their breast-feed. 

29-30a. All of them were stopped by the groups of 
cowherdesses stationed at the entrance. The angry children 
impatient to have their usual breastfeed forced their entry into 
the Mandapa. Thinking that they were only babies in the 
lap of their mother, the children were let in by the cow¬ 
herdesses. 

30b-32a. Then they went into the jewelled Mandapa 
crying bitterly, “O mother, where are you ?”. O queen, when 
the mother did not respond to the call of those children seeking 
breast-milk, the youngest of them all entered the actual spot of 
the mother’s sexual dalliance. 

32b-34a. On seeing her deluded sons unwittingly causing 
a break in her sexual dalliance, the agitated mother, O gentle 
lady, cursed them—“All of you go ere long to the world of 
earth since you had attempted to cause break in my sexual 
dalliance. After going to the earth, your sons will be staying 
there separately alone.” 

34b-35. O daughter of Brahma, on hearing the worlds of 
their mother, the mother of the universe, all those children 
cried aloud (as they were) extremely frightened of the impending 
separation. Thereafter, Lord Sri Krsna, the destroyer of the 
anguish of those who bow down, became pleased with 
them. 

36-37. “O sons, do not be afraid. I shall stand near you. 
All of vou shall be in the liquid state always with separate 
forms and movements. This youngest son who came well within 
the place shall become briny.” After saying this, the lord of 

the universe dismissed his sons. 

38. In order to console them, he always stood by them. 
He who entered the room of sexual dalliance became the brmy 
sea. The others remained separately as the milk ocean etc. 
assuming liquid form. 

Mohini queried : 

39. O Preceptor, who is this Radha mentioned by you as 
the chaste lady and the mother of the worlds. Explain to m 


1906 


Narada Purana 


the reality about her. I am eager to listen to it. 

40. The description of Radha and Madhava is a my¬ 
sterious secret in the Puranas. Since you factually know every¬ 
thing, O sage of holy rites, narrate it to me. 

Va si ft ha said : 

41. O King Mandhata, on hearing the words of 
MohinI, the magnanimous Vasu, the great devotee of Govinda, 
was visibly moved. 

42. (Being extremely delighted) the hair all over his 
body stood on their ends. His heart was overwhelmed with joy. 
He as it were lost his consciousness with ecstasy. The excellent 
Brahmana spoke to Mohini. 


Vasu said i 1 

43. O gentle lady, listen, I shall tell you the secret of 
secrets. The story of Krsna is to be guarded well. It brings 
about one’s union with the Brahman. 

44. I bow down to the lord who controls both-the 
Prakrti and Purusa, who is the creator of the creators, who is 
the anmhilator of the annihilators. 

D u 45 ' .°, ge ? tIe Iady ’ aI1 the ^carnations are those of the 
Brahman m the form of Kpsna. The incarnator is Krsna himself. 
He is both with and without attributes. 

46. He alone is Rama and Krsna factually, but he is 
separate due to the variety of attributes. The other worlds are 

the Goloka (■•'• Krsija’s wor.d, 
h 11- 47 ' ° ladl ’’ ,hc ,erm - Giva* rays of 

v ?ar “ r l sccrKinment) by * h »* *> 

48. O gentle lady, his refulgence is always without attri¬ 
butes but considered to be the cause of Gunas" The Gurta^are 

of evolution of^uni^ a synt h« is of Sa-i^a and the Purartic concept 
K rW a as the God. “ ° bv -' 0usly * c *eistic Sankhya with 










Uttarabhaga 58.49-59 


1907 


his rays, O gentle lady all of them are the separate manifest 
forms. 

49. The Gunas Rajas, Sattva and Tamas should be 
known as the producers of manifested forms. O splendid 
lady, the Gunas are mere means of knowledge of the purusa 
who is analysed Avyakrta. 

50. They are remembered as his bodies. His Sakti is 
considered to be Prakrti. They say that the Pradhana that 
is Prakrti is of the nature of both cause and effect. 

51-52. They say that the Purusa is the witness, eternal 
and devoid of attributes. Purusa deposited his energy into 
Prakrti. Hence, the Gunas Sattva etc. were evolved. From 
them the great principle (Mahattattva) took its origin. Thanks 
to the will of the Purusa, it became the Ahamkara (Ego) 
analysed into three. 

53. O gentle lady, it divided itself into three, viz. the 
Dravya (Substance), Jnana (Knowledge) and Kriya (Activity). 
Thus the Ahamkara is threefold—Vaikarika, Taijasa and 
Tamasa. 

54-55a. From the Vaikarika, the mind was bom. The 
Devas evolved out of Vaikarika, and also the ten, viz. : The 
quarters, wind, sun, pracetas, Asvins, Brahma, Indra, Upendra 
and Mitra (inclusive of mind). 

55b-56. They say that the sense-organs are evolved out 
of Taijasa. They are the cognitive senses and conative organs. 
The organs of knowledge are the ears, skin, nose, eye and 
tongue. O blessed lady, the organs of activity are the speech, 
hands, penis, feet and rectum. 

57. From the Tamasa Ego sound was evolved and 
from it originated the sky (ether). From ether the touch was 
evolved. O chaste lady, from it was born the wind. 

58.. From the wind, Rupa (colour, form) was evolved 
and from it the Tejas (fiery substance) was born. From Tejas, 
Rasa (taste) was evolved and from it the waters ware born, 
O chaste lady. 

59. From the waters smell got evolved and from smell 

the earth was born. The stability of the mobi e an 
immobile beings is seen dependent on the earth. 


1908 


Narada Purana 


60. In the principles of Akasa etc., the number of 
Gunas (attributes) are one, two, three and four but there are 
five attributes in the earth. Hence, the special feature of the 

earth is spoken. , , 

61 By being urged by parts of Time and Maya, an 
insentient cosmic egg was evolved out of the five great elements 
but it became sentient due to the entry of Puru 5 a into it, 
O chaste lady. 

62. From that egg, the Virat the immense being was 
born. It lay within the waters. Mouths and the other organs 
of the immense being were evolved then. 

63 These limbs were evolved, O beautiful lady, in 
order that he may be able to speak even as he lay in the 
water. From his umbilical region came out a lotus that ha 
the combined brilliant light of a thousand suns. 

64-65a. In it the selfborn lord, the great grandfather of 
the worlds was born. He performed a severe penance. After 
getting permission of the Purusa, the worlds and their 
guardians were created by Brahma, O chaste lady. 

65b-66. From the hips downwards, the seven lower 
worlds and from the upper part the seven upper worlds were 
created. The cosmic egg consisted of these fourteen worlds. In 
it he created all living beings—the mobile and immobile. 

67. Sanaka and the other four sons were born from the 
mind of Brahma; sons like Bhrgu etc. were evolved out of his 
body, O gentle lady, and by these the universe is populated and 
flourished. 





Uttarabhdga 59 . 1-8 


1909 


CHAPTER FIFTYNINE 

Purufoitama Mahatmyam {Contd .) 1 

Vasu continued : 

1. O highly blessed lady ! Now listen to the charac¬ 
teristics of Lord Krsna, Janardana who is unsullied (blemish¬ 
less); and an embodiment of consciousness and of the form of 
refulgence. 

2. That lord is perpetually stationed in Goloka, in 
the midst of luminaries. He is the one without a second), 
supreme Brahman assuming the form that is visible and 
invisible. 

3-4a. In that world there are only cows, cowherds and 
cowherdesses. O MohinI, there is Vrndavana and as before 
mount Govardhana of hundred peaks, the Viraja river and trees 
and birds of various kinds. 

4b-5. O daughter of Brahma, as long as the Prakrti 
remains awake, the lord is visible as stationed in the ‘Goloka.’ 
At the time of dissolution of the universe the cows and others 
are asleep and hence they do not know the great all-pervading 
lord. 

6-7. He is stationed within the multitude of luminaries. 
He assumes a beautiful form and physical body of a youth. He 
is dark-complexioned like a cloud and is clad in yellow silken 
robes. He has two arms and is bedecked in coronet etc. He 
has the flute in his hand. The lord of Kaivalya (salvation) 
occupies the bosom of Radha and shines brilliantly. 

8. Radha is his beloved, more dear to him than his own 
vital airs. He too is propitiated by her. That divine lady has 
golden complexion. She is of the form of consciousness and 
is beyond Prakrti. 

1. This chapter marks a developed stage of Radha-cult. That 
there exists the replica of Vrndavana in the highest spiritual region of Cows, 
( Goloka ) is described by later Vai$navas like Vallabha. The influence 
of Tantra on the Radha-Kr$ria relationship (e-g. the idea of Tuganaddha) 
is obvious. The system of Advaita and Bhakti and the advocacy of 
Anirvacaniyata , (vide vv. 36-38), utmost regards for one’s spiritual preceptors 
as veritable Almighty {livara) and respect for Vaisnavas are some of the 
characteristics of the teaching of the NP. 



1910 


Narada Purina 


9 When they are united in their bodies there is no 
difference between them, as in the case of the white colour and 
milk or as in the case of the element earth and its distin¬ 
guishing quality called ‘smell . 

10 He is the cause of all causes. He cannot be specifi¬ 
cally pointed out. What cannot be properly defined and 
described by even the Vedas cannot be specified by 


11. The form that has been proclaimed as being within 
the luminary bodies is dark and beautiful. Once that form was 
visualised by Siva in the course of his meditation. 

12. Ever since that, O daughter of Brahma, Narada and 
other sages as well as Sanaka and Yogins know that the 
description and account of the Goloka is desirable. 

13. All of them meditate on him in the form that has 
been heard by them but never seen. Even today, the eternal 
lord Siva performs penance to see him directly. 

14-15. But he does not see that form. He meditates 
on it and it is visible in the course of meditation. O gentle 
lady, on one occasion, while they were engaged in their dalli¬ 
ance, the body of Radha and Madhava split into two. The 
body to the left had four arms. The two forms had similar 
features and limbs, similar garments and ornaments. 

16. O chaste lady, similarly, the form of Radha too 
split into two. That form was directly seen by them. Those two 
were also like them. 


17. The beautiful form that had four arms was the be¬ 
loved of Laksmi. That was seen by Siva and many other groups 
of devotees. 


18. O gentle lady, that four-armed form was seen once 
by Brahma. It was revealed to him out of sympathy by the 
lord, on being confused in the work of creation. 

19-20. O daughter of Brahma, it has been described by 
Laksmi to Sanatkumara, O daughter of Brahma, his only form 
has been indicated to Visvaksena for understanding the real 
form, by Narayana. Hence all meditate on it. O queen : the 
description of Goloka as being permeated by Radha and 
Krsna was described by Dharmaputra to Narada. 








Uttarabhaga 59.21-33 


1911 


21-23. O daughter of Brahma, goddess Radha, wor¬ 
shipped by the excellent Devas, out of curiosity assumed the 
form of Siva herself, O fair-faced lady. On seeing this sudden 
surprising feature, Krsna, lord of the chiefs of Yogis, assumed 
the form of the primordial Prakrti as befitting that occasion. 
By his assuming the form of the opposite sex, Vamadeva 
became joyous. 

24-25. One should day and night meditate on lord Hari 
who had assumed the form of Durga. She who is Radha is 
LaksmI, Savitri, Sarasvatl and Ganga. O daughter of Brahma, 
there is no factual difference between them. As a Vidya(iore) 
in the form of Kamadhenu, she abides in these five different 
forms. 

26. He who is Krsna, the lord of Radha is glorified 
as the lord of LaksmI. He alone assumes the form of Brahma. 
He is Dharma and Narayana as well. 

27. Thus the unborn eternal lord has assumed the 
fivefold form. He is in the form of cause and effect. People 
on the surface of the earth meditate on him as such. 

28. Hence, there is the love-relationship. He who is 
the object is Siva. The lord of Radha is the form of Radha, 
which is of the nature of existence, knowledge and happiness. 

29. O blessed lady, the primordial Prakrti originated 
from the brilliance of the luminous lord. It is the goddess in 
the form of Krsna. It is the cause of destruction of the 
Daityas. 

30-31. She was born as Sati, the daughter of Daksa. 
She resorted to Siva, the lord of the Visayas (the Visayin ?). 
On hearing about the insult of her husband, Sati cast off her 
physical body and she was bornagainof Mena, the wife of Him- 
avan. O gentle lady, after performing penance, she, the besto- 
wer of auspiciousness obtained Siva as her consort. 

32. In fact, the Kr?na-cum-Radha [Radha who 
assumed the form of Krsna] were engaged in deluding and 
fascinating Siva. Since Maya in the form of the mother of the 
universe is the lord himself. 

33. That is why, O daughter of Brahma, Skanda is Gana- 
pati; Krsna himself was Ganapati, and Skanda himself became 
Siva. 








1912 Narada Purdna 

34. Some say that Siva is one and has resorted to the 
form of Radha. The region of the chest of Krsna is his (their ?) 
abode. Hence no difference is seen between them. 

35. This has not been decisively arrived at by anyone 
whether Kr$na or Siva. Radha herself is the primordial 
Prakrti. It has not been decided whether this principle under 
these names is single or a couple. 

36. It is not possible to describe specifically what is 
intrinsically indescribable. The assertion regarding Isvara 
(godhead) is a mere distinction, (implying something more 
unexpressed). 

37. O blessed lady, the scriptural texts, and the Vedas 
describe Isvara. That is the product of Prakrti. Surely know 
that it can be specifically mentioned. 

38. O gentle lady, what cannot be specifically described 
is being denied with the expression ‘neti’ (not such). What 
remains after negation is glorified as the overlord by those 
who seek refuge. 

39. O gentle lady, the scriptural text is that which regu¬ 
lates all activities. The individual soul is termed as Karmin 
(one who is engaged in holy rites) and Vibhu (the overlord) 
as a part of Isvara (Godhead) himself. 

40-41 a. The overlord is eternal and beyond Prakrti. O 
auspicious lady, the individual soul is deluded by Maya. The 
individual soul does not know the witness, the supreme soul 
who is complete in himself and is stationed along with the 
individual soul. But the Saksin knows the individual. 

41b-42. The individual souls who seek refuge in the 
ord have their pairs of arms adorned with the conch, discus, 
iron-club and lotus (?) O daughter of Brahma, they should 
C , ° wn *° b e °ftwo types : the Artas (the distressed ones) 
an the Drptas (the haughty ones). The distressed ones are 
tnose who cannot suffer.* 


and causes^thesonr^rt cons ' < * uences or result of an act (which clings to it 
to enter other bodies^. " CnJ ° ymg thetem P or ary freedom from transmigration 








Uttarabhaga 59.43—60.1 


1913 

43-44a. The haughty ones are those who can endure 
rebirths. They are fearless; they are both good and bad people. 
I shall recount to you the Mantra of those persons who have 
sought refuge in MahalaksmI and who have adopted the type 
of Bhakti known as friendship with the deity. They attain the 
status made known by god Brahma. 

44b-45a. (The Mantra): “At the end of the word “Gopl- 
jana” (the group of cowherdesses) one should utter the word 
‘vallabha’ (lover). Then caranam saranam prapadye (i.e. I 
resort to the feet of the lover of the groups of cowherdesses) 

45b-47a. ( lC GopI-jana-vallabha-caranam saranam pra¬ 

padye”). This is the ‘ring’of Mantras of sixteen syllables. 
This was revealed by LaksmI himself to Sanatkumara at the 
outset, and to Sambhu thereafter. O gentle lady, the devotee 
should adopt the status of a friend and think of himself as present 
amidst the group of cowherdesses; and name himself and 
Radhamadhava. 

47b. He should always behave humbly regarding his 
preceptors as Isvara and towards Vaisnavas (devotees of Visnu) 
he must behave with great respect. Towards others he 
must have the feeling of equality. Day and night he must 
think about the masters with the bondage of love. During the 
festive occasions he shall always perform the rites of great 
festivals and pilgrimages. 


CHAPTER SIXTY 


Ablution of Deity 

Vasu said : 

1 • Thereafter, the pilgrim should, O daughter of Brahma,, 
go to the holy centre originating from the sacrificial limb, where 


♦This chapter has most of the verses common to the Brahma P. Chs. 63, 
64, 65. Thus NP 1-18 are common to Ch. 63 of the Brahma P., NP. vv. 
19-37 to Brahma P . Gh. 64 and NP 38-76 (to the end) to Brahma P . Gh. bo. 
The description of Ablution of deities is ho.vever picturesque. 











1914 


Narada Purana 


the splendid and holy lake called Indradyumna—Saras* is 
present. 

2. After going there the pure and learned devotee shall 
perform the rite of Acamana and mentally meditate on Hari. 
After worshipping the lord, he should repeat this Mantra. 

3. “O Tirtha, born of the limb of horse-sacrifice, O 
destroyer of sins, I shall take my holy bath in you. Dispel my 
sins. Obeisance be to you.” 

4-5. After uttering the above-mentioned Mantra and 
having performed ablution and after propitiating gods, sages and 
ancestors and others with water mixed with gingelly seeds and 
observing silence, he should perform the Acamana rite of sipping 
water and offer Pinzas (balls of rice) to Pitrs. After worshipp¬ 
ing Lord Purusottama, one gets the benefit of ten horse- 
sacrifices properly. 

6. He shall uplift seven preceding generations and seven 
subsequent generations and shall go to the world of Visnu like a 
god by means of the aerial chariot that moves about as he 
pleases. 

7. He enjoys great and excellent pleasures there, as long 
as the moon, sun and stars shine. Falling off from that world, 
he comes to this world and subsequently shall certainly attain 
salvation. 


8-9. After performing the pilgrimage to the Panca- 
tirthi and observing fast on the eleventh day in the bright half 
of the month of Jyestha, the devotee should visit Purusottama 
on the fifteenth day (the full-moon day of Jyestha). He shall 
thereby attain the benefit mentioned before. He shall sport 
about in the abode of Acyuta and go to the highest region from 
which lie does not return to Samsara. 


10 11. Whatever places of sacred waters, rivers, lakes 
uskarinls (lotus ponds), tanks, wells, pools, rivers and oceans 
are on the earth, all of them appear in the holy centre of 
urusottama or seven days beginning with the tenth day in 
the bright half of jyestha. They appear there always. 


about a mile andTh^rmandira (or Janakapura) at a distance of 
about a mde and a half from the shrine of Jagannatha. 








Uttaro.bha.ga 6.12-32 


1915 


12. O chaste lady, whatever is performed by men such as 
ablution, charitable gifts visiting the deity etc. at the holy place 
of Purusottama shall be of an everlasting benefit. 

13. O MohinI, the tenth day of the bright half of the 
month of Jyestha dispells, the ten sins. Hence, it is caUed 
Dasahara. 

14. The man who visits the ploughshare-armed Balarama, 
Kr?na and Subhadra on that day shall be liberated from all 
sins. That excellent observer of vows shall go to the world of 
Visnu. 

15. By seeing Govinda Purusottama seated in the swing 
on the full moon day in the month of Phalguna, while observ¬ 
ing self-control, the man shall go to the city of Visnu. 

16-17. When the day ofVisuva (Equinox) arrives, O 
lady of beautiful eyes, the man should visit Samkarsana 
Krsna and Subhadra in accordance with the same injunctions 
as in the case of Pancatlrtha. By visiting these, the man attains 
the rare benefit of the Yajnas. Liberated from all sins he 
goes to the world of Visnu. 

18. He who secs Krsna fully smeared with sandal paste 
the third day in the bright half of the month of Vaisakha, goes 
to the mansion of Acyuta. 

19. When the holy day of MahajyaisthI arrives in view 
of the particular conjunction of the sign of zodiac and the 
constellation, men shall make special effort to go to Purusottama. 

20. By seeing Krsna, Rama and Bhadra (i.e. Subhadra) 
on the MahajyaisthI day, O MohinI, the man shall attain the 
benefit of twelve pilgrimages or even more. 

21-32. The holy centres and sacred rivers mentioned 
below arc not as meritorious as paying a visit to Krsna. 1 They 


1. These verses describe how a visit to Krsna (especially on the 
Full Moon day in the month of Jyestha) is much more benefit-yielding than 
a visit to any oilier sacred place. The list of these verses shows what p aces 
or spots (rivers, mountains, forests, towns etc.) were regarded as o y at 
time of the NP. Though many of these are common to other Furanas as 
well, the similarity in name is sometimes deceptive. For ex ^P c ’ “ ^ a 
according to the Kurma 11-35. 34-35 (also 37.10) is Kanakhala, lf 
mentions Kanakhala separately in this list later on. us \ 





1916 


Narada Pur&na 


are Prayaga, Kuruksetra, Naimisa, Puskara, Gaya, Gangadvara, 
Kubjamra, the confluence of the Ganga and the ocean (the 
mouth of the river Gahga), Kokamukha, Sukara, Mathura, 
Marusthala (the desert of Rajasthan), Salagrama, Vayutli tha, 
Mandara, Sindhusagara, Pirujnraka, Citrakuta, Prabhasa, Kana- 
khala, Sankhoddhara, Dvaraka, Badarikasrama, Lohakuta, 
Asvatlrtha, that dispels all sins, Kardamala, Koti-Tirtha Ama- 
rakantaka, Lolarka, Jambumarga, Somatlrtha Prthudaka (mod. 
Pehoa in Karnal dist), Utpalavartaka, Prthutunga, Kubjaka, 
Ekamraka. Kedara, Kas'I, Viraja, Kalanjaaa, Gokarna (moun¬ 
tains like) Srlsaila, Gandhamadana, Mahendra, Malaya, 
Vindhya, Pariyatra, Himalaya, Sahya, Suktimat, Gomanta, 
Arbuda, (in rivers like) Gahga, Yamuna, Sarasvatl, Gomati, 
the seven Brahmaputras, Godavari, Bliimarathl, Tunga- 
bhadra, Narmada, Tapi, Payosnl, Kaverl, Sipra, Carman- 
vati, Vitasta, Gandrabhaga, Satadru, Bahuda, Rsikulya. 
Marudvrdha, Vipasa Drsadvatl, Sarayu, Nakaganga 
GandakI, MahanadI, KausikI, Karatoya, Trisrota, MadhuvahinI, 
Vaitararu and other rivers not mentioned here. All these 
are not equal to the visit to Kfsna in the matter of yielding 
benefits. 

33. By visiting Krsna on the MahajyaisthI day, a man 
shall obtain that benefit which one gets by taking a holy dip 
and offering charitable gifts when the sun is swallowed by Rahu 
(i.e. when there is solar eclipse) 

34. Hence, by all means, O daughter of Brahma, all 
those who wish to obtain desired benefits shonld put in all 
efforts and go to Purusottama on MahajyaisthI day. 

35. By visiting Rama and Krsna along with Subhadra 
on the MahajyaisthI day, the man goes to the world of Visnu 
after uplifting hundred members of his family. 

36. He shall enjoy excellent pleasures there as long as. 
all the living beings are not dissolved. When the merits are 


assume that by Kubjamra, the NP. means the famous place to the north of 
Hr§ikesa (in the U. P.) the mahatmya of which has been treated in the 
Varaha P. It is noteworthy that the Varaha P. gives separate Mdhdtmyas of 
Kubjamra and Hrsikesa. Hence these two places cannot be identical as 
believed by some. 



Uttarabhaga 60 . 37-50 


1917 


exhausted he comes here and is born as a Brahmana well- 
versed in the four Vedas. 

37. He will be devoted to his own duty. He will be 
quiescent devotee of Krsna. He will be conquering all 
sense-organs. By adopting the Yoga pertaining to Visnu, he 
shall attain salvation. 

38. In the month of Jyestha when the full moon day 
comes in conjunction with the constellation having Indra for 
its deity, the ablution in the ocean is well praised. 

39. There is a well there which becomes identical with 
the Tirthas. It is full of water and pure; so also the Bhogavatl 
(the Ganga of the nether-worlds) manifests itself. 

40-42. Hence, on the JyaisthI day, O MohinI, water 
must be drawn out of it by means of gold or other pots for 
the ablution of Krsna, Rama and Subhadra. A Manca 
(a raised platform) of great splendour should, be erected 
and decorated with flags. It must be firm and of easy access. 
It should be decorated with clothes and flowers. It must be 
adequately extensive. It must be fumigated with incense for 
the purpose of ablution of Rama and Krsna. It must be cover¬ 
ed with a yellow cloth; pearl necklaces should be suspended by 
way of decoration. 

43-44. O chaste lady, to the accompaniment of auspicious 
shouts of victory Krsna, Balarama and Subhadra should 
be installed on the platform. It must be surrounded by thous¬ 
ands of people both men and women as well as all types of 
castes such the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas Sudras and 
others. 

45.. O MohinI, life-long students of Vedas, the house¬ 
holders, ascetics and religious students should bow to Kfsna 
along with Balarama seated on the platform. 

46. O beautiful woman, all the Tlrtlias mentioned before 
bathe there separately; one should bathe there offering sweets 
mixed with flowers. 

47-50. Thereafter, a loud sound like roaring of the 
sea is heard. It is the loud sound of drums, war drums, 
Murajas, trumpets, cymbals, Mrdangas, gongs, and other types 
of instruments, mixed with the sound of bells, auspicious 


1918 


J\ r arada Purana 


shouts of women, charming sound of eulogies, shouts of victory, 
drums, the sounds of flutes and lutes, of the chanting of the 
Vedas by the sages and the sounds of Mantras, holy hymns 
heightened by the singing of Samans. 

51. Rama and Kes'ava should be fanned with chowries 
having jewelled handles red and yellow silken cloths, by cour¬ 
tesans both of dark and fair complexion. 

52-53a. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Sadhyas Maruts, 
the guardians of quarters and others along with the Yaksas, 
Vidyadharas, Siddhas, Devas, Gandharvas and Caranas eulogise 
Purusottama. 

53b-55a. “O lord of the chiefs of the Devas, obeisance 
to you. O excellent ancient Purusa, O lord, the cause of crea¬ 
tion, sustenance and annihilation of the universe, O lord of the 
worlds, O lord of the universe. We shall bow down with devo¬ 
tion to that lord who is the refuge of the three worlds; who is 
favourably disposed to the Brahmanas and who is the cause of 
salvation. The lord who is the bestower of all desired benefits.” 


55b-56. O daughter of Brahma, Devas shall then be 
stationed in the firmament after eulogising, Krsna, Rama of 
great strength and Subhadra. Devas and the Gandharvas 
sing while the divine damsels dance. 

57. The divine drums and musical instruments are 
sounded. Cool breezes blow. The clouds in the sky shower 
flowers. 

58-59a. The sages, Siddhas, Caranas, Sakra and other 
Devas, sages, Pitrs, Prajapatis, Nagas and other heaven-dwellers 
raise shouts of victory. 

59b-72. With the articles of ablution along with other 
auspicious requisites duly consecrated with Mantras, the 
following deities etc. approach Purusottama to bathe him. The 
deities are : Indra and Visnu of great prowess, the sun and the 
moon, Dhatp, Vidhatr, the firegod, the windgod, Pusan, Bhaga, 
Aryama, Tvasfr, Vivasvan, Amsuman, intelligent Rudra, 
along with Asvins, Mitra, Varuna, Rudras 1 , Vasus, Adityas, 


}' ^? c duplication of Rudra, at first in the sg. number and then in 

indifrr!m^^ r r«°r VS To ‘j 1 ® 1 ? Mc T "“P 1 ? the deven Rudras. But it is an 
indiscriminate list for if Rudra in the sg. no. indicates god Siva. Hara is 
enumerated later as if these two are separate gods. 




Uttarabhaga 60.73-76 


1919 


Valakhilyas, the sons of Marici. The Bhrgus, Angiras, 
those who abide by all learning, Pitamaha, Pulastya, 
Pulaha of great penance, Angiras, Kasyapa, Atri, Marici, 
Bhrgu, Hara, Pracetas, Manu, Daksa, seasons, planets, 
luminaries, excellent Brahmanas, rivers in their embodied 
forms, the eternal Devas, the deep pools of great auspi¬ 
ciousness, the different kinds of Tlrthas, earth, heaven, 
quarters, trees, excellent birds, Aditi the mother of the 
Devas, Hri, Sri, Svaha, Sarasvatl, Uma, SacI, Sinlvall, 
Anumati, Kuhu, Raka, Dhisana and other wives of the 
heaven-dwellers, the Himalayas, the most excellent among 
the mountains, the king of serpents, Vamana, Pariyatra, the 
Vindhya-Meru of many peaks, Airavata with its followers, the 
Kalas, Kasthas, months, fortnights, seasons, day, night, years, 
Uccaissravas the most excellent among horses, Vamana the 
king of serpents, Aruna, Garu<Ja, creepers, herbs, lord Dharma, 
Kalayana, Mrtyu, and other attendants of Yama-all these 
come. Since they arc too numerous they have not been 
mentioned fully. Different deities come there for the ablution 
of the lord. 

73. They come equipped with divine requisites, gold pots 
and holy waters of the Divine Sarasvatl. 

74. Staying in the sky, they bathe Krsna along with 
Rama by means of the water of the celestial Ganga and waters 
of the pots in which flowers are mixed. 

75. The divine aerial chariots of the Devas move about 
in the sky. Some fly high, some fly low. They can go as they 
please. Some are stationary. 

76. They are variously decorated with divine jewels. 
Thev are resoited to by the Apsaras. They are rendered 
splendid by means of banners and musical instruments. 


1920 


jVarada Purdna 


CHAPTER SIXTYONE* 

The Fruit of Pilgrimage to Purusottama Kfctra 

Vasu said : 

1. Thus, then O daughter of Brahma, the highly blessed 
o\.es filled with joy eulogise Krsna in the company of Rama 
and Subhadra. 


Devas prayed : 

2. “Hail, Hail to you, O protector of the worlds, be 
victorious, O Padmanabha, O supporter of the earth. Be victo¬ 
rious, be victorious, O primordial Lord, the cause of the 
universe. 

3. Hail, Hail to you O Vasudeva, Be victorious, O 
Sacca ana (one whose feet are auspicious), O Satakarana (one 
whose activities are good). Be victorious, be victorious, O 
divine Fish. Be victorious, O excellent one among the 
Devas. 


4. Victory to you, O Jaladhisayana (one who lies down 
to sleep in the ocean). Hail, Hail to you, O lord of Yogins. Be 
victorious, O redeemer of the Vedas. Be victorious, be victorious 
O Visvamurti (one whose body is the universe); be victorious 
O Cakradhara (O wielder of discus). 

5. Victory, Victory to you, O lord of living beings, be 
victorious, O Srinivasa. Hail, Hail to you, O excellent Yogin. 
Be victorious, be victorious, O Suryanetra (one who has 

the sun as one of his eyes); be victorious O lord Varaha (Divine 
Boar). 


6. Be victorious, be victorious, O enemy of Kaitabha; 
be victorious, be victorious, O excellent one (mentioned 'in or 
known through) the Vedas. Victory, victory to you O Kurma- 

rupa (one who has assumed the form of the divine Tortoise); 

be victorious, O excellent Yajna. 

vicK "'i°“ s ' be victorious O Kamalanabha (one 
wnh the lotus in the umbilicus); Victory to the uplifter of the 


to Ch.*66! IS Chap ' er has many verses common to the 


Brahma P. Ch. 65.48ff. 






Uttarabhaga 61.8-15 


1921 


mountain Govardhana. Be victorious, be victorious, O holder 
of Velocity. 

8. Be victorious, be victorious, O Visvamurti (who are 
the embodiment of the universe); be victorious, O wielder of 
discus. Be victorious, be victorious, O lord of living beings, 
victory to you, O uplifter of the earth. 

9. Be victorious, be victorious, O Sesasayin (you who 
lie on the serpent Sesa) ; be victorious, O yellow-robed one. 
Be victorious O Somakanta (you that shine like the moon). 
Be victorious, O abode of Yoga; be victorious, be victorious. 

10. O Dahanacakra (you whose discus blazes like fire) 
be victorious. Hail, victory to you, O abode ofDharma, be 
victorious, be victorious, O receptacle of attributes. Be vic¬ 
torious, O Srinivasa, be victorious, be victorious. 

11. O Garudasana (you who are seated on Garuda) be 
victorious. Hail to you, O abode of happiness. Be victorious, 
be victorious O lover of Dharma. Victory, victory to you O 
abode of intellect. 

12. Be victorious, be victorious, O Gahanagehanivasa 
(one whose abode is mysterious). Be victorious, be victorious 
O Yogigamya (one who are knowable to the Yogins); Hail to 
you, O abode of sacrifices. 

13. Be victorious, be victorious O Vedavedya (one who 
can be known only through the Vedas) ; be victorious, O Santi- 
kara (O cause of peace and quiescence). Be victorious, be 
victorious, O Yogicintya (you who are to be contemplated by 
the Yogins) be victorious, O Pustikara (cause of Grace or 
nourishment). 

24. Be victorious, be victorious, O embodiment of 
knowledge; be victorious, O mine of good fortune. Be victor¬ 
ious, be victorious, O Bhavavedya (one who can be compre¬ 
hended through devotion); be victorious, be victorious, O cause 
of liberation. 

15. Be victorious, O deity whose body is free from 
impurities; be victorious, be victorious, O abode of Sattvic 
qualities. Hail, Hail to you, O Gunasamuha (you who are 
endowed with a multitude of attributes), Be victorious, be 
victorious O Yajriakara the cause of sacrifice. 


1922 


Narada Purana 


16. Be victorious, be victorious, O deity devoid of 
attributes. Be victorious, be victorious, O cause of liberation. 
Be victorious, be victorious, O Bhuhiranya (you who possess 
lands and gold); be victorious, be victorious, O Kantiyuta who 
are endowed with shining splendour). 

17. Be victorious, O refuge of the worlds. Be victorious, 
be victorious, O lord of LaksmI, Be victorious O lotus-eyed 
one; be victorious, be victorious, O cause of creation. 

18. Hail to you, O Yogayuta (one endowed with Yoga); 
be victorious O Ataslkusuma-Syama-Deha, (one whose body is 
dark-complexioned like the flower of AtasI). Glory, glory to 
you O Samudravistadeha (you whose body has penetrated the 
ocean). Be victorious, O god whose lotus-like body accords 
pleasure unto LaksmI. 

19. Glory, glory to you O Bhaktibhavana (O efficient 
cause of Devotion), O Ioka-geya (one worthy of being sung 
about by the world). Be victorious, O lover of the worlds. Be 
victorious O extremely quiescent one. 

20. Be victorious, be victorious, O the highest essence; 
be victorious, O wielder of the discus; be victorious, O one 
resting on the serpent; be victorious, O blue-robed one. 

21-22. Be victorious, be victorious, O deity with eyes like 
the petals of the lotus, Be victorious, O bestower of the desired 
benefit. Glory to the Deity whose chest is covered with garlands, 
Be victorious, O wielder of discus and iron club. 

23a. Be victorious, O lord of LaksmI, be victorious O 
Visnu; obeisance be to you. 

23b-24. After eulogising thus, Sakra and other Devas 
were delighted in their minds. The Siddhas, Caranas, 
Gandharvas and other heaven-dwellers visited, eulogised and 
made obeisance to Krsna, Rama and Subhadra with their 
mind fully turned towards them. Then they went back to 
their respective residences. 

25-26a. By visiting Krsna seated on the cushioned sofa 
in the company of Halayudha (Balarama), one attains that 
benefit which is derived by making a gift of a hundred cows, 
tawny-coloured variety in the holy centre of Puskara. 








Uttarabhaga 61.26b-41 


1923 


26b-27a. By visiting Krsna seated on the cushioned couch 
a man obtains that benefit which is cited to result from the 
gift of a hundred virgins. 

27b-31 - By visiting Rama and Krsna along with Subhadra 
seated in the cushioned sofa, one obtains the following benefits 
viz. the gift of a hundred gold coins; the gift of lands; the 
gift of cooked rice; hospitability extended to every one; the 
rite of duly discharging the Vrsa (Bull) ; the gift ofwater during 
the summer; the gift of Tiladhenu (replica of cow in gingelly 
seeds); the gift of elephants, horses and chariots; the rite of 
Candrayana; observance of fast for a month; pilgrimage to all 
holy centres and holy rites and religious gifts. Hence a 
man or a woman must visit Purusottama. O Mohini, when duly 
bathed with the water that remains after Krsna has been 
duly bathed, the barren woman, the lady whose progeny is 
dead, unfortunate wretched persons, those who are affected 
by evil planets, those who are possessed by Raksasas and others 
and those who are affected by ailments attain purity imme¬ 
diately. They attain desired benefits. O lady of good lustre, 
they attain other things they desire, if they perform ablutions 
as per injunctions. 

32. All other sacred waters on the earth do not deserve 
even the sixteenth part of the remainder of water after the 
ablution of Kr?na. 

33. Hence the devotee should sprinkle limbs (of his 
body) with the sacred water that is left over after the ablu¬ 
tion of the deity lying down in the waters. It is the sacred 
water that bestows all desired benefits. 

34. There is no doubt about this that those who visit 
Krsna who goes towards the south after ablution, are 
liberated from even the murder of a Brahmana and other sins. 

35. By visiting Krsna facing the south, a man obtains 
that benefit which is mentioned in the scriptures as the result of 
circumambulating the earth three times. 

36. By visiting Krsna proceeding to the south, one 
attains the benefit cited as the result of pilgrimages in the 
whole of the earth. 

37-41. By visiting Krsna proceeding to the south 
one attains that benefit which is derivable from the holy bath 


1924 


Narada Parana 


at Garigadvara, Kubjamra, Kuruksetra during the solar 
eclipse, at Puskara and other sacred waters. Of what avail is 
much talk ? By visiting Subhadra, Balarama and Kesava facing 
the south, one attains the benefit mentioned in the Vedas, scrip¬ 
tures, Puranas, Mahabharata, Samhitas and other works, as 
the fruits of meritorious rites. 

42. Those who see Krsna seated in the chariot along 
with Subhadra and Balarama and proceed to Gunqlica 1 
Mandapa go to the abode of Hari. 

43. By undertaking pilgrimage even once, at the time 
of journey to Gunqlica, at the time of equinox in the month 
of Phalguna, a man goes to the world of Visnu. 

44. It is certain that a man will stay in the world of 
Visnu for as many Kalpas as the number of pilgrimages he 
undertakes to Sripurusottama. 

45. O daughter of Brahma, when twelve pilgrimages 
are completed, the devotee shall perform the rite of installation 
in accordance with the injunctions. It will be destructive of 
sins. 

46. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the month 
of Jvestha, the devotee should go to the sacred waters, pure 
in mind and body. He should perform the rite of Acamana 
therein. 

47. After invoking the holy Tirthas and meditating on 
Narayana, he should take holy bath in the manner indicated 
in the sacred precepts. 

48. After the bath in a decent manner, the devotee 
should perform Tarpana rite for the Devas, sages, and Pitfs 
with the due utterance of their names and Gotras. 

49-50. After coming out of the water he should wear 
two pure clothes and perform the Acamana rite as well as the 
due worship of iihaskara the sun. He should then repeat 
Gayatri, the holy Mantra, the mother of the Vedas, one 
hundred and eight times : and also other Mantras pertaining to 
the sun. He should circumambulate three times and then bow to 
the sun. 


1. Gundica (Gundiva in the BM. P.) is the summer ‘palace’ of 
Jagannatha (Purusottama). It is at a distance of about 1 mile from the 
Jagannatha temple at Puri. 







Uttarabhaga 61.51-63 


1925 


51-53. The procedure for the holy dip and the repetition of 
Japas is, in regard to the three castes, the same as men¬ 
tioned in the Vedas. O fair lady, in regard to the Sudras and 
the women the repetition of the Vedic texts is to be avoided. 
Thereafter, he should, with devotion, go to Sri Purusottama 
installed in the temple. According to the injunctions, he should 
wash his hands and feet and perform the Acamanarite. He should 
bathe the lord with ghee and thereafter with milk. 

54. He should then bathe deity with honey, fragrant 
water and the water from theTirtha mixed with the sandal paste. 
Thereafter, the devotee should clothe the deity with excellent 
pair of clothes. 

55 He should smear deity with sandal paste, agallo- 
chum, camphor and saffron. He should worship Purusottama 
by means of lotuses, with great devotion. 

56-57. After thus worshipping Hari, the lord of the uni¬ 
verse the bestower of worldly pleasures and salvation, the devotee 
should burn incense mixed with agallochum. He should burn 
Guggula (aromatic resin) of the pure variety along with ghee. 
With devotion he should light the lamp with ghee in accordance 
with his capacity. 

58. With great concentration, he should light twelve 
other lamps, O goddess, with cow’s ghee or with gingelly oil. 

59-60. The devotee then offers the following as Naived- 
yas viz ; milk-pudding, friend pie, coiled baked pie, circular 
fried coils, sweet meats, molasses and fruits. After completing 
the worship of Purusottama by means of the fivefold services, 
the devotee should perform hundred and eight times the Japa 
of the Mantra—“Om obeisance to Purusottama”. 

61. Thereafter, he should propitiate the lord by bowing 
down and prostrating before him like a staff. Thereafter, he 
should honour the preceptor with devotion, with flowers, gar¬ 
ments and unguents. 

62-63. O daughter of Brahma, (the preceptor should be 
honoured) since there is no difference between these two (i.e. 
the preceptor and the lord). 

With concentration and purity of mind, the devotee should 
-erect the ceremonial hall (Mantfapa) over the lord. The zone 


1926 


Narada Pur ana 


in front should be brilliant and variegated with flowers. After 
making an emphatic determination at the outset, the devotee 
should keep awake at night. 

64. The learned devotee should cause the discourse on 
Vasudeva conducted and songs sung about him. He should spend 
the night meditating, reading and eulogising the lord. 

65-66a. Then, after the DvadasI has dawned splendidly, 
the devotee should invite twelve Brahmanas who are life-long 
students of the Vedas, who have taken a holy bath after holy rites,, 
are well conversant with the Itihasa and the Puranas, have 
learned the Vedas and have restrained their sense-organs. 

66b-68. After duly completing holy bath, the devotee 
should wear washed cloth and restrain and conquer the sense- 
organs. He should then bathe Purusottama who is stationed 
there, with devotion as before. He shall propitiate the lord of the 
universe with scents, fragrant flowers, presents, offerings of food, 
lamps, many kinds of reverential services, salutations, circum- 
ambulations, Japas, eulogies, prostrations, pleasant songs and 
instrumental music. 

69-70a. Then he should honour the Brahmanas, He 
should give them twelve cows, gold, an umbrella, a pair of 
sandals and bellmetal vessel with devotion. 

70b-73. He should, thereafter, feed the Brahmanas 
with milkpudding at the outset. Afterwards different edibles 
and foodstuffs, cooked rice with jaggery, and sugarcandy shall be 
offered to them. When the Brahmanas are satisfied after the 
meal and have had their rest mentally (and physically), he 
should offer them twelve water pots along with sweets. O 
daughter of Brahma, he should give them monetary gifts too 
according to his capacity. The learned devotee should worship 
them on a par with Visnu by means of gold, clothes, cows, food- 
grains, and other articles. After making obeisance to them, he 
should repeat this Mantra. 

74. (Mantra) “May the omnipresent lord who is the 
master of the universe, who wields conch, discus and iron 
club, may Purusottama, the lord devoid of beginning and 
death, be pleased”. 

75. After uttering this and respectfully circumambulating 






Ultarabhaga 61.76-87 


1927 


the Brahmanas three times, the devotee should bow down his 
head and bid them farewell with the preceptor. 

76-78. He should follow the Brahmanas upto boundary 
line of his village with devotion. After following the Brahma¬ 
nas, he should bow to them once again and return. Having 
returned home, he should silently take food in the company of 
his kins and relatives. By doing thus, the man or the woman 
devotee shall derive the benefit of a thousand horse-sacrifices 
and a hundred Rajasuyas. The excellent man shall uplift a 
hundred previous ancestors. 

79-82. O gentle lady, he will uplift a hundred successors 
as well. He will be assuming the divine unchanging form. He 
will be endowed with all auspicious characteristics. He will be 
bedecked in all ornaments. He will be flourishing with all desir¬ 
es in the mind realized. He will be blessed with good attributes, 
comeliness and youthful age (or longevity). He will be eulogis¬ 
ed by Gandharvas and Apsaras all round. He will be going to 
the world of Visnu by means of an aerial chariot that has the 
brilliance of the sun, which can go as he pleases, is steady, fitted 
with flags and banners and which has the lustre of a hundred 
suns. He will be brightening all the quarters thereby in the 
firmament. He will be devoid of exhaustion. He will become a 
youth of great strength and intelligence. Thus he will go to the 
world of Visnu. 

83. There he enjoys desired pleasures for the period 
of a hundred Kalpas. O gentle lady, he will stay there eulogised 
by excellent sages. He will be devoid of ailments. 

84. O gentle lady, just as the lord of the universe, the 
wielder of the conch, discus and iron club rejoices after assum¬ 
ing the four-armed form, so this devotee will be rejoicing in 
that form. 

85. O chaste lady, after enjoying excellent pleasures there 
and after sporting there for a long time, at the end thereof, 
he goes to the abode of Brahma that yields all desires. 

86. It is the abode that is rendered splendid by the 
Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Devas and Kinnaras. 

87. After enjoying happiness there for the period of 
ninety Kalpas, the man goes to the world of Rudra that best¬ 
ows happiness and that is resorted to by Devas, Siddhas, 



1928 


Narada Purai}a 


Vidyadharas and Yaksas. It is adorned by Daityas and 

Danavas. . , - 

88. After enjoying happiness there for the period of 

eighty Kaipas, the man at the end of that period, goes to 
Goloka equipped with all means of pleasures. 

89-91 It is a place rendered splendid by Devas, Siddhas 
and Apsaras. It is charming. He enjoys desired pleasures there 
for the period of seventy Kaipas. Thereafter, he goes to the ex¬ 
cellent world of Prajapati. Joyously he experiences different 
kinds of happiness there for the period of sixty kaipas. At the 
end of that period, he shall go to Sakra’s abode containing 
different kinds of wonderful features. There the man enjoys 

happiness for the period of fifty Kaipas. He then goes to the 

abode of immortal ones, embellished with aerial chariots. 

92-96. He enjoys rare pleasures there for the period of 
forty Kaipas. Then he goes to the stellar world equipped with 
different kinds of happiness and enjoys there excellent pleasures 
as desired, for the period of thirty Kaipas. O daughter of 
Brahma, from there he goes to the lunar world where stays 
the moon adorned by the Devas. After enjoying rare 
pleasures for the period of twenty Kaipas, he goes over 
to the world of the sun god worshipped by Devas. After 
enjoying splendid pleasures there for the period of ten 
Kaipas, he becomes contented and delighted; thence he goes 
to the abode of Gandharvas that is' very inaccessible. 

97. There he enjoys all kinds of pleasures upto satiety 
for the period of a Kalpa. Then he comes over to the earth and 


is born as a righteous king. 

98. He becomes an emperor of great prowess. He is bedeck¬ 
ed in all attributes. He rules over the kingdom righteously and 
performs Yajnas with liberal monetary gifts. 

99. At the end of that period, he goes to the world of yogin 
that is auspicious and that bestows salvation. As long as all 
living beings are not dissolved, he enjoys excellent pleasures 
there. 


100-101. Coming therefrom he is born in the family of 
Yogins, in an excellent family of devotees of Visnu, difficult of 
access and received with approbation by the good. O chaste 






Uttarabhaga 61.102—62.6 


1929 

lady, he becomes an excellent Brahmana, a master of four 
Vedas, devoted to the performance of Brahmayajna. 

102-103. By adopting Yoga pertaining to Visnu, he 
shall attain liberation..Thus the benefit of the pilgrimage to 
Purusottama has been recounted to you. It yields both worldly 
pleasures and salvation unto men. What else do you wish 
to hear ? 


CHAPTER SIXTYTWO 

The greatness of the most Eminent Tirtha Prayaga 
The Procedure of Pilgrimage 

Vast ff ha Said : 

1-3. O king Mandhata, on hearing this greatness of 
Purusottama (ksetra), that bestows worldly pleasures and salva¬ 
tion, Mohini the daughter of Brahma asked that Brahmana 
Vasu, her own family priest. 

Mohini requested : 

O Brahmana, the very wonderful glory of Purusottama 
ksetra has been heard. Now tell me the greatness of Prayaga 
too, O Brahmana, observer of holy rites. O preceptor, That 
the Tirtha Prayaga is the king of all Tirthas, has been heard 
by me before. 

4-5. Narrate to me its greatness along with the procedure 
of its pilgrimages. What specific formalities be observed by 
men devoted to virtuous, rites in regard to special sacred 
places regarded as highly meritorious and respectable, Tirthas 
in particular. 

6. O king on hearing those words uttered by Mohini, that 
Brahmana recounted to her the traditional account of Prayaga 
with the enunciation of the general ru les of pilgrimage at t e 
outset. 






1930 


Narada Purana 


Vasu said : 

7 Listen, O gentle lady, I shall recount the rules of proce¬ 
dure in undertaking pilgrimages. It is only by observing those 
rules that a man can attain the benefit as mentioned. Going to 
a pilgrimage is meritorious; It surpasses even Yajnas. 

8. A man becomes indigent by not observing fast for 
three days, by not giving gold in gift and by not offering cows 
after visiting holy places. 

9. Even by performing Agnistoma and other Yajnas with 
magnificent monetary gifts, one does not attain that benefit 
which results from undertaking pilgrimages. 

10. Even he who casually visits a holy centre unwitt¬ 
ingly shall attain all desires and flourish. He is honoured in 
the heavently world. 

11. He perpetually obtains a position that is full of wealth 
and food-grains. He shall be full of perfect knowledge and 
prosperity. He shall have pleasures for ever. 

12. The Pitrs (manes) and great-grand-fathers have been 
redeemed from hell by that person whose hands, feet and 
mind are well-controlled. 

13. One who refrains from accepting monetary gifts, one 
who is satisfied with whatever one gets shall attain learning, 
penance, renown and the benefit of pilgrimage. 

14-15A He who is devoid of egotism shall attain the bene¬ 
fit of pilgrimage. A person not conforming to the prescribed 
rules of a ceremony (akalpaka),* a person who does not under¬ 
take elaborate worldly activities, a person of restricted diet, a per¬ 
son who has conquered the sense-organs and one who is liberated 
from all attachments shall reap the benefit of pilgrimage. 

15B-17. Even though a person has committed sins, if he 
frequents sacred places, is self-possessed, faithful and is calm in 
mind, becomes pure by pilgrimage. What then if a man of 
pure rites undertakes it ? The following five persons never reap 
the benefit of a pilgrimage viz.—a person who has no faith, a 
person distressed with sins, an atheist, a person whose doubts 


*This appears to be a misprint as its meaning is inappropriate. 
Probably akalmaja i.e. ‘A person devoid of sin,* may be the original reading. 









Ultarabhaga 62.18-23 1931 

are not cleared and a Hetunistha (a heretic stubbornly clinging 
to arguments). In a holy place the sins of sinners are 
absolved. 

18. The Tlrtha yields the benefits as mentioned above 
in the case of those men whose soul is pure. If a person enters 
the Tlrtha after conquering lust, fury and covetousness, there is 
nothing which is not attained by him through the pilgrimage 
undertaken. Those men who move about holy centres adher¬ 
ing to the rules of procedure laid down (for the performance 
of the pilgrimage to the particular Tirtha) are self-possessed men 
and can bear Dvandvas (mutually clashing opposites), go to 
heaven. 

19. The fishes stay in the sacred rivers like Ganga etc. 
There are flocks of birds in a temple. But since they are devoid 
of devotional emotions, they do not attain any benefit from the 
Tlrtha or the important temple. 

20-2la. Hence, a person of calm and concentrated mind 
shall retain devotional emotion in the lotus-like heart and then 
resort to the Tirthas. A Brahmacarin duly uudertakes that pil¬ 
grimage which is described, undertaken and approved of by 
leading sages. 

2lb-22. He is urged to do it by his preceptor and he has 
full restraint of senses. When all possessions perish, or when 
persons supporting him become very few or when his capacity 
to perform sacrifices comes to an end, a Brahmana should under¬ 
take pilgrimage and roam about the Tirthas, after keeping 
Brahmanas at the head, since the benefit of Yajnas is also said 
to be resulting from Tirthas, by leading sages of pure nature. 

23. <c In regard to a person who is authorised to perform 
Homas and Yajnas, the house itself and all the duties of a house¬ 
holder are excellent. Pilgrimage to holy centres is forbidden by 
ancient authorities in regard to a person who maintains a 
householder’s life thus. Some opine that even all the Tirthas 
put together are not equal to Agnihotra” 1 


1. Purapas do not advise recourse to ^Rnf^P^auoted 

one's duties as a householder vide Kurma P. II. 44.20, a * ’ g^ p 

by Tirtha-Kalpataru P. 9 (v. 23 in the NP. here is the same as in the m. . 
mentioned above). 




1932 


Narada Pur ana 


24. He who wishes to go on a pilgrimage should at the 
outset remain in a house (i.e. be a househol er) wit se ' rest ' 
raint. Staying in the-house, he should maintain purity and be 
non negligent Humble with devotion he should worship god 

Ganesa. ^ ;nte i i;g ent Brahmana pilgrim should propitiate 
Devas Pitrs, Brahmanas and ascetics assiduously and 
in accordance with his affluence. After returning from the 
pilgrimage also he shall again worship Devas, Pitis and 

Brahmanas . 1 , . , 

36 There is not the slight doubt at all in this, that he 

who performs thus shall get the benefit mentioned (in Sastras). 

27. He who wishes to go on pilgrimage should perform 
Sraddha with ghee. It is performed for the welfare during 
pilgrimage. During the return journey too the Sraddha should 


be performed. 

28. When one is-on a pilgrimage to Prayaga, one should 
shave off the hair on the head when father or mother is dead. 2 
No one shall have the hair cut without reason. 

29: If one endeavours to go to Gaya one must assiduously 
perform Sraddha. He must adopt the dress of a pilgrim and 
perform the rite of circumambulation of the .town. 

30. After going to the other village, he should partake 
of the remnants of Sraddha food. 3 Then he shall go ahead every - 
day without taking any monetary gift. 


31-32. At every step one takes to Gaya one gets the 
benefit of a horse-sacrifi ce. 

O lady of good rites, he who rides on a bullock while 
going on a pilgrimage stays in the terrible hell. Indeed, the fury 
of the bull is terrible. From that embodied person his Pitrs da 
not accept water libations. 


1. VV. 24 and 25 are the same as those in ■ Bm. P. . quoted by 
Tirtha-Kalpalaru p. 9. Cf. The Sk. P KiSi 6. 56-57 and the Pd. P. Ultara 237. 
36-38, There is a great similarity (Practically unanimity) in Puranas about 
the procedure to be observed by the pilgrim. 

2. The tonsure is recommended as it was believed that sins resort 
to the roots of the hair, vide v. 50 below. Vide Pd. P. Uttara Khat)da 237. *5,. 
Sk. P. JTd/f.6.65. 

3. Vide Vayu P> 110. 2-3 for similar instructions. 



Uttarabhaga 62.33-42 


1933- 


33. If any person, either because of his affluence or due 
to greed or delusion goes out (on a pilgrimage) in a vehicle* 
his pilgrimage to that sacred place becomes fruitless for him. 
Hence, one should avoid the use of vehicles for pilgrimage. 

34. If a cow (or a bull) is used as a vehicle, it is no 
better than cowslaughter; if a horse is used as a vehicle, the 
pilgrimage becomes fruitless. Ifamanis used as a vehicle, the 
benefit shall be halved; if one undertakes journey on foot, 
the pilgrim has four times the benefit. 

35. If there is heavy downpour or if there is scorching 
sunshine, one should go out with an umbrella; if the path is 
gravelly and thorny, one shall use a staff as a prop; if the devo¬ 
tee is desirous of protecting the body, he should always walk 
about with a shoe on. 

36. After reaching the Tirtha some-how and perform- 
ing the rite of ablution, incidentally one may attain the benefit 
of ablution but not that of the pilgrimage. 

37 He who goes on pilgrimage on another man’s behalf 
attains a sixteenth part of the benefit. He who goes on a 
pilgrimage by force of circumstances derives half the benefit o 


pilgrimage. . . 

38. One shall never test a Brahmana m the Tirthas. 

Manu has said that a suppliant that comes here is worthy of 

being fed. 

39 He must offer Pindas with powdered fried grams, 
Samyava (cake of wheat flour) milk pudding, Badara or Ama- 
laka fruits or an oil cake, O lady of beautiful eyes. 

40 Sraddha must be performed there without invoking 
Pitrs by means of Rk Mantras (as the ancestors are 
already present at holy places). The matert.1 offered tn he 
Sraddha is not to be defiled by being seen by dogs, eras s, 

vultures and sinners. , . rp- .l is conducive 

41-42 The Sraddha offered in Tirtha is conau 

arrival. The Pl rt £ P * n dd Nor should any obstacle be 

There should not be any aeiay. 


put in. 




1934 


Narada Purajia 


43. If the image of any person made out of Kusa grass is 
sunk in the water of the Tlrtha, O lady of large eyes, he derives 
the eighth part of the benefit. 

44. (Mantra) “thou art Kusa grass; Thou art the son of 
Kusa grass. Thou wert made by Brahma formerly. If thou 
takest a holy bath, he whose image is represented by the tying 
of this knot, also performs a holy ablution.” 

45. Excepting Kuruksetra, Visala, Viraja and Gaya the 
general rule in all the Tlrthas lays down shaving of the head 
and observance of a fast. 

46-47. Just as there are many limbs in the body but 
some are very important, so also some Tlrthas are very important. 
Now listen to the reason for the meritorious state of worldly 
Tirthas. It is due to the influence of the Earth, water or fire or 
due to the acceptance for stay by sages that the holiness of 
Tirthas is prescribed in Smrtis. 

48. O gentle lady, if any one, after reaching the Ganga 
does not get his head shaved off, his holy rites shall be other¬ 
wise. He shall be a traitor unto the Tlrtha. 

49. If any one does not get his head shaved off in the 
Bhaskara ksetra i.e. Prayaga, in the Ganga, he shall fall into 
the Raurava hell for the duration of a Kalpa along with a crore 
of the members of his family. 

50. After reaching the Ganga the excellent river, the 
multitudes of sins of the period of a Kalpa stay resorting to the 
tresses of hair. Hence, they must be cast off. 

51. The devotee is honoured in the heavenly world as 
many thousands of years as the number of hairs and nails that 
fall in the waters of the Ganga. 

52. Excepting at Prayaga, nowhere else in the Ganga is 
the rite of tonsure laid down. He who, out of delusion, does it 
otherwise, shall fall into Maharaurava hell. 

53-54. O chaste lady, a person whose father is alive 
shall undergo Ksaura (shaving of the beard) rite after reaching 
the Tlrtha. The knower of procedure shall not shave off 
his moustaches. O goddess, in Gaya and other places it is not 


t 



Uttarabhaga 62 . 55 — 63.5 


1935 


shaving of the beard that is forbidden but only shaving of the 
moustache is forbidden. 

55. Learned men know that the shaving of the mousta¬ 
ches, beard and the hair is Mundana (tonsure). O lady of 
beautiful eyebrows, mere shaving is not tonsure as mentioned by 
those who know the Vedas. 


CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE 

The Greatness of Prayaga ( Concluded.) 


Vasu said : 


1. Listen, O Mohini, I shall recount the glory of Pra¬ 
yaga as approved in the Vedas. By taking the holy bath therein 
in acccordance with the religious injunctions, one becomes 
pure. 

2. Wherever one may have his plunge in the Ganga, it 
is on a par with Kuruksetra. It is ten times more meritorious, 
where it comes into contact with Vindhya (?) 


3 At KasI it flows towards the north. It is hundred 
times more efficacious there. The place where the Ganga 
mingles with the Yamuna, the daughter of the Sun-god, is 
hundred times more effective than atKasi. 

4 When it flows towards the west, it is thousand time 
mnr , meritorious. O gentle lady, the Ganga there dispels the 
Xf Brahmahaty, (murder of a Brahma^) etc. by Us mere 

S 5 The Ganga flowing towards the west and mingling 
with the ^KAlindi"(Yamuna) destroys sins accumulated in 


1936 


jYdrada Purana 


hundreds of Kalpas. O gentle lady, it is very difficult of per¬ 
formance (and very auspicious) in the month of Magha. 

6. Its continuous flow of the braided currents of 
Ganga and Yamuna coming in contact with the Earth, is said 
to be nectar. Even a Muhurta (48 minutes) there in the month 
of Magha is inaccessible even to the Devas. 

7. During the month of Magha, when the sun is in the 
the Makara (Capricorn) sign, O chaste lady, all the Tlrthas 
on the Earth, all meritorious cities, come to the VenI* (water of 
the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna) to take holy dip 
therein. 

8-11. O daughter of Brahma, all these come to the VenI 
to take their holy bath therein, Brahma, Visnu, Mahadeva, 
Rudras, Adityas, Maruts, Gandharvas guardians of the 
quarters, Yaksas, Kinnaras, Guhyakas, all other seers of 
reality equipped with super-human powers (siddhis) like Anima 
(minuteness) etc. BrahmanI, Parvatl, LaksmI, SacI, Medha, 
Aditi, Rati, the wives of Devas, the women of Nagas, famous 
celestial damsels like Ghrtaci, Menaka Rambha, UrvasI, Tilot- 
tama, Apsaras and Pitrs come here for taking bath. 

12-13A. These deities used to come down in their real 
form in Krtayuga, in the Kaliyuga they come down in disguise 
(in invisible form). Due to contact with the sinners, Tlrthas 
become black. They become white in colour once again by their 
holy dip at Prayaga in the month of Magha. 

13B-14. (At the time of bath the following Mantra 
should be recited) “O Govinda, O Acyuta, O Mahadeva, thanks 
to this holy bath of mine, in the month of Magha. when the 
Sun is in the Capricorn, be you the bestower of benefit as 
mentioned in Sastras”. Uttering this Mantra and observing 
silence otherwise, the devotee should take the holy dip. 

15-16. Again he should remember Vasudeva, Hari, 
Kfsna, and Madhava. When the sun is in Capricorn, if men 


*The Tristhali-Setu (p. 8) clarifies that the confluence of the Ganga, 
Yamuna (and Sarasvatl) is called Vefli. 








1937 


Utlarabhaga 63.17-25 


take bath in the house with warm water, its benefit.is earned 
only in the course of sixty years. If bath is taken outside in 
tanks, it yields the benefit in the course of twelve years. 

17. The benefit of bath in a lake is twice that of the 
same in a tank and in the river it is fourfold. In a natural pond, 
it is tenfold and in a big river it is hundredfold,. 

18. In the confluence of two great rivers it is four 
hundred times more meritorious. These merits are increased 
a thousand times when the sun is in the Capricorn. 

19A. When one takes a holy dip in Gahga at Prayaga 
%vhen the sun is in Capricorn, the same as above is reputed 
to be thousand times more meritorious. 

19B-20a. O lady of beautiful eyes, those who take bath 
into the Ganga in the month of Magha, do not fall from the 
abode of Devas for the period of a thousand sets of four Yugas. 

20B-21a. O daughter of Brahma, if in the month of 
Magha it is hundred-times more meritorious, the bath in the 
confluence of the Gahga and Yamuna is thousand-times more 


meritorious. , . , j 

21B-‘ 7 2A. O gentle lady, god Brahma has created tni 

Prayaga for the combustion of the burden due to multitude of 
sins on the Earth. He created Prayaga, out of desire for the 

benefit of his subjects. , . 

22B-23A. In some places, its waters are white and in 
some other places its waters are black. It had been formed), 
created by Brahma for the destruction of animals in the form 


° f Sm 23B-24A. The creator has created that path to the 
world of Brahma viz. the flow of the current that is white and 
black. It has been blended together (lit. closdy s^ung^geAer 
bv the Sarasvati. In the Manasa lake, the month of Magha is 
the bestower of perfect knowledge but not of the benefit o 

SalVat 24B-25. In the holy places on the plateau| of the 

knowers of the Tsvarga). But Magha, the best of all 

Irnhsconto Moksa (liberate from Sahara) a, the forest 
of Badari (Mod. Badri-Narayana) 


1938 


Narada Purina 


26. Bath in the waters of Narmada in the month of 
Magha is glorified as the destroyer of sin$, remover of miseries, 
bestower of desired objects and conferer of stay in the 
region of Rudra. 

27. Ablution in the waters of Sarasvatl (in the month 
of Magha) annihilates multitude of sins and grants many 
pleasures in the world. At Visala 1 the month of Magha is 
described as the river of extensive benefits. 

28. The holy water of the Gahga is a veritable forest 
fire for the fuel of sins. It is destructive of the necessity of 
staying in the womb (i.e. of taking rebirth). The holy waters 
are glorified as conducive to the attainment of the world of 
Visnu and salvation. 

29-30. A man who takes bath in the following rivers 
becomes free from sins and goes to the heavenly world. The 
rivers are Sarayu, Ganqlakl, Sindhu, Candrabhaga, (the 
Chenab), KausikI (Kusi) Tapi, Godavari, Bhlma, Payosni 
(Bain-Ganga), Krsnavenika, (Krsna) Kaveri, Tungabhadra 
and other rivers that flow into the sea. 

31. The bath in the Naimisa in the month of Magha 
yields identity of form with Visnu; that in the Puskara lake 
confers nearness to Brahma and that in Kuruksetra bestows the 
world of Indra. 

32. O gentle lady, in the Devahrada, the month of 
Magha is the bestower of Yogic Siddhis. By taking a holy 
dip in Prabhasa when the Sun is in Capricorn, one shall 
become Rudra’s attendant. 

33. By means of bath in Devika (the lower course of 
Sara>u) during Magha, a man becomes endowed with a 
divine body. O daughter of Brahma, thanks to the holy dip 
in the Gomatl during the month of Magha, one ceases to have 
rebirth. 

34. The Month of Magha is the bestower of the world 
of Rudra, if one stays at the following places viz. Hemakunda 
(or Kailasa), Mahakala (the famous Jyotir-linga at Ujjain) 


1. Visala, the same as Vaisali in the Buddhist period. 
Besatf in Muzaffarpur dist. in Bihar. 


It is mod. 










Uttarabhaga 63.35-42 


1939 


at Ornkara Mandhata, (a Jyotirlinga in the Narmada), Nlla- 
kantha (the Siva Shrine, five miles north of Kathmandu, 
Nepal) and Arbuda (Mt. Abu). 

35. During the period while the Sun is in the sign of 
Capricorn, the waters of rivers are conducive to the at¬ 
tainment of all cher shed desires by performance of ablution in 
them. This should be noted by all clever people. 

36. O daughter of Brahma, only the blessed people 
reach Prayaga during the month of Magha since the water of 
the confluence there which is both white and black is the 
beslower of non-recurrence of births. 

37. Devas stationed in the heaven always do sing 
thus, “the momh of Magha must happen to us at Prayaga 
(i.e. we wish to be in Prayaga in the month of Magha). 
Men who take their holy dip there at that time, do not experi¬ 
ence the pain of being within the womb. They stay in the 
vicinity of Visnu. 

38. O daughter of the four-faced deity, formerly Magha 
and Prayaga were weighed against Tirthas, Vratas, charitable 
gifts, and sacrifices,, in the balance. Of the two, Magha was 
found to be weightier. 

39. Through the holy bath at Prayaga, men attain that 
goal which they attain by more severe penances in which 
they subsist only on air, water or leaves and make the bodies 
emaciated or which had been practised in the course of long 
periods of time. They attain the same goal as is attained by the 
practice of Yogic exercises. 

40. Swarms of bees flapped by the ears of Elephants 
will decorate the portals of houses of those persons who take 
a holy dip in the Tlrtha at Prayaga, the confluence of the 
divine rivers, when the Sun stays in the zodiac of Capricorn 
(i.e. they become rich and own many elephants.) 

'41. Through the holy bath in ir, Prayaga fully bestows 
a benefit equal to that of sacrifice called Rajasuya, after 
destroying all sins sportively. Indeed, how is it that Prayaga 
cannot be described ? 

42. He who takes a holy bath in the confluence of 
Ganga and Yamuna attains merit acquired by masters of the 
four Vedas and habitual speakers of truth. 


1940 


jVdrada Purana 


43. In the confluence, the devotee of praiseworthy holy 
vows should take ablution. He attains a benefit equal to both— 
Rajasuya and Asvamedha (Horse Sacrifice). 

44. The geographical area of Prayaga extends to five 
Yojanas. After the entry within its precincts one gains the 
merit of Horse-sacrifice at every step. 1 

45. O blessed lady, there are three consecrated pools 
and in the middle thereof is the Jahnavl. By entering into 
Prayaga the sin perishes instantaneously. 2 

46. By taking a holy dip in Prayaga for a month and 
remaining restrained in the sense-organs, one is liberated from 
all sins. 

47. By remaining pure in mind and body, by abjuring 
violence and by maintaining faith, he who takes holy bath is 
liberated from all sins. He shall go to the greatest region. 

48-50A. There are many holy centres, spots and shrines 
abiding in Prayaga such as Naimisa, Puskara, Gotirtha, Sindhu- 
sagara, Gaya, Dhenuka, and the confluence of Ganga and 
Sea. There are many sacred mountains. There are ten thousand 
Tirthas and thirty crores of other shrines. These shrines station¬ 
ed in Prayaga flourish day by day. They are enlightening to 
the mind. 

50B-53. There are three Kundas of sacred fire and the 
Ganga flows through the middle of them. It comes out from 
Prayaga. It is regarded as their supreme by all the Tirthas. 
The divine river Yamuna, the daughter of the Sun, is well- 
known in the three worlds. It joins Ganga. It sanctifies the 
worlds. The other holy centres that are between Ganga and 
Yamuna, though remembered as great in the Earth do 
not deserve to be even a sixteenth part of the holy centre 
Prayaga. Vayu (the wind god) says that there are three and a 
half crores of holy shrines. 

54.A They are in heaven, in firmament and in Ganga. 


1. The same as Mt. P. 108. 9-10, Pd. P. I 45,8. 

2. NP. verse 50 below, Mbh. Vana 85. 73, Mt. P. 110 4 also call 
th«e sacred spots as ‘altars of sacrificial fire’ (Agni-Kurfa). The number of 

j'sGlfirnA t ^ Z CD accord ' n 2 to AP. 111-12 but Kurma 
I. 36.28 reads five Paftoa-JCupfam Rtijendra ytjdm madhye tu jdhuwf. 









Uttarabhaga 63.54B-64 


1941 


54B-55. The area of Prayaga extends from Pratist- 
hana* up to the two Nagas—Kambala and Asvatara or upto 
Bhogavatl (the pool of Vasuki.) This should be known as the 
Sacred altar of Prajapati. * 1 Assuming (physical) bodies the Vedas 
and sacrifices are present there. 

56. O chaste lady, sages, ascetics, Devas and Cakra- 
dharas (holders of discus) worship Prajapati by means of 
sacrifices. 

57. O beautiful lady, there is no other holy centre more 
meritorious than it in the three worlds. Thanks to its power, 
it is superior to all other Tlrthas. 

58. By visiting that greatest Tirtha (viz Prayaga), people 
are liberated from all sins like the moon liberated from Rahu. 

59-60A. After going to Prayaga guarded by the Devas, 
a Brahmacarin (a religious student) should stay there for a 
month, performing Tarpana rites unto the Pitrs and the 
Devas. He attains desired benefits. 

60B-61A. If a person even though enveloped with 
hundreds of sins, takes bath in the black and white waters 
of the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna when the Sun 
is in the Capricorn in the month of Magha, he does not stay 
in the womb thereafter (as he is liberated from Samsara there- 
by). 

61B-62A. The Maya pertaining to Visnu is invincible. 
It cannot be shaken off even by the Devas- But, O daughter 
of Brahma, iu the month of Magha, at Prayaga it is burned- 

62B-63A. Those who take their holy dip at Prayaga in 
the month of Magha, enjoy pleasures in the different worlds 
and get dissolved in the discus-bearing lord Visnu thereafter. 

63B-64. Even Citragupta does not adequately know the 
extent of the merit of the person who takes holy dip in the 

* Samadhifthaya in the text is confusing. The Mbh . Vana 85. 76-77 from 
which this is a quotation reads Sa-pratif(hdnam . Hence it is adopted here. 
Pratisfbana is modern Jhusi near Prayaga and marks its eastern boundary. In 
Tristhali-Setu , Pratis^hana is the name of a Kupa (well) that marks the 
eastern boundary. 

1. Quoted from Mbh . Vana 85. 76.77. cf. TheMt. P. 104. 5 Pd. P. 

I. 39. 69-70 for the sacred area of Prayaga. 




1942 


Marada Purina 


Sitasita (i.e. the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna) during the 
»r* „f Magha when ,hs Sun * in Capncom toiamly, 
tho.e who take holy bath in the Sitasita daring the month of 
Magha attain the benefit of a thonsand RfijasOya and a hundred 
Vaiapeya sacrifices. 

65. The sirn accumulated by men in the course of 
their births ever since the beginning of the Kalpa are reduced 
to ashes, if they perform ablution in the Sitasita during e 

month of Magha. . . . 

66-69A. The confluence of Ganga and Yamuna is 

well-known in the worlds. It is called a Kamika Tirtha (i.e. 
a holy centre where desires are realised). Whatever one may 
desire and whoever may desire it, it is realised by means of 
holy bath therein with devotion. If the devotee desires worldly 

pleasures he wiU have them. If the devotee desires a kingdom, 

he will get it. The heaven will be attained by one who desires 
it, and the person who wishes for salvation will attain salvation. 
There are many Tirthas in the three worlds bestowing cherished 

desires. All of them resort to Prayaga when the Sun is in the 

Capricorn. 

69B-70A. By taking holy dip in Haridvara, Prayaga and 
at the confluence of meeting of Ganga and the ocean, the 
devotee shall go to the city of Brahma, Visnu and &iva. 

70B-73A. O lady of beautiful eyes, the bath in the 
Sitasita in the month of Magha prevents the recurrence of 
births for hundreds and crores of Kalpas. A person who is 
truthful in speech, who has conquered anger, who has resorted 
to non-violence of the noblest type, who follows the path of 
virtue, who is conversant with realities, and who is engaged 
in what is beneficial to cows and Brahmanas, shall be 
liberated from sins by taking bath in the confluence of 
Ganga and Yamuna. He attains the cherished desires in full. 

73B-76. In the month of Magha, in the VenI (the con¬ 
fluence of Ganga and Yamuna), every day one shall attain 
that benefit which one attains by means of charitable gifts 
of a thousand Bharas of gold in Kuruksetra during a solar 
eclipse. One who takes holy dip in Prayaga for three days 
in the month of Magha attains that benefit which is derived 
when a hundred thousand cows are given away in charity. One 







Uttarabhaga 63.77-85 


1943 


who takes a holy bath in Prayaga for three days in the month of 
Magha, attains that benefit (merit) which one may get in three 
hundred years by practising Yogic exercises. O chaste lady, 
even by means of a thousand horse-sacrifices, one does not 
attain that benefit which one gets by means of taking a holy 
dip in Prayaga for three days in the month of Magha. 

77. Formerly, Kancana-malini 1 gave a Raksasa, out of 
love, the benefit of taking the holy dip during the month of 
Magha, for three days. That sinner was liberated thereby. 

78. Within three days the sins were dispelled. She 
attained Deva-hood by means of that merit which resulted from 
the holy bath for twentyseven days. 

79. She became the favourite friend of Girija (goddess 
Parvati) and sported about in Kailasa. Thanks to the grace of 
Prayaga, she became one who could remember previous 
births. 

80. Formerly, in the country of Avanti, there was a king 
named Vatsaraja. He went to the banks of the river Narmada 
and performed the Rajasuya sacrifice. 

81. Sixteen horses were used there. They were tied to 
as many golden sacrificial posts where they shone with gold 
ornaments. He too duly appeared refulgent. 

82. He gave heaps of food-grains, comparable to moun¬ 
tains, toBrahmanas. He had full faith. He was a great devotee 
of the deity. He bestowed cows and gold. 

83. At that time there was a foolish Brahmana named 
Bhadraka.He was born of a base family. He worked like a hus¬ 
bandman. His conduct was base and lowly. He was excluded 
from all holy rites. 

84. He was disgusted with the work of ploughing. He 
was deceived by his own kinsmen. Afflicted by his misfortune, 
he went out of his house and wandered here and there. 

85. Fortunately, wisdom dawned in him and he went to 
Prayaga. With MaharaaghI in view (i.e. in the month of 
Magha) he took a holy bath there for three days, 

1. Some episodes about the greatness of Prayaga are given in w. 
77-90. I could not trace these episodes elsewhere and am inclined to regard 
these names as fictitious. 





1944 


Narada Purdna 


86. By the mere ablution, he became sinless. He became 
an excellent Brahmana. Returning from Prayaga c w 

t0 ^ C ^"“nd this Brahmana died 
simultaneously. They wen. simultaneously and tn a sun, ar 

T SeyT^e tri,finance. They hah the same 

of Parijhta flowee, dance, music, everyth,n s was sundae to 
b0 "’f^cT'After seeing this, what else should I say about 

the S r “““ S t ° f U(J ^ th / m0 „,h of Magha in the Sitasita is not 

equal to Rajasuya sacrifice (but is superior) tor. * 

confluence of the white and blue or black waters extends to 
twenty bow lengths.* By taking the holy dip in thisj du ™§ 
month of Magha one does not return to the world. Bu 
after the Rajasuya sacrificeone is likely to return (from heavenly 
pleasures) to Samsara. 

91. Kambala and Asvatara are two serpents lying on the 
extensive banks of the Yumuna.** By taking bath there and 
drinking the water thereof one is liberated from all sms. 

92. After going to that spot of the intelligent Mahadeva 
a man redeems ten previous and ten subsequent generations. 

93-94. There is a well there which is well-known by the 
name of Pratisthana. The devotee should take bath there 
and perform Tarpana rites for Pitps and Devas with full 
mental control. He must conquer anger. He who thus stays 
here for three nights, shall be purified of all sins. He shall 
derive the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. 

95-96. To the north of Pratisthana and to the east of 
Bhagirathi, there is a Tirtha named Hamsapratapana. It 
is well-known in all the worlds. By the mere ablution 


♦This is the VetfKfetra in Prayaga according to Pd . P. Sitasita is also 
called Verii. 

♦♦The reading in Pd. P.I. 43.27 is Yamuna daksive-tafe ‘on the south bant 
of Yamuna’. 




Uttarabhaga 63.97-106 


1945 


therein, the benefit of a horse-sacrifice is derived.. He is 
honoured in the heaven as long as the moon and the sun 
shine. 

97-98. Thereafter, he should go to Bhogavatl, to the 
north of Vasuki that is remembered as the greatest Tirtha 
named Dasasvamedhika. By the rite of ablution therein, the 
devotee derives the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. He becomes 
rich, handsome, and a liberal and virtuous donor. 

99. By going to that place, one attains that benefit 
which a master of the four Vedas obtains, which those who 
speak truth derive, and which one attains as a result of 
nonviolence. 

100. On the northern bank of the Payati (?) and to the 
south of Prayaga, there is the Tirtha named Rnamocanaka. It 
is remembered as the greatest holy centre. 

101. One who spends a night there and takes a holy 
dip therein, is liberated from all indebtedness. He attains the 
heavenly world. He becomes immortal himself. 

102. He who takes bath and misses three meals and 
continues like this for three months, is purified of sins of 
betrayal of confidence. (Within three months, he becomes 
pure). 

103. By glorifying the holy centre, the devotee 
obtains merit, by visiting it he sees auspicious things, by 
plunging in and drinking its waters, he sanctifies upto the 
seventh generation. 

104. When the sun is in Capricorn, during the month 
of Magha, if one does not take bath before the sunrise how 
can one be liberated from sins ? How can one go to heaven ? 

105. One shall shave off one’s head at Prayaga, one 
shall offer Pindas into the Ganga. One shall give charitable 
gifts at Kuruksetra, one shall eschew body at Varanasi. 

106. If one has shaved off the head at Prayaga of what 
avail is offerings of Pinzas at Gaya, 1 or death at Kasi or the. 
giving of charitable gifts at Kuruksetra ? 

1 This is a misprint for ‘Gaya* as can be seen from the quotation of this 
verse in Tirtha-cintama*i, p. 32 and elsewhere. For offering Pi*das at Gaya is 
unanimously recommended. 




1946 


N&rada Purana 


107. If the year is not over after a pilgrimage and the 
shortage is upto two months, the pilgrim shall assiduously 
perform the rites of tonsure and observance of fast again. 

108. In regard to all the women who go to Prayaga, 
the rite of tonsure shall be performed thus. All the hairs are 
collected together and two Angulas at the tip are cut off. 1 

109. All the sins of persons cling to the roots of hairs 
and stay there even after the holy dip in the TIrtha. Hence they 
must be shaved off. 

110-111 A. (?) If the new moon day, Sravana constel¬ 
lation and Arkapata (the fall of the Sun ? sunset ?) coincide in 
the month of Pausa or Magha it should be known as Ardhodaya 
Parva. It is superior to a hundred solar festive occasions. 

O daughter of Brahma, if it is slightly less (in these 
respects), it is remembered as Mahodaya Parva. 

111B-112. If one is able to be at Prayaga at the time of 
dawn on the seventh day in the bright half of the month of 
Magha, it is on a par with a thousand solar eclipses. If (one 
is at Prayaga) during the tropical transit of the sun, the merit 
is a crore times more. During the equinoxes the merit is a 
hundred thousand times more. 

113. During the Sadasiti* (meritorious hour) the 
benefit is a thousand times more. So also in the case of 
Visnupadi** (meritorious hour). One shall give charitable 
gifts at Prayaga in accordance with the extent of one’s 
resources. 

114-117. O daughter of Brahma, thereby the benefit 
from the TIrtha increases. If any one wishes to offer a cow at 
the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna, he must offer as 
Pratigraha (gift) a gold piece, a jewel or a pearl. O auspicious 


1. This is called Vepi-dana, Even women whose husbands are alive 
offer the tresses of their hair measuring two Angulas, to the confluence of 
Ganga and Yamuna (called Vepi ). 

♦The sun’s entrance into the four signs viz. Pisces, Gemini, Virgo and 
Sagittarius. 

♦♦The sun’s passage into the zodiacal signs of Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and 
Aquarius. 




Utiarabhaga 63.118-129A 


1947 


lady, if any one wishes to give a reddish, brown or a tawny 
coloured cow, he must cover its horns with gold, the hoofs 
with silver and the neck with a cloth. It must be a milch cow 
with a calf. It must be given to a Vedic Scholar in accordance 
with the injunctions. He must be a good-mannered person 
wearing white clothes, quiescent, knower of Dharma and a 
master of the Vedas. That cow must be given at the confluence 
of Ganga and Yamuna. 

118-120. Costly clothes and different kinds of jewels (too 
must be given). The devotee if honoured in the heavenly 
world as many thousand years as there are hairpores in the 
bodies of the cow and the calf. The cow too is born there 
where the donor takes his rebirth. Thanks to that rite, the 
donors do not see hell. They reach the northern Kurus and 
rejoice for long periods of time. 

121. It is better to give a milch cow than hundreds and 
thousands of dry cows. That cow alone will redeem the wife, 
sons and servants of the donor. 

122-123A. Hence among all charitable gifts, the gift of 
a cow is specially praiseworthy. It is the cow alone that protects 
one in impassable, dangerous, terrible transmission of great 
sins. Hence the cow should be given as a gift to an excellent 
Brahmana. 

123B-125A. One shall not accept monetary gifts in 
Tirthas and holy shrines. As long as that amount (in case he 
has accepted) remains with him and he benefits by it, the holy 
centre is of no avail to him. When there are special indi¬ 
cations and portents, the Brahmana shall guard himself 
against mistakes in his own activities and in those pertaining 
to the Pitrs (Such as Sraddha) as well as in the worship of the 
deities. 

125B-126. He who makes a gift of a virgin (i e. gives 
her in marriage) on the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna 
does not see the terrible hell, thanks to that rite. He goes 
to the northern Kurus and rejoices for long endless periods 

of time. 

12 7-129A. He obtains wives and righteous sons endowed 
with handsome features. 


1948 


Narada Puratfa 


(Special austerities). A man who stands topsy-turvy with 
outstretched arms and inhales smoke from below is honoured 
in the heavenly world for a hundred thousand years. Falling 
from the heavenly abode, the man becomes an Agmhotrm. 
After enjoying extensive pleasures, he attains that same holy 

centre once again. 

129B-130. (This holy sacred place and sphere ot rra- 
japati has the following boundaries :) Prayaga* extends from 
Pratisthana up to the deep pool of Vasuki in front of Prajapati 
and up to the two Nagas Kambala and Asvatara and the 
Naga Bahumulaka. This is known in the three worlds as the 


sacred spot of Prajapati. 

131. By taking the holy bath there, people go to 
heaven. Those who are dead there are not reborn. Not only 
through the words of the Vedas but through the popular saying 
this is justified. 

132. The soul goes up in its flight as a result of the 
death in Prayaga. There are ten thousand Tirthas and another 
sixty crores. 


133-134A. O daughter of Brahma, their presence at 
that place is glorified. He who abandons his life at the con¬ 
fluence of Ganga and Yamuna attains the goal which a 
practising Yogin who is intelligent and who traverses the path 
of the good, attains. 


134B-136. A man may be oppressed, afflicted, indigent or 
furious. But if he eschews life after reaching the confluence 
of Ganga and Yamuna, he rejoices in the heaven in the midst 
of Gandharvas and Apsaras. He goes there on aerial chariots 
having the lustre and colour of molten gold and the refulgence 
of the Sun. He attains all cherished desires, so say the 
leading sages. 

137. From slumber he is wakened by means of songs and 
sounds of musical instruments. He is honoured in heaven as 
long as he does not remember about the birth. 


*Praydgat —in the text means ‘from Prayaga*. If emended as 
d-Praydgam as found in the same verses in the Mi . P. 104.5 and Pd. P. 1.39 
69-70 it gives better sense. The reading in Mt. P. is accepted in the above 
translation. 



1949 


Uttarabh&ga 63.138-149 


138. When his Karmans are exhausted and he falls 
from heaven, he comes back (to the world of human beings) 
and is born in a family that is rich and flourishing and that is 
full of gold and jewels. 

139-141. Remembering the same thing he goes to the 
world of Visnu. He who abandons life after reaching the 
root of the (‘Eterpal’) banyan tree goes beyond all the 
worlds to the world of Rudra. The twelve Adityas (Suns) 
shine there resorting to Rudra. The entire universe comes 
out (?). He burns at the root of the banyan tree* (?). O gentle 
lady, lord Hari honoured and kept in front by Prajapati lies 
down on its leaf in the form of an infant child sucking the 
big toe. 


142-144A. Listen to the benefit attained by the person 
who abandons his life in the beautiful bank of the river 
Urvasi (UrvaS-pulina) which is large and whitened like 
swans (due to the presence of flocks of Swans. O daughter of 
Brahma, for sixtysix thousand years he shall stay in the 
heavenly world along with his Pitrs. 

144B-146. O lady of beautiful eyes, when he sees Urvasi 
in the divine world, he is honoured continuously by the Devas, 
sages, Gandharvas and Kinnaras. Thereafter, when the 
Karmans are exhausted and he falls from the heaven e 
comes here (on the Earth). He obtains a hundred beloved 
wives like Urvasi. He shall be the husband of many thousands 
of women amidst whom he sports. 


147 O MohinI, he shall be the enjoyer and adminis¬ 
trator of ten thousand villages. He is wakened from his sleep 

(every day) by the sounds of girdles and anklets. 

148-149 After enjoying extensive pleasures, he attains 
the same Tirtha once again. Perpetually wearing white clothes 

.The text in NP : nirgocchanti jagal sarvam va,a-miilc sa donate / translated 
I he text We should rather accept the reading vctamidam 

above ,s not satisfac y. ^ ^ ^ raean3 (although at die end of 
na dahyate / gwen • » burn down the whole universe the 

»«•*>* - ~ 



1950 


Narada Purana 


and invariably subjugating the sense-organs, he takes only one 
meal a day. By continuing thus for a month he becomes the 
lord of Yoga. He obtains a hundred women bedecked in 
gold. 

150-151A. He will be the master of great pleasures 
over the Earth extending up in the oceans. He shall be 
endowed with wealth and food-grains. He will be a donor 
continuously. 

After enjoying extensive pleasures, he remembers that 
Tirtha once again. 

151b-153a. He who abandons life after reaching the 
holy place called ‘Kotitlrtha’ is honoured in the heavenly 
world for a thousand crores of years. Thereafter, when the 
Karmans are exhausted, the excellent man comes here from 
heaven and is born in a family that is highly praiseworthy and 
endowed with gold, jewels and pearls. He is born a handsome 
person. 

153b-154. Willingly or unwillingly he who dies in 
Ganga, attains the abode of Sakra. He never goes to hell. He 
rides in an aerial chariot to which swans and Sarasa birds 
are yoked* 

155-156a. He sleeps in the midst of Apsaras and is 
wakened by them- O daughter of Baahma when the karmans 
are exhausted, he comes here from heaven. He chooses his 
birth in the family of Yogins and prosperous peoples. 

156b-159a. A person who is not short of any limb, who 
is free from ailments and who has all the five sense-organs 
functioning perfectly shall immolate himself in the fire of dried 
cowdung cakes at the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna. 
He is honoured in the heavenly world for as many thousands of 
years as there are pores of hairs in the body of that intelligent 
devotee. Falling from heaven thereafter he becomes the lord 
of Jambudvlpa. After enjoying extensively many pleasures he 
attains the same Tirtha once again. 

159b-l 61. He who chops off his own body and gives it to 
birds, is honoured in the Somaloka (world of the moon) for a 
hundred thousand years. Thereafter, he comes here from that 
world and becomes a righteous king endowed with all good 




Uttarabhaga 63.162-174 


1951 


qualities, comely features and learning. He speaks pleasing words 
and he remains pure. After enjoying extensive pleasures, he 
goes again to the same Tirtha. 

162-163. A person who has adopted holy observance 
Anasaka (non destructive) and who dies anywhere in the 
area of Prayaga which extends to five Yojanas, redeems seven 
previous generations and fourteen subsequent generations. He 
uplifts himself. 

164-166. There is a Tirtha well-known as Agnitirtha 
on the southern bank of Yamuna. On the Western bank is 
the Tirtha of Dharmaraja known as Naraka. 

165. By taking holy bath therein people go to heaven. 
Those who die there are not reborn. On the northern bank 
of Yamuna, there are many Tirthas that destroy sins, O 
daughter of Brahma. They are resorted to by prominent 
sages. Those who take holy dip there go to heaven. Those 
who die there are not reborn. 

167. Ganga and Yamuna are remembered as yielding 
similar fruits. Only because of its seniority, Ganga is worshipp¬ 
ed everywhere* 

168-169a. O lady of Devas, Yogic power may or may 
not be attained by one who gives all jewels to the Brahmanas. 
But surely all these befall a person who dies at Prayaga. 

169b-172. One may be in one’s own land, or in a forest, 
or in a foreign country or in his house. If he dies remembering 
Prayaga, he attains the world of Brahma where the ground is 
golden. There are trees that yield all cherished desires, as 
their fruit. There are sages there. He sports about along with 
Siddhas and Gandharvas in the auspicious and beautiful bank 
of Mandakini (Ganga). He is worshipped by Devas. There¬ 
after, he comes here and becomes the lord of Jambudvipa. 

173-174. He is a righteous soul and is fully endowed 

with all good qualities. He attains the same holy Tirtha once 

again. Thus the entire greatness of Prayaga has been described 
to you. It is conducive to happiness and salvation. What other 
essence do you wish to hear ? 



1952 


N&rada Purana 


I 


CHAPTER SEXTYFOUR 

The greatness of Kuruksetra 1 . 

Mohini said : 

1. O merciful Vasu, O knower of virtue, the greatness 
of Prayaga, the king of Tirthas, has been narrated to me by 
you who are deeply erudite. 

2. Now recount full details of the splendid Kuru- 
ksetra which is the most auspicious of all important Tirthas 
and which sanctifies all the worlds. 

Vasu said : 

3. Listen, O Mohini, I shall narrate to you the details 
of Kuruksetra which bestows great merits. By going there and 
taking the holy dip, a man is liberated from all sins. 

4. There are many holy centres there resorted to by 
the leading sages. They bestow salvation to those who listen. 
I shall recount them to you. 

5. Liberation is of four types : Viz : knowledge of the 
Brahman, Sraddha at Gaya, death while defending cattle and 
residence at Kuruksetra. 

6. They call the land between the two divine rivers 
Sarasvatl and Drsadvatl ‘Brahmavarta’, a land resorted to by 
the Devas. 2 

7. He who continuously says thus :— “Although I stay 
far off, I will go to Kuruksetra and stay there”, is liberated 
from all sins. 3 


1. Kuruksetra or the land of Kurus is a very sacred region. Since 
Vedic times, it was the cradle of Aryan civilisation. As recorded in the 
opening verse of the BG., Kuruksetra was originally a dharma-kfetra as gods, 
sages and kings have performed sacrifices in the area on the banks of 
Sarasvatl. Its area is much wider than the place now called Kuruksetra as 
it includes Thaneswar, Sonepat, Amin, Asthipur etc. De, p. 110. 

2. Mbh. Vana 83. 3, 204-205 records that the land between the 
Sarasvatl and the Dfsad-vati is Kuruksetra. Manu II. 17 calls this tract 
Brahmavarta. 

3. A verbatim echo of ihe sentiment expressed in Mbh. Vana 83. 


1 - 2 . 









1953 


Uttarabhaga 64.8-14 

8 There is no doubt about this that the knowledge of 
the self-possessed learned person who stays on the banks of the 
Sarasvati will be full of Brahman. 

9. O gentle lady, the deities, sages and Siddhas 
resort to Kurujangala 1 (the forest in Kuruksetra). By resorting 
to that place, one realises Brahman in his Atman. 

Mohini said : 

10. O excellent Brahmana, how is Kuruksetra superior 
to all other Tirthas ? Recount it in detail to me. I have sought 
refuge in you. 


Vasu said : 

11. O splendid lady, listen. I shall recount to you the 
details of Kuruksetra that yields great benefit. I shall tell 
you how it has become one that burns the sins of men and is a 
favourite of Brahma. 

12. At that holy spot, the meritorious Brahmasaras 
(the lake of Brahma) came into being at the outset. Then 
the Ramahrada (deep pool of Parasurama) came into bem a 
and thereafter Kuruksetra (the land ploughed by King Kuru.) 

13. The lake nearby was created by Brahma formerly. 
Moreover, the altar of Brahma is in between the quarters. 

14. O Mohini, penance was performed here by Brahma 
who was desirous of creation (of the universe). Penance 
was performed by the discus-bearing Hari also who was des.rous 
of sustaining the worlds. 


1. Vamana P. 22.47 regards 
Drsadvati as Kurujangala. Formerly. 


the region between Sarasvati and 
. v _ r _ must have been some forests 
Drsadvati as Kurujangala. formerly, *e g+ _ 4g idcntifies Kuru- 

in Kuruksetra but now no jungle is there. • 
ksetra and Kurujangala with Hastinapura as its capi 

2. V 5 „„, P. 22.59.60 con*™ 

was called the Vedl (sacrificial altar) of known ^ Ramahrada (or 

filled five pools with blood of K satiny as, i ^ Jon 0 f Samvarana 

Syamanta or Samanta Paiicaka); lastly when g * ^ roun d it 

ploughed this land with a golden * 

came to be known as Kuruksetra ‘The farm-land of Kuru. 














1954 


JVarada Pur ana 


15A Thanks to the entry into the lake, Sthanutva 
(the state of being steady like a pillar) was attained by Sambhu 

15B-17A. O beautiful woman, Parasurama was enraged 
because his father had been slain. (By way of revenge) he 
killed the Ksatriyas unfavourable to Brahmanas. Pools 
of blood were made by him. He performed the rite of Tarpana 
to the Pitrs with that blood and performed a penance there. 
Thereafter, it became famous as Ramatirtha. 1 It became 
destructive of sins. 

17B-18. In the place where sage Markanqieya performed 
a great penance, the river Sarasvati originating from the 
Plaksa tree flowed. The river was welcomed, honoured and 
eulogised by the righteous sage. 

19-20. The river flooded the lake nearby and flowed 
to the West. The place all around extending to five 
Yojanas was ploughed by Kuru as cultivable land. 2 The area 
upto Syamantapancaka is cited as Kuruksetra. It is the 
source of (qualities like) mercy, truthfulness and forgiveness. 

21. O gentle lady, men who take holy dip here obtain 
everlasting merit. Those who die here ride in an aerial 
chariot and go to the world of Brahma. 

22. No doubt need be entertained in this respect that 
observance of fast, charitable gifts, Homa, Japa and worship 
of the lord in this place attain everlasting benefit. 

23-24. Those who die at Brahmavedi (the pulpit or 
altar of Brahma) in Kuruksetra are not reborn. Planets, stars 


I. Ramahrada is a lake at a distance of one mile from Kuruksetra 
station. Its area is 3546 ft. (length) X 1900 (breadth).' It was originally 
known as Brahmasaras as god Brahma performed penance on its bank. 
Parasurama performed the Tarpa\xa of his Pitrs here and hence it is called 
Ramahrada. De (P. 166) is wrong in identifying Dvaipayanahrada with it as 
that lake (also known as Paras'ara) is at a distance of 20 miles from 
Thanesar. 

2. That the extent of Kuruksetra is five Yojanas in radius is con¬ 
firmed in xheMbh. Vana 129-22 and Vdmana P . 22.15-16. Sya (Sa-) manta- 
pancaka or Ramahrada forms the boundary of Kuruksetra. This specific 
area was advised as proper for the battlefield by Balarama (Mbh . Salya 
55. 5-18). 








Uttarabhaga 64.25-32 


1955 


and other luminaries have the fear of falling off after some 
time, but there is no fall in regard to those who die in Kuru- 
ksetra. Hence, even Devas, sages, Siddhas and Gandharvas 
are eager to resort to that lake. 

25-26. The holy spot is called Rantuka. O auspicious 
lady, the following guards were settled here by Visnu for 
protecting the holy centre. They are :— Sucandra, Yaksa, 
Raksasa, Surya, Vasuki, Sukesin and Vidyadhara, Sambu- 
karnaka. 

27. With their servants whose number goes upto eight 
thousand and who bear bows and arrows, they protect Kuru- 
ksetra and prevent sinners. 

28. After reaching Rantuka, 1 the devotee should crave 
forgiveness again and again. He should take a holy dip in 
Sarasvati, visit Yaksa Rantuka and bow to him. After offering 
flowers, incense and Naivedya, he should utter the following : 

29-30A. “O leading Yaksa, it is thanks to your favour 
that I could wander over forests, rivers and Tirthas. Let 
there be no obstacle therein. Obeisance to you”. 

30B. After craving forgiveness and propitiating the 
leading Yaksa thus, the devotee shall start on his pilgrimage. 

31-32. O MohinI, there is no shortage or deficiency in 
this world or in the other world in regard to that person who 
makes a pilgrimage to the forests, Tirthas and rivers of Kuru- 
ksetra. The pilgrimage yields merits. 


1. Rantuka is probably (as opined by » 

Report for India- II. P. 215) Ratan Ja^situated a 

comer of Kuruksetra, four miles to the eas 


Arch. Survey 
the north-cast 






1956 


CHAPTER SIXTYFIYE 

Pilgrimage to Kuruksetra 


Narada Purana 


Mohini said :— 

1. o leading Brahmana, what are the forests there ? 
What are the splendid rivers ? Kindly recount to me the pil¬ 
grimage that bestows Siddhi. 

2. Mention to me the Tirthas that are present in 
Kuruksetra that yields merit, since you are my preceptor 
and bestower of salvation. 

Vasu said :— 

3. O Mohini, listen. I shall recount to you the rules of 
procedure for undertaking the pilgrimage of Kuruksetra. It 
bestows merit. By undertaking the pilgrimage, the devotee 
attains excellent salvation. 

4-7. In the middle of Kuruksetra there are seven holy 
forests. 1 I shall mention their names as they are bestowers 
of merit on men : 1) the Kamyakavana is meritorious. 
2) the Aditivana is very big. 3) Vyasa’s forest is sacred. 4) 
So also is Phalaklvana. 5) The Suryavana is holy. 6) Madhu- 
vana is equally meritorious. 7) Sltavana is famous and is 
destructive of sins. Thus there are seven forests here. There 
are many Tirthas. The river Sarasvatl is holy. So also is the 
river Vaitarani. Ganga, MandakinI (flowing slowly) is also 
meritorious. 

8-9. Another river is Madhusrava. Drsadvatl, KausikI 
and Hairanvatl are also sacred. 2 Excepting Sarasvatl all 
these rivers are flooded during the rainy season. The waters 
of these rivers are holy for touching, drinking and plunging. 


1. The Vdmana P. 34-37 confirms the list of seven forests in Kuru¬ 
ksetra as given by NP. here. But today there is no trace of a single forest, 
though the names of some villages (e. g. Kamodd for Kdmyakavana, Pharal for 
Phalaki-vana) are popularly believed to be the sites of those forests. 

2. The Vdmana P . 39.6-8 confirms this list of so-called rivers. 
Today even the great Sarasvatl of Vedic and Pur&ijic fame has a bare exis¬ 
tence. V. 10a below euphemistically suggests that these rivers were dry even 
in the days of the N&rada Pur&na. 



Uttarabhaga 65.10a-18 


1957 


10A. These rivers are not frothy and foaming in view of 
the greatness of the sacred holy centre. 

1 OB-11 A- The devotee should first go toRantukaand 
pay respects to that Yaksa, the extremely powerful gatekeeper. 
Only then the pilgrim should begin his pilgrimage. 

11B-13A. Thereafter, O auspicious lady, the man 
should go to the holy Aditivana. 1 It was here that a great 
penance was duly performed by Aditi for obtaining sons. By 
taking holy dip and worshipping Aditi, the mother of the 
Devas, the lady-devotee gives birth to a great and heroic son 
endowed with all auspicious characteristic features. 


13B-16A. Thereafter, O fair lady, the pilgrim should go 
to the excellent spot of Visnu that is famous by the name of 
Vimala. 2 * 4 Lord Hari is present here. By taking holy dip in 
Vimala and by visiting lord of Vimala the devotee should be¬ 
come (free from impurities). He shall attain the world 
of discus-bearing lord of the Devas. O Mohini, there is no 
doubt about this that by visiting Hari and Baladeva occupying 
one and the same seat, the devotee shall immediately be liberated 

from sins. , 

lfift-17. Thereafter, the devotee should go to the Tirtha 



2. Now-a-days 
and is regarded as 

at the time of the, NP 
identical. 


1. Now there is 
the village Amin wl 
miles from Kuruksetra 



4. This is a diff 

in Gaya-mahatmya. Il 

VmP. 34.18 and the same confluence is 


3. Mentioned 
83.12 and in VmP. (Vi 



confluence is implied here. 



„ „ Narada Parana 

1958 

O splendid lady, the man attains union with his beloved 

° nCS 19. Thereafter, the man endowed with forbearance 
should go to the Prthivitirtha and devoutly take holy dip. 
Thereby, O blessed lady, he attains excellent salvation. 

20. The goddess (Earth) forgives the offences com¬ 
mitted by a man on the Earth, if that embodied soul takes his 

holy dip there. . . 

21. By visiting Siva, the lord of Daksa in the loly 

hermitage Daksasrama, the man obtains the benefit of a horse- 

sacrifice. m 

22. Thereafter, the devotee shall go to Salakinl. After 

taking a holy dip there, he should worship Hari in communion 
with Hara, for achieving the desired object. 

23. The devotee who knows rules of procedure 
should go to Nagatlrtha and take holy dip there. By taking 
in ghee and curds thereafter, he shall attain freedom from the 
fear of serpents. 

24. Thereafter, he should return in the evening to the 
shrine of Rantuka. Staying there for a night, the devotee 
should worship the getekeeper on the next day. 

25. The next day he should worship a Brahmana receiving 
him with scents and other articles of service and then feed him. 
Thereafter, he should go to the Tirtha, Pancanada, well known 
in the three worlds. 

26-27A. It was here that Siva gave out five loud shouts 
that terrified the Asuras. Hence, the holy centre is famous by the 
name Pancanada. It is destructive of all sins. By taking a 
holy dip there and making charitable gifts, the man becomes 
fearless. 

27B-29A. Thereafter, he should go to Kotitirtha, O 
Mohini, where a crore of Tirtha were brought as installed by 
Rudra the Great Atman. By taking the holy dip in that Tirtha 
and by visiting Hara, Kotisvara (the lord of crores) the devotee 
shall attain the merit originating from five Yajnas ever since 
that day. 

29B-30A. It was here alone that lord Vamana was install¬ 
ed by all Devas. 





Uttarabhaga 65.30b-39 


1959 


30B. Hence by worshipping him the devotee shall 
derive the benefit of Agnistoma sacrifice. 

31 A. Thereafter, he should go to Asvitlrtha. By 
having faith and mastering sense-organs as well as by taking 
holy dip therein, the man shall become renowned and 
handsome. 

31B-32A. Then he should go to the Varahatlrtha created 
by Visnu. By taking holy dip therein with faith, the man 
shall attain good goal. 

32B-33. Thereafter, O fairfaced lady, he should go to Soma 
tirtha 1 where Soma (the moon) performed penance and became 
free from ailments. The devotee should like his holy plunge 
therein. By giving a cow as gift there, he shall attain the benefit 
of Rajasuya sacrifice. 

34. By worshipping Bhutesvara, Jvalamalesvara and 
Tandalinga, the devotee shall never have rebirth. 

35. By taking a holy dip in Ekahamsa, the man shall 
attain the benefit of charitable gift of a thousand cows. By 
taking holy bath in Krtasauca the man shall attain the 
benefit of sacrifice called Punqlarlka 

36. Thereafter, the devotee should go to the holy centre 
of the trident-bearing lord, called munja-vata. By observing fast 
for a night and worshipping Isa he shall be the lord of Ganas. ^ 

37. The devotee should propitiate the female Yaksi^ii 
stationed at the threshold by observing fast, taking the holy dip 
and worshipping. For quelling great sins, he should feed the 

Brahmanas. § , „ 

38. He shall circumambulate them. Thereafter, he shall 

go to Puskara. By taking a bath and by worshipping the 
Pitrs, he shall have his objects accomplished. 

39. If any one offers the gift of a virgin (ue. if he gives a 
virgin away in marriage) there on the fullmoon day of Karttika 

the deities will be delighted and give him the desired benefit. 

1 . It is probably the tank to the South of Amin mentioned also in 

the Mbh. Vana 83.114, VmP. 41.4. ■ the' 

Many of the sub-Tirthas mentioned in the NP. are the sam 
Mbh. Va/a and also in VmP. In fact many lines are tamwed «£■* 
from Mbh. by NP. Thus NP. V. 35 =Mbh Vane .83. NP. 

36= Mbh. Vana 83. 21b-22a. Such borrowings are found m a 1 







1960 


jVarada Purina 


40. Kapila, the great Yaksa, is stationed here as the gate¬ 
keeper. He creates obstacles in the commission of sins (to the 

sinners). He grants merit too. ... 

41 42A His highly blessed wife Okhalamekhala con¬ 
tinuously beats the Dundubhi drum and wanders every 
where. She prevents sinners from taking bath. She leads 

the meritorious ones. 

42B-43 Thereafter, the devotee shall go to Ramahrada. 1 
By taking a holy dip therein duly and by worshipping the Devas, 
Pitrs and sages the devotee shall attain worldly pleasuses 
and liberation. By worshipping Parasurama faithfully and by 
making gift of gold, the devotee shall become rich. 

44. By going to Vamsamula Tlrtha and by taking the 
holy bath therein, the devotee shall uplift his own race. By tak¬ 
ing the holy dip in Kayasodhanaka (that which purifies the 
body) the devotee’s body shall become pure and he shall enter 
Hari. 

45. The devotee shall go to Lokoddhara. By taking 
bath and worshipping Janardana, he shall attain the perma¬ 
nent world where the eternal Visnu abides. 

46. He should then go to Srltlrtha and after taking bath 
should worship the excellent Salagrama. Thereby, he sees Hari 
present continuously near him. 

47. After reaching Kapilahrada, he should take a holy 
bath and worship Devas and Pitrs. Thereby, he derives the merit 
of a thousand tawny-coloured cows. 

48. By duly worshipping Kapila, the lord of the uni¬ 
verse, O gentle lady, the devotee shall be duly greeted by 
Devas and he shall derive the region of Siva himself. 

49. Thereafter, observing fast, he should worship the sun 
in the Suryatirtha. After attaining the benefit of Agnistoma 
sacrifice, he shall go to heaven. 


1. This is to the north of Thaneswar, Mbh. Vana 83. 26-40 tells us 
that originally five tanks were filled with the blood of Ksattriyas by Para¬ 
surama for the Tarpaya to his ancestors and at his request they transformed 
them into Tirthas; also vide Pd . P. I. 26. 23-37. 






Uttarabhaga 65.50-6la 


1961 


50. Ganapati himself is stationed at the entrance to a cre¬ 
vice into the Earth. By visiting him and duly worshipping 
him, the devotee shall attain the benefit of a Yajfia. 

51. By taking a holy dip in the Tirtha of Goddess, a 
man obtains excellent features. By taking holy dip Brahma- 
varta, a man attains perfect knowledge of the Brahman. 

52. By taking holy dip in Sutirthaka and by worshipping 
Devas, sages, Pitrs and human beings, a man obtains the benefit 
of a horse-sacrifice. 


53. By performing holy bath in the Tirtha of Kames- 
vara with faith, the devotee shall be liberated from all ailments. 
He shall attain the eternal Brahman. 

54. By taking a holy dip and worshipping with faith in 
the Matrtirtha the family flourishes till the eleventh generation. 
Excellent prosperity increases. 


55. Thereafter, the devotee should go to Sitavana. 1 O 
auspicious lady, there is a great Tirtha there. By its mere vision, 
it sanctifies twenty-one generations. 

56-57. By casting off the tresses of hair there, the devotee 
becomes liberated from sins. The Tirtha named Dasasvame- 
dhika is well known in all the three worlds. By seeing that Tirtha 
one shall be liberated from sins. Thereafter, he shall go to the 
Tirtha called Manusa 2 and take the holy bath. 

58-59. O daughter of god Brahma, if one wishes for a 
human birth once again one shall take bath in the Tirtha h4^ u § a - 
The river MahanadI three kilometres from the Manusa Tirtha 
is well known. After taking bath there in accordance with the 
injunctions, the devotee should feed excellent Brahmana on 
Syamaka rice cooked in milk. 

60-61 A. His sins perish. He attains salvation by perform- 
ingthe rite ofSraddha io the Pitrs. At midday or.the 
day during the Pit, paksa (the dark form.ght dedicated to 


1. Probably the same as Sila-Vana mentioned as the seven ' h ^ 
xr i • \/mP <u 7 The village Sivana is supposed to b 

in Kuruksetra in VmP. /. in 5 Kuruksetra as per 

site. Sita, the queen of Rama, has no associate with Kuruksetra » P 

VR ' 2. It is also glorified in VmP. 35. 50-56. Pd. P. I. 26. 60-63. 







1962 


Narada Purana 


manes) called Mahalaya in the month of Bhadra-pada, the de¬ 
votee shall offer Pintjas. Thereby, he shall attain liberation. 

61B-62A. Thereafter, he should go to Brahma’s spot 
Brahmodumbaraka. He who takes a holy dip in the pools of 
Brahmarsis (Brahmanical sages) obtains the benefit of 
Somayaga. 

62B-63A. By worshipping Sthanu accompanied by Dan- 
din in the Tlrtha called Vrddhakedaraka the man attains the 
power of vanishing at will. 

63B-64A. Thereafter, the devotee should go to Kalasi 
where the goddess herself is present. By taking a holy dip 
here and worshipping Ambika, one shall cross the ocean of 
worldly existence. 

64B-65. By visiting lord Mahesvara at Saraka 1 on the four¬ 
teenth day in the dark half of the month, the man endowed with 
faith, shall attain the region of Siva. O beautiful lady, there 
are three classes of Tirthas at Saraka. 

66-67A. The Rudrakoti (thecrore ofRudras) is stationed 
in the well in the middle of the lake. The man who takes bath 
in that lake and remembers Rudrakoti is meritorious. There is 
no doubt about this that Rudrakoti it worshipped by him. 

67B-69A. There is another Tlrtha there itself, viz. Ihaspa- 
padam (Basis for desire). It is destructive of sins. By its mere 
sight a man attains liberation. By worshipping Devas and 
Pitrs, the man wards off mishaps. He shall obtain everything 
mentally thought of. 

69B-70A. There is a great Tlrtha called Kedara. It is des¬ 
tructive of all sins. By taking a holy bath there, the man shall 
achieve the benefit of all gifts. 

70B-71A. There is a great lake of very clear water to the 
east of Saraka. It is well known by the name <c Anyajanma*’ 
(another birth), where the lord Hari and Hara are present. 
Visnu stands there in his four-armed form, while Siva abides 
there in the form of a Liriga. By performing holy ablution there 
in visiting and eulogising the deity, the man obtains liberation. 


1. Also glorified in Mbh. Vana 83. 75-76, Pd. P. 1. 26.76. 









Uttarabkaga 65.71b-82a 


1963 


71B-73A. Thereafter, the devotee shall go to Nagahrada 
and take a holy dip towards the end of the bright half of the 
month of Caitra. By offering Sraddha, he attains liberation. He 
never sees the world of Yama. 

73B-75. Thereafter, the devotee shall go to the Tirtha 
Trivistapa that is resorted to by the Devas. There is a holy 
river Vaitarani there. It liberates one from sins. By 
taking a holy dip and worshipping the trident-bearing and 
bull-emblemed deity, he shall purify his soul of all sins. He 
will definitely attain the greatest goal (Moksa). By taking 
holy dip in the Rasavarta the man attains excellent Siddhi. 

76. On the fourteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Caitra, the devotee should take a holy dip in the 
Vilepaka and worship Siva devoutly. Thereby he is liberated 
from all sins. 

77. Thereafter, O gentle lady, the man should go to 
the excellent Phalakivana 1 where Devas perform great pen¬ 
ance along with the Gandharvas. 

78. By taking a holy dip in the river Drsadvati there in 
accordance with the injunctions and by performing the rite of 
Tarpana to the Devas and Pitrs. the man shall attain the 
benefit of Agnistoma and Atiratra sacrifices. 

79 On the new-moon day or on Lunar-day (Full-moon 
day (?) the man shall perform Sraddha rite there. He attains 
an excellent benefit thereby on a par with that of Gayasraddha. 

80A. That is the benefit of the Sraddha. The rememb¬ 
rance of the forest yields satisfaction to the Pitrs. 

80B-81A. Thereafter, the devotee shall go to the Tirt a 
Panighata and perform the rite of Tarpanas to the Pitrs. ere- 
by he attain, the benefit of Raja,uya and of Santhyaand 

Yoga as well. . . 

81B-82A. Then the man should perform a * 
Tirtha Misraka in accordance with the in J un ® ’. ellent 

he attains the benefit of all the Tirthas an a 
salvation. 

There b no jungle now. but the village ^ “ 

the site of Phalaki Vana . 



1964 


Narada Purana 



Tlrtha, the con 
observes restraints 
from all sins. 


85B-86. Thereafter, the devotee should go to Vyasa- 
sthali It was here that the intelligent Vyasa, overwhelmed by 
srief at the bereavement of his son, decided on casting off 
his body. He was re-suscitated to life by Devas. By going to 
that holy spot, the man is rid of his grief- 

87. After going to the well of Kindusu kupa the devotee 
should make a gift of a Prastha measure of gingelly seeds. There¬ 
by, he attains the greatest Siddhi. If he dies there, he shall 


attain liberation. 

88. Two Tlrthas are well-known over the Earth Viz. 
Ahna and Mudita. By taking a holy dip therein and 
purifying the soul, the devotee shall attain the world of Sun- 

89. Thereafter, he should go to the Tlrtha Mrgamucya 
on the Ganga. By bowing down and worshipping Mahadeva, 
the devotee shall attain the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. 

90. Thereafter, he should go to Kotitirtha. By taking 
a holy dip, by visiting Sivakotlsvara and by eulogising 
him faithfully, he shall attain the benefit of a crore of 
sacrifices. 

91-92. Thereafter, the devotee shall go to Vamana- 
kunda 1 2 well-known in the three worlds. It was here that Vamana 


1. No jungle now. Its site is now occupied by the village Varasa to 
the south of Kamal-Kaithal road. This is different from Vyasasthali in W. 
85-86 below, where Vyasa tried to commit suicide (mentioned in Pd. P. I. 
26. 90-91). 

2. Mentioned in Mbh. Vana 83.103, 88.130. Pd. P. I. 26.96. A 
Vamana-Kunda (a pool) is now shown at its site ( Ka’yaria 31. 1 P. 81) 



Uttarabhaga 65.93-102 


1965 


his birth with the desire to destroy Bali’s Yajna. By taking the 
holy bath at Visnupada therein and by worshipping Vamana, 
the devotee shall be freed of all sins. He is honoured in the 
world of Visnu. 

93-94. The hermitage Jyesthasrama is destructive of 
all sins. The devotee should observe fast on the eleventh day 
in the bright half of the month of Jyestha. On the next day, 
he should perform ablution therein in accordance with the 
injunctions. Thereby, he attains the greatest excellence among 
men. O gentle lady, the Sraddha performed there gives great 
satisfaction to the Pitrs. 

95. There itself is the Kotitirtha well known in the 
three worlds. By taking a holy dip in that Tlrtha he shall 
obtain the benefit of a crore of sacrifices. 

96. By duly worshipping Mahesvara, the lord of the 
Devas, named Kotisvara, the devotee shall attain chieftancy of 


the Ganas. 

97A. By taking a holy dip in the Suryatlrtha the 
devotee shall attain the world of the Sun. 

97B-98A. Going to the Tlrtha called Kulottaranaka 
and taking a holy dip therein, the devotee uplifts his family. 
He then stays in heaven till the end of Kalpa. 

98B-99A. By taking a holy dip in the Deep pool of 
the Wind-God and by visiting lord Mahesvara, the devotee 
shall be liberated from all sins and attain Siva’s region. 

99B. By taking-a holy dip in the Hanumattirtha the 
man shall attain liberation. 

100. By taking a holy dip in the Tlrtha of the sain y 
king Salahotra the devotee shaU be devoid of sin • • k § 

the holy dip in the Tirtha of the Sarasvatx named Snkumbha 

the man shall attain the benefit of Yajna. 

,0,. By tahing .he holy dip in ^ N —* % 

Vedav.., » «— ** 

attain the Statue of Sat. (Paraa.O- B[ahma ^ , 

102. By taking a holy dip ^ ^ greatest spot 0 f 

man obtains Brahmana-hood. 

Brahma. By going there none comes o g 


1966 


Narad a Purdna 


103. By taking a holy dip in Somatirtha, a man shall 
attain heavenly goal. By going to and by having a 
holy dip in the seven Sarasvata Tirthas the man shall attain 
liberation. 

104-105. The seven Sarasvatls viz Suprabha, Kanca- 
naksi, Visala, Manohari, Sunanda, Suvenu and Vimalodaka 
join together there. By taking a holy bath in the Ausanasa 
Tlrtha, the devotee shall be freed from all sins. 

106. By taking a holy dip in the Kapalamocana even 
a Brahmana-slayer becomes pure. A man who takes a holy 
dip in the Vaisvamitra Tlrtha shall attain Brahmana-hood. 

107. By taking the holy dip in the Prthudaka 1 one is 
liberated from worldly bondage. By taking a holy dip in the 
Avakirna a man attains the benefit of celibacy. 

108. One who goes to Madhusrava and takes a holy 
bath shall be liberated from sins. By taking the holy dip in the 
Vasisthatirlha, the devotee attains the world of Vasistha. 

109. By taking a holy bath in the confluence of 
Aruna and by observing fast for three days, the devotee 
attains liberation. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 

110. O auspicious lady, there are four seas there. One 
who takes a holy dip there attains the benefit of the gift of a 
thousand cows. He is honoured in the heavenly world. 

111. There is another Somatirtha there. O Mohinl, by 
taking holy bath in that on the sixth day in the bright half 
of the month of Caitra, and by performing Sraddha, one shall 
uplift the Pitrs. 

112. By taking a holy dip in the Pancavata and by 
duly worshipping Siva who has assumed the Yogic form, the 
devotee rejoices along with the Devas. 

113. One who takes a holy dip in the Kurutlrtha 
shall attain all Siddhis. The man who takes a plunge in 
the Svargadvara, is honoured in the heavenly world. 


1. Prthudaka is the famous holy place Pehoa or Pehova, Kamal 
Dist. It is highly valued in Mbh. Vana 83. 142-149 and in Salya Parva 39. 
33-34. Also in Pd. P. Svarga, 27.31, 38, 39. VMP. calls it Brahma-yoni- 
Tirtha (39. 20, 23). 




1967 


Uttarabhaga 65.114a-22a 


114A. One who takes bath in the Tirtha Anaraka is 
liberated from all sins. 

114B-115A. O gentle lady, thereafter, the man should 
go to the excellent forest Kamyaka Vana. 1 The moment he 
enters, he is liberated from all accumulations of sins. 

115 B- 116 A. After reaching Adityavana, if he vi,its (the 

deity) he will be liberated. By taking holy dip there on a 
Sunday, the devotee shall attain everything desired. 


116B. By taking a holy dip in the Yajnopavitika Tirtha, 
the devotee shall attain the benefit of maintaining his own 
duty. 


117. Thereafter, the excellent man shall take a holy 
dip in the Tirtha Catuhpravaha. Thereby, he attains the 
benefit of all Tirthas and rejoices in heaven like a Deva. 

118. One who takes bath in the Tirtha Vihara shall 
attain all happiness- By taking a holy dipin the Durga 
Tirtha a man never faces misfortunes. 

119. Thereafter, the devotee should take bath in the 
well Sarasvati also known as Pitr-Tirtha, and perform the 
Tarpana rite to the Devas and others; thereby he shall attain 
excellent salvation. 

120. By taking a holy dip in the Praci Sarasvati 2 
(Eastern Sarasvati) and by performing the Sraddha rites in 
accordance with the injunctions, the devotee shall attain even 
inaccessible desires. At the time of death, he shall attain 
heavenly goal. 

121-22A. By taking a holy dip in the Sukra Tirtha 

and offering Sraddha a man shall uplift the Pitre. He s ou 

observe fast on the eighth or the fourteenth day PM t,c “ la f J 
the dark half of the month of Gaitra and take bath in the 
Brahma Tirtha. Undoubtedly he will attain liberation. 


1. The site of the forest is occupied by the village Kamodha. 
three miles from Jyotisaras to the south of the Pc o\a ro 

2. ftissoeaUedas.he 8—. 

Today there is only a tank of that w ,,t glorious past. 

Tarpana to the ancestors. The surrounding 




1968 


Narada Purdna 


122B-123. Thereafter, he shall take bath in the Sthanu- 
Tirtha and visit the Sthanuvrsa. The man thereby is liberated 
from terrible sins. So says Pitamaha. By visiting the Sthanu- 
linga the pilgrimage becomes complete. 

124. O goddess, the pilgrimage of the holy centre 
Kuruksetra is thus complete. Truth and nothing but the 
truth is uttered by me. There has never been and there never 
will be a Tirtha like Kuruksetra. 

125A. By undertaking twelve such pilgrimages the 
devotee is not born again. 

125B-126A. Holy rites and laudable public works like 
digging tanks, wells, penances, Homas, duly given charit¬ 
able gifts etc. at that place, everything shall be everlasting. They 
who know the Vedas know this. 

126B-127. One who takes a holy dip on the inaugural 
days of Manvantaras and Yugas, during lunar and solar 
eclipses during the transits of the sun, on Mahapata period 
and on other holy occasions shall attain infinite benefits. 

128. It is for the purification of sins of noble souls, 
originating from the Kali age that the pleasant Tirtha of 
Kuruksetra has been created by Brahma. 

129. He too who glorifies this sacred story that destroys 
sins, or the man who devoutly listens to this, is liberated from 
sins 

130. In every birth, the man shall always attain 
whatever he gives away at Kuruksetra at the time of solar 
eclipse. 

131. Now, of what avail is much talk ? O daughter of 
Brahma, listen to this decision. If one wishes for deliverance 
from worldly bondage, one shall of necessity resort to 
Kuruksetra. 

132. This is the greatest merit. This is the greatest 
penance. This alone is the greatest perfect knowledge if one 
goes to the Sthanutlrtha. 

133. There is no other Tirtha on the Earth as splendid 
as Kuruksetra. Whether one adheres to the Acaras or not 
(i.e. discipline of castes and stages of life) one attains liber¬ 
ation there. 




Uttarabhaga 65.134—66.4 


1969 


134-135. O sinless lady, what I have been asked, I have 
told you entirely, about the greatness of Kuruksetra that 
destroys sins. It is meritorious. It bestows salvation. What 
else do you wish to hear ? 


CHAPTER SIXTYSIX 

Glory of Gangadvara 
(Or Haridvara) 


Mohini submitted : 

1. O most excellent one among the Brahmanas, the 
greatness of Kuruksetra* that is exceedingly destructive of sins, 
and which bestows Siddhis on men, has been heard from you. 

2. O preceptor, blessed are you. Kindly recount to me 
the meritorious Tirtha well known as Gangadvara. 1 There is 
great desire in my heart to hear about it. 

Vasu narrated : 


3. Listen, O gentle lady, I shall describe to you the 
greatness of Gangadvara that destroys sins. It is holy and 
auspicious to those who listen and read. 

4. It is at this place that the holy Ganga named Ala- 
kananda reaches the Earth piercing through the mountains 
in thousand places and following the chariot of Bhagiratha. 


♦The editor of the Sk. Text remarks : 


Thus the greatness of' Kuruksetra is completely recounted. Now the 


greatness of Gangadvara is beeun. 


1. The sam 
Haridvara implyin 
Gangadvara was ra 



Biruni called it Gahgadvara (‘the <j 
traveller put it). It is one of the seven 
•called Maya or Mayfipurl. 


holiest cities in India. It 








1970 


jVdrada Purana 


5 It is here that Daksa, 1 the Prajapati, formerly wor¬ 
shipped Yajnesa (Lord of Yajftas). That holy place bestows 

merits on men and destroys sins. 

6. In this Yajna, Devas with their leaders like Indra 
and others had been invoked. With a desire to partake ol 
their shares in the Yajna, they came here accompanied by their 

attendants. . 

7. O auspicious lady, the divine sages, pure Brahmamcal 

sages and saintly kings together with their disciples and 
their disciples’ disciples had come there. 

8-9A. All of them had been invited by that intelligent 
son of Brahma. The Gandharvas, Apsaras, Yaksas, Siddhas, 
Vidyadharas and serpents—all came to the place of Yajna, 
except Siva, the Pinaka-bearing deity. 

9B-10. As the invitees were going in their aerial chariots 
along with their wives, they were extolling the festivities in 
the Yajna of Daksa delightedly. The beautiful lady Sal! heard 
(their descriptions) and became eager (to see it for herself). 
She therefore requested Mahadeva for permission to go. 

11-12. On hearing it, the Lord said : “It is not conducive 


to welfare to gothere”. In view of the gravity of the inevitable 
future, she disregarded the lord and went there to participate in 
the celebration of the Yajna by her father. When she reached 
there, she was neither honoured nor welcomed by anyone. 

13-15A The beautiful lady laid down her life there and 
that spot became an excellent holy centre. 2 Those who take 
their holy bath in that Tirtha and perform the rite of 
Tarpana to the Devas and Pitrs, shall be favourites of the 
goddess. They will be able to enjoy worldly pleasures as well 
as salvation. Those who cast off their lives there by means 
of fasts etc. attain Siva himself. They are not reborn in 
Samsara. 

15B-16. On hearing about the death of his beloved 
from Narada, lord Nilalohita (Siva) created Virabhadra. 


1. It is at a distance of about half a mile or so from modern Hari- 
dvara that we are shown the place of Daksa’s famous sacrifice. The story of 
destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice is given in Mbh. Santi 283. 32-37 and in 
other Puranas like the Bh. P. 

2. This is called Sati-Kunqla. 







Uttarabhaga 66.17-26 


1971 


Accompanied by all the Pramathas, he destroyed that Yajiia 
completely. 

17. By the subsequent prayer of Brahma God Siva 
was immediately propitiated. He reorganized the Yajna. The 
disorganized Yajna was brought back to normalcy. 

18. Thereafter, that Tirtha has become unequalled and 
destructive of all sins. By performing ablution into it, the 
moon-god became free from the grip of consumptive diseases. 

19. No doubt need be entertained in this respect, O 
daughter of Brahma. He who duly takes bath in that Tirtha 
attains every desire he cherishes. 

20. Hari Tirtha is that holy centre where the immutable 
lord Vi?nu, the lord of Yajnas, was eulogised by Daksa and 


Devas. 

21. The man who duly takes a holy bath there at 
Haripada, O chaste lady, shall be a beloved favourite of 
Vi?nu and the receptacle of worldly pleasures and salvation. 


22. To the east of this is the well known holy centre 
Triganga. The Tripathaga (Ganga flowing along the three 
paths) is directly seen there by the people. 

23. By taking a holy bath therein and by performing 
the rite of Tarpana to the Devas, sages, Pitre and human beings, 
the man endowed with perfect faith rejoices in heaven like a 

god. 

24. O chaste lady, he who falls into the current and 
abandons his life, shall go to the abode of Visnu. He is duly 
honoured by Devas. 

25. Thereafter, the devotee should go to the Tirtha, 
Kanakhala 1 in the southern direction. In observing fast for 
three nights and by taking a holy dip in the Tirtha, one is 
liberated from all sins. 

26 O gentle lady, he who gives a cow there to a 
Brahmana who has mastered the Vedas never sees Vaitaram 

nor Yajna. 


1. Kanakhala is at a distance of about three miles from Here 
ki Pai<ji. 








1972 


Narada Purana 


27A. Anything given or offered into the sacred fire, or 
Tapa, or penance performed here attains everlasting benefit. 

27B-28. TheJahnuTirthais also here where formerly 
that river was drunk up by the royal sage Jahnu after making 
a mouthful of her. When he was propitiated, the river was 
released by him and it came out of his ear. 

29-30A O blessed lady, the man who takes his holy dip 
there, who observes fast, who is equipped with faith and who 
duly propitiates a Brahmana who has mastered the Vedas, by 
feeding him with excellent cooked rice, shall stay in the heaven 
for the duration of a Kalpa. 

30B-31. O lady of fine waist-line, thereafter, the devotee 
should go to the Kotitirtha which is in the western direction. 
By visiting Kotlsa the merit acquired is a crore of times more. 
By observing fast for a night there, the devotee shall attain the 
benefit of Pundarika sacrifice. 

32. Similarly, in the northern quarter, there is the 
great TIrtha well known as Saptagahga. 1 O gentle lady, it is 
destructive of all sins. 

33-34A. O highly intelligent lady, the holy hermitages 
of the seven sages are there. By taking a ' holy bath severally 
in those Tirthas and by performing the rite of Tarpana to the 
gods and to the Pitrs, the man obtains the eternal world of 
sages. 

34B-35- When the Divine river Ganga was being 
brought by king Bhaglratha, the river, thanks to her love 
and fondness for them (seven sages), flowed in seven currents. 
Therefore, the TIrtha became famous as Saptagahga. 

36- The devotee then goes to the Avarta and performs 
Tarpana rite to all, beginning with the Devas, after the 
holy bath. Thereby, he rejoices in the abode of Devendra for 
the period of a Yuga. 

37. Thereafter, O gentle lady, the devotee should go to 
the excellent Kapilahrada. By giving a cow as gift to an excel- 


1. It is called Sapta-dhara now. It is at a distance of a mile or so 
from Bhima-Goda. 



Uttarabhaga 66.38-48 


1973 


lent Brahmana he shall attain the benefit of giving a thousand 
cows. 

38. The extremely sacred Tirtha of Nagaraja, (king of 
serpents, is here itself. He who performs the rite of ablution 
here, shall derive protection from serpents. . 

39. Thereafter, the devotee should go to Lalitakaand the 
excellent Tirtha of Santanu. By taking the holy bath therein 
and performing the rite of Tarpana in accordance with injunc¬ 
tions the gods and others, the devotee attains salvation. 

40. It was here that Ganga who had come in a human 
form was attained by Santanu. After giving birth to the Vasus 
year by year, it was here that she threw them in and 
finally cast off her body. 

41-42A. Where the body was cast off, medicinal trees 
■grew up. The man who takes bath there and eats parts of 
the trees never sees any misfortune by the grace of god ess 

G § 42B. Thereafter, the devotee shall go to the Tirtha 
Bhlmasthala. 1 He who takes a holy bath there is a meritorious 


man 


43. After enjoying pleasures here, the devotee shall attain 
heaVe ^:"tl holy centres have been narrated to 

refulgence. completed the pilgrimage ofPrayaga 

vtr1o' s f and Mahamahavaruoa. He aha,, 

«r h ;.y bath in d— fc ■* 

47-48. By rt&S H he make, any Chari,ab.e 
shall attain the region of Brahma. 


i Probably the same as Bhima-goda 
from Haridvara to Rishikesh (hay W 


holy 


centre on the way 





1974 


Ndrada Purdna 


gift during the transit of the Sun, or on the new-moon day, or 
when the Vyatlpata period of time occurs, or on the anniver¬ 
sary day of the beginning of Yugas, or during other sacred 
days, it shall have a crore times more benefit. It is the truth 
that has been declared by me. 

49. He who remembers Gangadvara even when he is far 
away, attains good goal like the person who remembers Hari 
in the end. 

50. That deity whom pure man worships at Haridvara 
shall become delighted and fulfil his desires. 

51. The place where Ganga entered the Earth is 
itself a place of penance, it is a place of Japa and the place of 
Homa. 

52. The man who observes restraints and after taking a 
holy dip, repeats the thousand epithets of the Ganga three 
times per day, shall attain a line of progeny that gets never 
extinct. 

53. O blessed lady, he who devoutly listens to the 
Parana at Gangadvara with due observance of restraints, attains 
the unchanging region (i.e. the permanent abode of the 
Supreme Lord). 

54. The excellent man who listens to or reads the great¬ 
ness of Haridvara with great devotion shall acquire the benefit 
of the holy bath there. 

55-56. O gentle lady, there is no cause of fear from ser¬ 
pents, thieves, fires, evil planets or tyrannous kings. All the 
riches increase, thanks to the grace of lord Visnu. 






Uttarabhaga 67.1-8 


1975 


CHAPTER SIXTYSEVEN* 


The Greatness of Badarikatrama ** 

Mohini said : 

1. O excellent Brahmana, the greatness of Gangadvara 
has been recounted. Now narrate the greatness of Badari that is 
destructive of sins. 

Vasu said : 

2. Listen, O gentle lady, I shall describe in detail to 
you the greatness of Badari. On hearing this, a creature (the 
living soul) is liberated from the bondage of birth and 

samsara. . _ 

3. The holy centre of Hari named Badari is destructive 

of all sins. It bestows liberation on those men who are afraid of 
worldly existence and it dispels the defects of Kali Yuga. 

4-5 There, lord Narayana and the holy sage Nara who 
were born of Murti and Dharma, went to Gandhamadana 
mountain where there is a Badari tree endowed with many 

fruits ofsvveet fragrance. . 

o blessed lady, on that spot, they have been engaged m 

penance ever since the beginning of Kalpa. 

6 They are surrounded byNaradaand other excellent 

sages staying in the village of Kalapa* and also by the groups of 
Siddhas. They stationed themselves there for the sustenance 

the w ° lld There h awdl known h0 l y centrenamed Agnitlrtha’ 

* • „\ Tt vields all Siddhis. Even those who are 

dip 

therein. ^ ^ discoloured go i d becomes pure when heated 

in the'fire, so also the embodied soul becomes liberated from 

sins by plunging into the Agnitirtha. 

-ZT— T- - r *1ip t«t of N. P. introduces this chapter with the 

♦The editor of the text oi , .. u eeun . 

(Uttar^rad^h) ^ & ^ ^ 

1. Purapas like Bh. P. X. 87.7 state a ^ ^ such village. The big 

Kalapa near Badankasrama, but no * ded by so me as the site of Kalapa 
plain behind Mucakunda s n ther locations vide De, p. 84. 

gramafAalBfpa 3U P. 60); a ou Badrinati temp'* where 







1976 


jYurada Purdija 


9. By taking a holy dip in the Agnitlrtha a man obtains 
that benefit which is obtained from thousands of Candrayanas 
and crores of Krcchras. 

10. There are five rocky slabs. 1 O daughter of Brahma, 
Agnitlrtha is situated in their midst. By its mere sight, it dispels 

11. That rocky slab is called NaradI sila where the 
holy sage Narada performed a terrible penance. By its very 
sight, it yields liberation. 

12-14A. O lady of beautiful eyes, there is the perpetual 
presence of Hari, there. The Naradakunda (holy pool of 
Narada) is also there. The man who takes a holy bath there 
becomes pure. He obtains whatever he desires, such as worldly 
pleasures, salvation and devodon to Hari. Whatever a man 
performs here with devotion such as holy bath, charitable gift, 
worship of Devas, Homa, Japa or other rites are imperishable. 

14B-15. There is another splendid rocky slab in that holy 
centre. It is called Vainateyasila. 

It was here that a very severe penance was performed y 
Garuda of noble soul, for thirty thousand years with the desire 
for seeing Hari. 

16. O auspicious lady, the delighted lord granted him the 
boon and said, “O dear one, be unconquerable to the host of 
Daityas, and a terror unto the serpents. 

17-18A. Become my vehicle. I am delighted with you. 
This rocky slab where the penance has been performed by you 
will become famous over the Earth by your name. By its mere 
sight it shall be the bestower of merit on men. 

18B-19A. In this most important Tlrtha on Ganga, 
with a desire to attain my love (you have performed pen¬ 
ance) . O blessed one, may it manifest itself as the granter ot 
merits to those who take their holy dip here. 

1. The five rocky-slabs arc below the hot-water-spring called Agni 
Tirtha. The order of slabs to-day is (1) .Garuda or Vainatcya (2) 
Narada, (3) Markandcya, (4) Narasiiiiha and (5) Varahi (Kalyapa 30. 1. 
p. 59).' The order in the NP is as follows : (1) Narada, (2) Vainateya or 
Garuda 3) Varahi, (4) Narasirhha (5) Nara:Narayana Sila on the bank 
of the hot-spring (Vahni Kuntfa). 






Uttarabh&ga 69.19b-31 


1977 


19b-20. He who takes a holy bath in the Pancaganga 
and performs the rites ofTarpana to the Devas and others, does 
not return from the eternal world of Brahma.” 

After granting this boon, Visnu vanished then. 

21 -22 A. At the behest of Visnu, Garuda attained the 
state of being the vehicle of Visnu. Thereafter, that holy centre 
has become destructive of sins. 

22B. It is the bestower of merits on being remembered. It 
yields the.goal ofVainateya. There is another auspicious slab 
of a rock. It is known as Varahi (Sila). 

23. It was here that the lord (in the form of a 
divine Boar) lifted up the Earth after striking down Hiran- 
yaksa and occupied this position in the form of a rocky slab. He 
is the destroyer of sins. 


24. The man who goes there, plunges into the pure 
waters of Ganga and worships that rocky slab with devotion 
does not attain misfortunes or hell. 

25. There is another rocky slab called Narasimha sila. 
The lord of Devas killed Hiranyakasipu and rested there on the 

26. Later on, his anger was assuaged by the celestial 
sages. He was requested to stay perpetually there at Visala (i.e. 
Badarikasrama). 


97 The four-armed deity accordingly assumed the 
rocky form. Engaged in aquatic sports, he permanently 


tVif*. middle of water. 



28. The man who takes i 
the rocky slab, attains the abode 
does any one return to Samsara. 


29. O gentle lady, Know 
the banks of Vahnikupa (i.e. 
It is called Naranarayana Sil; 


(i.e. the hot water spring thereof). 
gila. I shall explain about it now, 


listen. 


„_j Hari in the form of 






Ndrada Pur ana 

himself adopts the Yogic posture and remains as the sustainer 
of worlds. 

32. When Dvapara Age arrives he is seen by the path 
of knowledge and not by any other means. In the Tisya 
(i.c. Kali age) he becomes (completely) invisible. 

33. Therefore, Brahma and other Devas, sages and 
ascetics, eulogised lord Hari with various kinds of praise and 
propitiated him. 

34. Thereupon, an incorporeal voice (from heaven) 
addressed Brahma and others : “I shall not be visible in the 
Kali age that is devoid of virtue and piety. 

35. O leading Devas, if you have faith in viewing the 
Manqlapa (ceremonial hall) take up my image of rock situated 
in the Narada Kunqla”. 

36-37. On hearing those words, Brahma and others be¬ 
came delighted at heart. They took out that divine rock image 
situated in the Naradakunda and installed it. After worshipping 
it, they went to their respective abodes. It is in the month of 
Vaisakha that Devas go back to their abodes. 

38-39. They come back again in the month of Karttika 
and perform the rite of worship. At the beginning of Vaisakha, 
due to the melting away of snow, the meritorious human 
beings devoid of sinful actions are able to see the deity. The 
deity is to be worshipped for six months by Devas and for six 
months by human beings. 

40-41 A. It is under these conditions that the image mani¬ 
fested itself from that time onwards. He who devoutly worships 
the image of Visnu and partakes of Naivedya, certainly 
attains liberation. 

41B-42. These five holy rocky slabs are thus situated in 
Visala (Badarika). The Naivedya offered to Hari in these 
places is inaccessible even to Devas. What then to the human 
beings ? If it is partaken of, it is a means to salvation. 

43. Even if the boiled rice offered as Naivedya to Visnu 
at Badari is partaken of, it shall purify sins in the body like 
the blazing fire that purifies the dross in gold. 



1979 


Uttarabhaga 67.44-53 


44. Thus this is the holy spot of Kapalamocana 1 2 3 which 
dispels sins. In its midst too, there are five rocky slabs that 
dispel sins. 

45. O MohinI, listen to another great holy pool here it¬ 
self. By taking a holy dip here with devotion, the man becomes 
master of the Vedas. 

46. The Asura named Hayasiras, a terror to Devas 
and others, snatched away Vedas coming out of the mouth of 
cod Brahma. 

47. Thereupon, prayed to by Brahma, Visnu manifest¬ 
ed himself in the form of a divine Fish. The lord killed the 

demon and handed over the Vedas to Brahma. 

48. That Tirtha is highly meritorious. It illuminates all 
lores. O blessed lady, it is called Taimihgila Tirtha. By its mere 


vision it is destructive of sins. , 

49-50. Once again, the unchanging lord Visnu m the 
form of the horse-nccked being, killed the arrogant Asuras, 
Madhu and Kaitabha who stole the Vedas from god Brahma. 
He handed the Vedas back to Brahma. O daughter of Brahm 

that Tirtha dispels sins by a mere holy dip. 

51 In both Tirthas, Matsya (i.e. Taimingalla) as 
well as Hayagrlva, the Vedas exist in the liquid form of wate 
perpetually. O gentle lady, that water is destructive of sins 

52 O eentlc lady, there is a famous holy centre Indra- 
pada in'ihe^south-east coroo, By .aking a holy dip toom. 
a man shall attain the region of Indra (or India-hoo ) . 

53 There is another charming Tirtha there named 

Manasodbhedaka 5 (resolver of the mmd.) X. spills ”> 

the hearts; it dispels all doubts. 


1. Itisata distance of when ^goT^va" 1 cutoff ^hc 

Tirtha on the bank of the /Jak gj va performed pilgrimage 

fifth head of god Brahma, h ^ h ’ ead , ^ Tirtha. Hence u is 

to all places but was ndofthatsuckmg ancestors. 

called Brahma-Kapala. Pdgnms offer be ^ ? ^ ^ 

2. According to Kalywa 31. 1£^1^ dc than Urvasi-Kuncja. 

behind the Badrinatha temple at a high Bhima sila on the 

3 . At Kesaya- p rayaga, near ** w J er is famous in Garhwal 

Makananda, ^cascades fo- this Tirtha 


for its health-restorative efficacy. 


(Kalyapa 31. 1- P- 60) 





jggQ Narada Pur ana 

54-55. It despels all sins also. Hence, it is called 
M anasodbhedaka. 

o fair-faced lady, there is another Tirtha there called 
Kamakama. It bestows the desired objects on those who have a 
desire for it and confers salvation on those who have no desires. 

O gentle lady, to the west of it is the Tirtha called 
Vasudhara. 1 

56-57. By taking a holy bath therein with devotion, a 
man obtains the desired benefit (Defective Text). The merito¬ 
rious persons see the deity, stationed in the middle of waters 

On seeing it, the creature does not have the compulsion to 
stay in the womb (i.e. is not reborn). 

Thereafter, in the south-western direction five currents 
flow down. 

58. Their names are Prabhasa, Puskara, Gaya, Naimisa- 
ranya and Kuruksetra. By taking a holy dip in every one 
of them separately, the man obtains the benefit of respective 
Tirtha. 

59-60A. There is another pure Tirtha, the second name 
of which is Somakunda, By performing severe penance here, 
Soma (the moon god) became the over-lord of planets and 
luminaries that move about in the firmament). O gentle 
lady, by taking a holy bath, a man becomes free from defects 
and sins. 

60B-61a. There is another Tirtha there called Dvadasa- 
ditya, (the sacred pool of the twelve sun-gods). It is excessi¬ 
vely destructive of sins. By taking a holy dip in it, a man 
becomes comparable to the sun by means of his refulgence. 

61B-62A. There is another Tirtha there called Catuh- 
srotas . A man who plunges into it attains whatever he wishes 
from among the Purusarthas viz. virtue, wealth love and 
liberation. 


1. This is a beautiful waterfall at a distance of five miles from. 
Badarinatha shrine. 



1981 


Uttarabhaga 67.62B-74A 


62B-63. There is another charming TIrtha there named 
Saptapada. By the very sight of this TIrtha, even great sins 
definitely perish. O chaste lady, what then if he takes a holy 
bath therein ? 

64. In the sacred pools called Trilokakundas, Brahma. 
Visnu and Mahesvara are stationed. By dying therein the man 
attains the region called Satya-loka. 

65-66A. O auspicious lady, there is another Tirtha in the 
residence of Naranarayana. Its name is Urvasikunda. 1 One who 
takes bath here becomes endowed with handsome features. He 
shall be a great favourite of Narayana. He will captivate the 
universe. 

66B. Then to the south of it there is the great Tirtha 


called Astra. 

67-68. It was here that Nara and Narayana deposited 
their weapons and engaged themselves in the penance. (It is 
true) O highly blessed lady, since the divine weapons 
(such as) the conch, discus etc are seen in embodied form 
by meritorious persons. A man who takes a holy bath there 
with devotion shall never be afraid of an enemy. 

59 . There is the holy centre called Mcrutirtha there. By 
visiting the bowbearing deity after the holy dip, O auspicious 
lady, the devotee realises all desires. 

70-71 A. There is another Tirtha named after the guar¬ 
dians of quarters. It is an excellent holy centre. It is here 
that the guardians of quarters performed peaance. O 
gentle lady, the man who performs ablution into the Tirt 
attains the benefit of plunging into all Tirthas. 

7 ib- 72A. Since it was by striking with his staff that the 
, Hm-i it has come to be called Dand^pu?" 

Tirtha was created by Hau, it nas come 

karini. It yields happiness to the protectors of the worlds (i.e. 

the guardians of quarters.) . . , , 

72B-74A That Tirtha where the Bhagirathi is joined by 
Ala JandLtthe „,o,t excellent of all holy epot, ,n the aacted 


ZiH - 7 st 

lap and discomfited India's band of tempters. 



Narada Purana 


1982 


Badarikasrama. By takihg a holy bath and devoutly perform¬ 
ing the Tarpana rites to the Pitrs and Devas and by worshi¬ 
ping them with devotion, the devotee attains the abod of 
Visnu. He is bowed to by all Devas. 

74B-75. O splendid-faced lady, there is Dharmaksctra( the 
sacred place called Dharma) to the south of the confluence. I 
consider that holy centre as the most sacred. It is the most 
excellent of all Tirthas. O gentle lady, by taking a holy bath 
there, the man becomes one who has reached the vicinity of 
that which should be accomplished (viz Moksa). 

76. The Tlrtha called Urvaslsangama, is the dispeller 
of all sins of man. There is another holy centre called Karmod- 
dhara. It is the sole means to attain Hari’s devotion. 

77. The Tirtha called Brahmavarta is the sole cause of 
attaining the world of Brahma. These Tirthas based on the 
Gahga have been recounted to you. 

78-79A. Even god Brahma is not competent to describe 
entirely the Tirthas stationed there. He who listens to this 
and he who narrates this with concentration shall be liberated 
from all sins. He shall attain the world of Visnu. 

79B-80A. The man who stays here for a month and ob¬ 


serves holy rites with devotion, will visualize lord Hari, Nara 
and Narayana directly. 

80B. Premature death, mental anguish, physical ailments 
and fear of serpents shall not befall the abode, O gentle lady, 
where the greatness of Badarikasrama has been written and 
preserved. Thanks to Hari’s favour, happiness always abides 
there. The riches flourish, thanks to the favour of Visnu. 



Utlarabhaga 68.1-5 


1983 


CHAPTER SEXTYEIGHT 

The Legend of Kamoda* 


Mohini said : 

1. O excellent Brahmana, recount to me the greatness 
of Kamoda. 1 On hearing it directly from your mouth, I shall 
feel contented and delighted. 

Vasu said : 

2. O gentle lady, listen, I shall narrate to you the auspi¬ 
cious details of Kamoda. O hearing it, one is released from all 
sins. There is no doubt about it. 

3. O gentle lady, the city Kamoda is situated on the 
banks of Ganga. It is here that Kamoda, the beloved of Hari, 
resides along with Devas. 

4. O gentle lady, it was when the milk-ocean was churn¬ 
ed that Kamoda was born among the four jewels of Virgins. 

5. The virgin Rama was the first and the second was 
Varunl! The girl Kamoda was the third; the fourth was Vara. 


*The printed Text of the N- P. has this following introductory remark. 
Thus the greatness of Badarikasrama has been recounted. encc 
the greatness of Kamoda is being recounted. 

i. »,«< 

Milk-o.cn, who '7'^; ^ d *' also ..tad Kin,.® cd i. M .o 

« • <*>»»“ ° f “ Y0i ““ T/ 

be on the bank ol oang ,.;h t her tears of joy 

Ganga from Gangadvara. When s e aug is ' ^ caUcd * Kamoda. It is 
are transformed into fragrant ye ow jj at vernal beauty, 

generally on the 12th day of Cattra when she smiles « 

These flowers can be collected desSe objects 5 If 

Siva is worshipped with these, l C W °” P bc loluscs 0 f bad odour. The 
she weeps with sorrow, the tears turn ou Vihunda worshipped god 

Pd. P. Ota. .19-121 Finn. 

Siva with such flowers and was , ^ N p advises pilgrims 

Kamoda seems to be a mythological town, though the N 

to visit and stay in the city. Kamoda. That becomes accessible 

There is also a Tirtha tnere cai 
after the melting away of snow- 




1984 


Narada, Purana 


6. Among them three girls were obtained by the power¬ 
ful Visnu. O chaste lady, Varum was taken away by the Asuras 
at the behest of Lord Visnu. 

7. Ever since that time, LaksmI has established herself on 
the chest of Visnu. O auspicious lady, she became the wife 
of Visnu. She was devoid of any co-wife. 

8. Realising the task to be achieved in the future, 
Devas, at the behest of Visnu, worship goddess Kamoda in the 
city called Kamoda. 

9. She stays there perpetually with the desire for the 
union with Visnu. She has attained the state of his wife in ima¬ 
gination. She is engaged in meditation on Visnu. 

10. Lord Visnu, the great omnipresent deity, approach¬ 
able through sincerity and devotion by her, stays there 
perpetually near her. 

11. O gentle lady, that deity, the Atman of the universe, 
is imperceptible to the Devas, Asuras, sages and human beings. 
He can be visualised by means of meditation. 

12-15. Devas and sages observe the lord only through 
meditation. O MohinI, when Kamoda, the highly blessed 
lady laughs overwhelmed with delight, tears of delight fall 
down into Ganga. O goddess of Devas, these tears become 
lotuses named Kamoda. They are yellow, fragrant and ex¬ 
tremely pleasant. He who comes to acquire them, thanks to his 
good luck, and worships Siva with them, shall attain cherished 
desires. This is the behest of Paramesvara (The Supreme Lord 
Siva). 

16. Sometimes tears of misery too fall. From those tears 
lotuses of bad odour crop up. 

17. Deluded by the previous sins, if any one worships 
lord Sankara, the benefactor of the worlds, with those lotus 
flowers of bad odour he will be oppressed by all miseries. 

18-21. Kamoda is situated ten Yojanas above Ganga- 
dvara. Ihe devotee should perform the Japa of twelve sylla¬ 
bled Mantra for the whole of a year. O daughter of Brahma, at 
the end of the year on the tweflh day in the month of Caitra, 
she will see the splendour of the spring and thanks to her delight, 
will laugh continuously; then the devotee may get those lotuses 
and by no means at any other time. The man who is devoted 






Uttarabhaga 68.22—69.1 


1985 


to Visnu and who takes a holy bath there after contemplat¬ 
ing on the city of Kamoda, shall be a favourite of Visnu. There is 
no doubt in this that he will be a favourite with the Devas and 
Pitrs. 

22. O splendid-faced lady, he who stays there for twelve 
years engaged in the repetition of Japa shall obtain the vision of 
Kamoda herself. 

23. O lady, by means of holy bath alone, the pure man 
attains whatever worldly pleasure he may seek. 

24. O gentle lady, this is an impassable rugged place. 
When the snow is melted away on the mountain, this greatest 
Tirtha may be accessible, thanks to good luck. 

25. Thus the auspicious account of Kamoda has been 
wholly recounted. The man who listens to this with devotion is 
liberated from sins. 


CHAPTER SIXTYNINE 

The Greatness af Kdmakfd 


Mohini said : 

1. The narrative of Kamodaka that is destructive of sins 
and conducive to the attainment of merit has been heard by me. 
O Brahmana, now I wish to hear the benefit derived from 
devotion of Kamaksa. 1 


T. It is the most important Devi pi/lia. It is at a distance of about 
wo miles from Gauhati on a beautiful hill called Nilacala over-hanging 
the Brahmaputra. The author of the NP. is so overawed with the wide 
expanse of the Brahmaputra that he thinks it to be a sea and the goddess 
(Tripura-bhairavi) is described as standing near the sea (. rigaranupa-tata-ga ) 
■ m v 2 below, Devi Bhagavata VII. 38.15 states that it is the place where 
the private part of Tripura-bhairavi fell. According to mythological legend, 
when Siva became too much grieved at the death of his first wife Sati, he 
carried her body on his shoulder. So to bring him to normalcy, Visnu cut 






1986 


Narada Parana 


Vasu said . . , . . 

2 The greatest goddess Kamaksa ,s stationed m the 

eastern quarter. She is present on the shores of the marshy place 
near the Sea. She is the bestower of Siddhi on men m the Kali 

8 3 The devotee who goes there and observing restriction 

in the deity, worships Kamaksa and stays a night there seating 
himself steadfastly, shall then visualize her, O gentle lady. 

4 That goddess appears before men in a terrible form. 
He who is not moved with fear on seeing her, shall attain 


the desired Siddhi- 

5. If on seeing the goddess of Devas, Kamaksa of 
terrific features, the devotee sways from his seats instantaneouly, 
he shall then certainly become distracted in mind and 
behaviour. 

6. O fair-faced lady, Siddhanatha 1 , the son of Parvatl 
stays there (engaged) in a severe penance. He is never seen 
by the people. 


to pieces Satl’s body with his discus Sudarsana and as Siva went on 
wandering with Sati’s body, one after another, her limbs went on falling on 
the ground. Her private parts fell on the Nilacala and the Devi Bhdgavata 
calls it the jewel among sacred places where Mahamaya ever abides*. 

Kamak§a is a centre of Tantrism. One wonders why the NP. 
which devotes a whole section to tantra, mantra etc. finishes the glory of 
Kamaksa within four (2-5) verses, when he waxes so eloquent on the 
Tantric worship of Radha (and of other deities like Rama, Narasiriiha, 
Hanuman and even king Karttavirya). 

1. This natha is Matsyendra-natha, the so-called founder of the 
Natha Sampradaya. It is understandable that Jnanes'vara, a 13th Cent, 
writer from the South, being far away from Assam and writing some four 
centuries after Matsycndra, should look upon Matsycndra as the human 
founder of N&lha-Panlha. But Tibetan records show that it was sarahapa, 
the seventh ancestor of Matsyendra, who should be credited if at all with 
being the founder. Although I have discussed this problem in Marathi 
under the title “The spiritual lineage of jnanesvara” in the Nava-bharata 
(a monthly), I would recommend Rahul Sankrityayana’s (Hindi) Intro¬ 
duction to Sarahapada’s Doha KoSa (Bihara Rastrabhasa Parisad, Patna 
1957). 

It is surprising why the last redactor of NP who comes from east- 
India (Bengal-Orissa region) should be so ignorant about Matsycndra who 
was not much removed in time and space from him. 










Uttarabhaga 69.7-15 


1987 


7. During the three Yugas : Krta, Treta and Dvapara 
he was directly perceived by every one. In the Kali age, as 
long as the first quarter of it does not pass off, he shall stay 
invisible. 

8-9. When a quarter of the Kali age has passed off and 
the surface of the earth has become terrible, he becomes visible 
and controls the people. O blessed lady, by his powers like 
Mohana (fascination) Uccatana (eradication) etc., he gains 
control over the people most of whom are Mlecchas 1 * * * (alien 
out-castes). He will spend the remaininig three quarters of the 
Kali age by keeping them submissive. 

10-11. The devotee should go to Siddhanatha and medi¬ 
tate on him with devotional feelings, for a whole year. Every day 
he must worship Kamaksa. He shall then gain the vision of 
Siddhanatha in the dream. At the end of the vision he shall 
have great concentration. He shall achieve Siddhi indicated 
by it and be a Siddha on the Earth. 

12. O auspicious lady, he will be wandering, fulfilling the 
desires of all the worlds. By means of the boon, he will 
attract all the articles in the three worlds. 

13. He is Matsyanatha (Matsyendra of the Natha cult) 
stationed there. O gentle lady, he has mastered the perfect know¬ 
ledge. He performed a terrible penance, distributing among the 
people whatever they desired. But he never becomes visible. 

14. Formerly, he had roamed all over the worlds without 
his movement being impeded, for the period of many Yugas. 
Today the noble-minded personage is completely engaged in 
penance. O auspicious lady, he is not oppressed by the velocity 
ofKala (the force of the stream of time). 

15. O highly blessed lady, in the previous birth he had 
been born as the son of a certain Brahmana. He was born during 
the astrologically evil period of a ‘Gandanta 5 (the tenth astro¬ 
logical Yoga). Hence the moment he was born in the continent 
named Puskara, he was cast into the ocean by his father. 


1, The inclusion of Mlccclias in the Natha cult is implied here, and 

the initiation of Matsyendra who was abandoned by his father and had 

become ‘castcless*, shows the breadth of outlook of the Natha cult in. 

its early stage. 






1988 


Narada Parana 


16 As soon as he was thrown into the sea, thanks to a 

lucky coincidence, a certain fid, wallowed the boy. For many 
Yogas, lie remained there without ageing or dying due to the 
flux of time. 

17 Thereafter, O gentle lady, once urged by his wile, 

the daughter of the mountain, Mahesvara, the incomprehensi¬ 
ble deity accompanied her to the mountain Lokaloka ior the 

instruction in the esoteric principles. 

18-19a. On its gentle and beautiful peak illuminated by 
jewels, the lord stood for half a moment with his mind engrossed 
in Hari. He enlightened spiritually goddess Uma by means of 
his Sakti. He drove away the Sattvas (animals, living beings) 

with three Talas (clapping of hands). 

19b-20. He then told her the Tattva (the real principle) 
in the form of the meaning of the twelve-syllabled Mantra 
which had been an esoteric secret. The daughter of the moun¬ 
tain bowed down to Mahesa, the destroyer of Mara. She un¬ 
derstood the principle a little and sat there firmly. At that time 
the fish in the great ocean immediately jumped on to the peak. 1 
The Brahmana boy who was within its belly became a Tattva- 
siddha (a person who realised the principle) and freed of all 
bondages. 

21. O splendid-faced lady, coming out of the belly of 
the fish, he made obeisance in front of Siva and Uma. Though 
he was aware of the truth Mahesvara asked him the cause of 
being within the womb of the fish. 

22-23. In front of them, he recounted everything in the 
manner it had happened. On hearing what had happened to 
him, Uma was pleased. Getting the permission of Mahesa, she 
made him her son. O fair-limbed lady, placing him on her lap 
she kissed his face and said “O, is this not my Son? He is 
Matsyanatha, (lord of fish). He has understood the principle. 
Hence he is Siddhanatha for all. 

1. The absurdity of the story—jumping of a fish from the great 
ocean to the peak of the Lokaloka mountain-top where Siva was secretly 
instructing Parvati in an esoteric lore—is obvious. Jnancsvara states that it 
was on a small island in the ocean where Siva imparted that spiritual know¬ 
ledge to Parvati and which was heard by Matsycndra from his fish-mother's 
belly. 






1989 


Uttarabhaga 69.24—70.1 

24-25. Let him go over the worlds according to his will. 

Mav he accord happiness unto us now.” 

Ever since that time this son of Ambika roamed about all 
the worlds as he pleased. He attained the Siddhapitha. 1 He 
has occupied that seat as one engaged in penance. By mentally 
meditating on Siddhanatha, a man shall be one who has realised 

all his desires. , . 

26-27A. He will acquire learning. He will be drawing 

the multitudes of scholars in the current of his words (eloquent 
speech). He who hears this story which is the most sacred in the 
universe, (even though) it might have entered his ears (casually), 
realises whatever he desires on the Earth and goes to the 
heaven. His feet are worshipped by the Devas. 

27B-C. Thus O lady of beautiful eyes, I have told you 
about "the greatness of Kamaksa alongwith the story of Siddha¬ 
natha. It is destructive of sins at the outset. O gentle lady, 
what else shall I recount to you ? 


CHAPTER SEVENTY 

The Greatness of Prabhasa 


Mohini said : 

1. O excellent Brahmana, recount to me the greatness of 
Prabhasa 2 On hearing it I shall be delighted in my mind. May 
I be blessed thanks to your grace. 


1. Kamakhya is both Saklipitha and a Siddha-Pitha. 

2. Prabhasa, alternately called SomanathapaUana, Devapattana, 
Veravala, is the holy place of Lord Somanatha, the famous JjotirliAsa xn 
Saurastra. It is here that Lord Krsija gave up his physical body under a 
Pippala tree. The Mbh. Vana 82.58. 58.20 etc. mention the great sancuty 
of Prabhasa while the Siva Purtoa, KotUrudra 15. 56-58 waxes eloquent about 
the mere sight of Somanatha. The NP., however, is interested in the 
directory of various Tirthas in and about Prabhasa and not so much in 



1990 


Ndrada Purdna 


Vasu said : 

9 O gentle lady, listen. I shall narrate to you the (glory 
of the holy eentre named Prabhasa. It yields great ment It 
b a Tirtha that dispels all sins of men. It yields worldly 


pleasures and salvation. . 

3.4 O daughter of Brahma, there are innumerable 

Tirthas therein. Some *, * 1 the lord of the universe, the lord of 
the daughter of the mountain, is present there. By taking a 
holy bath in the Prabhasa Tirtha, and by worshipping Soma- 
natha, a man obtains liberation. What I have stated to you is 
the truth. 


5. The zone of Prabhasa extends to twelve Yojanas. In 

its centre is the Pithika (thepedestal). It is said to extend to 
five Yojanas. 

6 . In its middle is the Tirtha extending to a Gocarma 
(about a hundred hands. But it excels even mount Kailasa. 
Another meritorious and splendid Tirtha is Arkasthala (the 


holy spot of the sun). 

7-8a. There are thousands of Lingas such as Siddhesvara 
etc. By performing the holy bath there, and the Tarpana 
rite for Pitrs and Devas with devotion, and by worshipping 
the Lingas, the devotee attains the same worlds as that of 
Rudra. 

8b-9a. Another Tirtha, the Agnitirtha , 2 is situated on the 
shore of the sea. O gentle lady, by taking the holy dip there, 
the man shall attain the world of Vahni. 


Somanatha. Inscriptional evidence e.g. the Nasik inscription of Usavadata 
(Bombay, G. XVI p. 669) testifies to the holiness of Prabhasa. Most of the 
sub-tirthas mentioned in this chapter are described in detail in the SkP . 
Prabhasa Khanda. 

1. This is the famous Jyotir-lifiga whose shrine faced destruction 
and re-construction at least five times during the last thousand years. The 
last re-construction of the shrine took place after Indian independence, 
probably due to the interest taken by Safdar Patel, the then Home 
Minister of India. 

2. It is strange but watery places are called by the name Agni- 
tirtha (The sacred ‘pool* of the Fire god). Here the sea near the town of 
Prabhasa is called Agni Tirtha . 



1991 


Uttarabhaga 70.9b-21a 


9 b-10a. By worshipping lord Kapardlsa (Siva) after 
observing fast, the devotee attains Siva’s world after enjoying 
the desired worldly pleasures. 

1 Ob-1 la. The devotee shall go to Kedaresa and worship 
him in accordance with the injunctions. Thereby, he attains 
heavenly goal. He goes there by means of an aerial chariot. He 

is worshipped by Devas. . 

1 lb-13. The three deities mentioned before together with 
the following make fourteen, viz : Bhimesa, Bhairvesa, Caijdisa, 
Bhaskaresvara, Angaresa, Gurvisa, Somesa, Bhrgujesvara, 
Sanisvara, Rahvlsvara and Sikhisvara. These deities must be 
visited in order. By worshipping with devotion these deities 
severally, the devotee who knows rules of religious procedure 
attains the same world as Siva. He becomes competent to 

chastise as well as to bless others. 

14. O daughter of Brahma, by worshipping five other 
Lingas, Siddhesvara etc., the man attains Siddhi of this 

world as well as of the other world. 

15. By worshipping the fair lady Ajapala, Mangala an 

Lalitesvari, the man becomes free from sins. 

16. By worshipping Laksmisvara, Badavesa, Arghyesa 
and Kamakesvara with devotion, a man shall attain lordship 

of the worlds. . 

17. By worshipping Gaurisa, Varunesvara and Usesvara 

after reaching the penance grove of Gauri, the man shall attain 

heavenly goal. . . c 

18-19a. By duly worshipping Ganesa, Kumaresa, svaka- 

kesa, Kulesvara, Uttankesa, Vahnisa, Gautama and Daityasu- 
dana (the slayer of the Daityas), the man shall never go to hell 

(or troubles). , 

19b-20a. The devotee should thereafter go to Oakra 

Tirtha, take a holy bath in accordance with the injunctions 

and worship goddess Gauri; thereby the man shall obtain the 


desired benefits. . , . 

20b-21a. O fair-faced lady, after reaching the Tirtha 

called ‘Sannihatya’, the devotee shall take a hdydip an 
perform the rite of Tarpana to Devas and others. Thereby, 
he shall attain the benefit accruing from that Sannihatya 
Tirtha. 


1992 


Narada Purdna 


21b-22a. He who worships the eleven Lingas, Bhutesa 
and others, attains excellent pleasures and in the end shall 
attain the region of Rudra. 

22b-23a. O gentle lady, by worshipping lord Adinara- 
yana, the excellent man shall attain salvation. No doubt need 
be entertained in this respect. 

23b-24a. He who goes near Cakradhara and worships 
him in accordance with the injunctions shall conquei his 
enemies and attain worldly pleasures high and low. 

24b-25a. The devotee who goes to the Tlrtha Samba- 
ditya and takes a holy bath with due observances of restraints 
shall be free from ailments. The man shall be endowed with 
wealth and food-grains on the earth. 

25b-26a. Then the man should go to the goddess Kan- 
takasodhini who slew Mahisa. By worshipping her the man 
becomes fearless. 

26b-27a. By worshipping Kapalisa and KotIsa c the 
excellent man shall become extremely fortunate. Thus the 
middle pilgrimage shall be completed. 

27b-28a. O queen of men, by going to the Tirtha 
Balabrahma thereafter, the man becomes a master of worldly 
pleasures and salvation. He will be honoured and worshipped 
by all Devas. 

28b-29a. By worshipping NarakeSa, Samvartesa, Nidhi- 
svara, one shall be having worldly pleasures and liberation. 

29b. By resorting to Gangaganapati and worshipping him 
in accordance with the injunctions, the devotee derives desired 
benefits in this world as well as in the other world. 

30-3la. Thereafter, the man should go to the river 
Jambavati. By taking the holy dip with devotion and concentra¬ 
tion and by worshipping the deity, the man shall have his 
objects accomplished. 

31b-32a. Thereafter, he shall take a holy dip in the 
well Pandukupa and worship Pandavesvara. That man goes to 
heaven and sports about in Nandana and other parks. 

32b-33a. By worshipping the three Lingas, Satamedha, 
Laksamedha and Kotimedha in the proper order, the devotee 
rejoices in the heaven like a Leva. 


1993 


Uttarabhaga 70.33b-41a 

33b-34a. By visiting Durvasadityaka and by worshipping 
him in accordance with the injunctions, the devotee shall 
undoubtedly attain the benefit of horse-sacrifice. 

34b-35a. By resorting to Yadavasthall 1 and by worship¬ 
ping Varsesa, the man attains his coveted Siddhi. He is greeted 
and honoured by the king of Devas. 

35b-36. After taking a holy dip in the confluence of the 
Hiranva, the devotee shall make a gift of a golden chariot to a 
Bra’nmana looking upon him as Siva. He who does so with 
devotion shall obtain everlasting worlds. By worshipping 
Nagararka thereafter, this devotee shall attain the world of 
the sun. 

37. By visiting and duly worshipping Bala, Kxsna and 
Subhadra near Nagaraditya, one shall attain the sayujya (iden- 
tity) with Krsna. 

38. Thereafter, the devotee shall go to Kumarika Tlrtha 
and worship the deity in accordance with the injunctions. 
There is no doubt about this that he attains cherished desires 
and conquers even Indra. 

39a. By worshipping Ksetrapala thereafter, he shall 
attain all desired benefits. 

39b-40a. By worshipping Brahmesvara installed on 
the banks of Satasvati 2 the devotee shall be freed from all 
sins. He is honoured in the world of Brahma. 

40b-41a. He should then go to the river Pihgala and 
take a holy dip there. By performing Sraddha, the man is 
not born here again. By worshipping Sahgamesa, the man 
wards off misfortune or hell. 


1. This is traditionallv regarded as the site of the last mutually - 
annihilating fight among Yadavas. It is on the bank of the Hiranva river 
{Kalyana 31. I. P. 419). 

2. This is different from the Vcdic Sarasvatl of Kuruksetra. This 
is also called Prabhasa Sarasvatl, Pratyak (west-ward flowing) Sarasvaii. 
Near Prabhasa, the small rivers, the Kapila, Sarasvatl and Huanya join 
each other near the sea and fall into. It is also called ‘Tiiveiji confluence, 
though actually the Kapila joins the Sarasvatl which flows into the Hiranya 
which ultimately falls into the sea. 



1994 


Narada Purana 


I 


41b-42. By worshipping Saiikaraditya, and Ghantesa, 
the great lord, a man shall attain all cherished desires. There 
is no doubt about this. 

43 . The devotee should then go to the Rsi Tlrtha and 
take a holy bath with full control of the mind. By worshipping 
the sages there, he shall attain the benefits of all the Tirthas. 

44. By worshipping Nandaditya thereafter, he is liberated 
from all ailments. By resorting to Tritakupa and by taking the 
holy dip therein, he goes to the heaven. 

45. O Mohini, by taking a holy dip in ‘Sasopana’ the 
man sees Devas and attains all desired benefits. Truth : It is 
the truth that has been stated by me. 

46-47. By visiting Parnaditya, the man becomes free from 
ailments and enjoys worldly pleasures. By resorting to Nyanku- 
mati, by taking the holy dip there in accordance with the ( 

injunctions and by worshipping Siddhesvara, the devotee shall 
attain Anima (minuteness) and other Siddhis. By visiting 
Varahasvamin, one is liberated from the ocean of mundane 
existence. 

48. By worshipping Chayalinga one is liberated from all 
sins. By visiting Gulpha and worshipping him one shall attain 
the benefit of observance of the Candrayana vow. 

49. O chaste lady, by worshipping goddess Kana- 
kananda, the devotee attains all cherished desires. On death he 
attains heavenly goal. 

50-5la. By worshipping Kuntlsvara, one is liberated 
from all sins. The man who takes a plunge in the Ganga and 
worships Gangesvara is liberated from the three types of sins. 

51b-52a. He who takes a holy dip in Camasodbhedaka 
and offers balls of rice, obtains a merit a crore of times more 
than at Gaya. There is no doubt about this. 

52b-53. Thereafter, O daughter of Brahma, the devotee 
should go to the excellent Vidurasrama and worship Triga, the 
lord of the three worlds. Thereby, he shall be happy. By wor- 
shipping Mankanesvara, the man attains good goal(i.e. heaven). 

54-55. By worshipping Traipura and Trilinga, one is 
liberated from sins. Thereafter, the man shall resort to Santfa- 


1995 


Utlarabhaga 70.56-66 

tirtha, take a holy dip there and make a gift of gold. There¬ 
after he shall be purified of all sins. He shall attain the region 
of Siva. By taking a holy dip in Suryapraci, the man shall be 
devoid of sins and enjoy worldly pleasures. 

56-57. By taking a holy dip in the Tirtha, Trilocana, 
the man attains Rudraloka. By worshipping Umanatha in the 
Devika river the excellent man attains desired benefits. On 
death he shall attain heavenly benefit. By worshipping Bhu- 
dvara the devotee shall attain the cherished desire. 

58-59. By making obeisance to Valmiki in Sulasthana, the 
devotee shall become a poet. By worshipping Cyavanarka one 
shall be richly endowed with all desired benefits. Through the 
worship of Gyavanesa, the man shall become the attendant of 
Siva. By worshipping PrajapaleSa, the devotee shall be endow¬ 
ed with wealth and foodgrains. 

60. A man who worships Balarka shall be endowed with 
learning and wealth. By taking a holy dip in Kuberasihana 
the devotee shall certainly obtain a treasure-trove. 

61. By resorting to the river Rsitoya, by taking holy 
bath there, and by giving gold to a Brahmana as gift, the 
man becomes pure and is liberated from sins. 

62. By worshipping Srgalesvara, the devotee is honour¬ 
ed in the Rudraloka. By worshipping Naradaditya the devotee 
shall become endowed with the perfect knowledge of the three 
units of time. 

63-64. By worshipping Narayana the man shall attain 
liberation. After taking a holy dip in the waters of Tapta- 
kunda, the devotee should worship Mulacandlsa. The man 
shall be absolved of all sins. He shall attain the desired 
object. By worshipping the fourfaced deity Vinayaka, the 
devotee attains the desired benefit. 

65. By worshipping Kambala, the devotee is endow¬ 
ed with flourishing wealth and food-grains. Through the 
worship of Gopalasvamin, the devotee will possess cows and 
wealth. He will become a poet or a wise man. 

66. The worship of Bakulasvamin is the bestower of 
heavenly goal unto the man. By worshipping the goddess of 
MarutSj one shall attain the desired benefits. 


1996 


Narada Purana 


67. Through the worship of Ksemaditya, the man shall 
attain welfare and truthfully partake of all relished objects. By 
worshipping Vighnaraja Unnata, the devotee is not impeded 
by obstacles. 

68. The two deities Jalasvamin and Kalamegha, when 
worshipped, bestow all Siddhis. When the goddess RukminI 
is worshipped, she bestows the desired objects on men. 

69. By worshipping Durvasesa and Pihgesa, the devotee 
is liberated from sins. By taking the holy dip in the confluence 
ofBhadra, the man sees auspicious things. 

70. By taking the holy dip in Sarikhavarta, the man 
shall become the master of all Siddhis. By taking the holy bath 
in the Moksa Tirtha, the man shall be liberated from the ocean 
of worldly existence. 

71. Merely by means of ablution in the Gospada 
(the pit made by the hoofs of cows), one shall attain all happi¬ 
ness. After going to the abode of Narayana, a man does not 
grieve again. 

72. Through the worship ofjalesvara, a man shall realise 
all desired Siddhis. One who takes a holy dip in the well 
Humkarakupa shall never attain a residence in the womb there¬ 
after. 

73. By worshipping Candlsa one shall attain the benefit 
of all llrthas. By Worshipping Vighnesa stationed in Asapura, 
one shall never be harassed by obstacles. 

74. A man taking the holy plunge in the Kalakunda 
shall undoubtedly attain salvation. By worshipping Kapilesa 
one shall attain a herd of Kapilas (tawny-coloured cows). 

75. By worshipping Jaradgavesvara the devotee is never 
overwhelmed by old age. The worshipper of Nalesvara is an 
enjoyer of pleasures. The worshipper ofKarkotesa is a wealthy 
man. 

76. Through the worship of Hatakesvara all the desires 
are fulfilled. The worshipper of Naradesa shall obtain devotion 
to Visnu and Sankara. 

77. By worshipping goddess Mantravibhusana, the devotee 
becomes one who deserves heaven. By worshipping Ganapati 
and Durgakuta, one shall be ever happy. 


1997 


Ultarabhaga 70.78-88 

78. A person who worships Kauravesvari shall become 
one endowed with wealth and food-grains. By worshipping 
Suparnesa and Bhairavl, one shall be blessed with happiness. 

79. By taking a holy dip in Bhala Tirtha. 1 the man is 
absolved of all sins. By taking a holy bath in Kardamala, one 
is relieved of sins. 

80. By visiting Guptasomesvara (the hidden Somesvara) 
one ceases to grieve further. By visiting Bahusvarncsvara one 
shall attain heavenly goal. 

81. The man who worships Srngesvara is not attacked 
by miseries. By taking a holy dip in (he Tirtha Narayana, the 
man obtains liberation. 

82. By worshipping Markandesvara, the man becomes 
longlived. By taking the holy dip in the Kotihrada and by wor¬ 
shipping Kotlsvara one becomes happy. 

83. By performing ablution in Siddhasthana and by 
worshipping numerous Lingas thereof, the man shall become 
a Siddha on the earth. 

84-85a. By visiting Damodaragrha one attains excellent 
happiness. O auspicious lady, the holy centie Vastrapatha is 
situated in the navel region of Prabhasa. By worshipping goc 
Bhava (Siva) there, one shall directly become equal to Siva. 

85b-86. The Svarnarekha (the line of gold) is in Damo- 
dara. Brahmakuntfa (holy pool of Brahma) is in Raivata. 
Kuntisa and the highly refulgent Bhlmesa are in Ujjayanta 
(mount Girnar). And Mrgikunda and Sarvasva—all these are 
remembered to be at the holy spot called Vastrapatha. 

87. By taking the holy bath in these, in the order, by 
worshipping Devas assiduously and by performing Tarpana 
rite with water, one shall attain the benefit of all Tirthas. 

88. By taking the holy dip in Dunnabila and enjoying 
the pleasures one shall go to the heaven. By worshipping 
Gangesvara thereafter, one shall attain the benefit o t c o y 

bath in.Gahga. 

/ 

1. This is probably the Bhalaka Tirtha of today near Bhalupura 
(Kalyd{ia 31. 1 P- 419). 



1998 


Narada Purana 


89-90. O gentle lady, there are many Tlrthas on the 
mountain Raivataka (or Girnar). By taking a holy dip in them 
and by worshipping with devotion, Brahma, Visnu, MaheSvara, 
Indra and other guardians of the worlds, the man obtains 
worldly pleasures and liberation. O beautiful lady, these 
Tlrthas have been narrated to you in brief. 

91. In their midst there are infinite numbers of them. It 
is not possible to recount them all. There are detailed stories 
for each and everyone of these Tlrthas. 

92-93a. Hence, the merit accruing from Prabhasa has been 
succinctly mentioned by me. O Mohini, there is no other Tlrtha 
in all the three worlds, equal to Prabhasa. O auspicious lady, a 
man who takes a holy bath there competes with heaven- 
dwellers. 

93b-95. If the greatness of Prabhasa is written and kept 
in the house, there can be no danger or fear from goblins, 
thieves, serpents and enemies. He who devoutly listens to this 
and he who narrates this with concentration shall attain the 
goal of the good. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYONE 

The Greatness of Ptifkara 

Mohini said : 

I. O excellent Brahmana, the greatness of Prabhasa that 
is extremely conducive to the attainment of merit has been 
heard. Now I wish to hear the glory of Puskara. 1 


1. A sacred place, a lake (or rather three lakes) six miles from 
Ajmer (Rajasthan). It is the first among all Tirthas (Mbh. Vana 82.35). 
The Mbh (ibid w. 22 ff) waxes so eloquent in its glorification that other 
holy places pale into insignificance—the epic style of exaggeration. It is 
called Ptifkara as according to the Pd. P. } the lake was created out of a 
lotus-flower thrown by god Brahma to kill a demon Vajranabha. Brahma 
selected this place for performance of sacrifice and it is the western Vedi 








1999 


Uttarabhdga 71.2-10 

o It is the first one among the TIrthas. It is sacred 
, destructive of sins. It is the abode of the Yajfla of my 
father. Kindly narrate it to me in detail. 


Vasu said : . 

3 O gentle lady, I shall recount to you the meritorious 

greatness of Pu?kara. Listen. It yields the desired benefiB to 
all man always. It has within it many TIrthas. 

4 6 Indra and other Devas have settled here along with 
Visnu The elephant-faced lord, the sun-god, Kumara and 
Raivata are present here. So also goddess SivaduU always 
stavs here She brings about the happiness of the holy centre. 
H« who stays in the fores, of Pu 5 kara> in the holy month o 
Tyestha, without exerting himselr in worldly actmt.es shall 
undoubtedly attain the merit of Yoga consisting of eight 
subdivisions. In this world there is no other centre holier t an 

thlS ’ 7-8 Hence, this must be resorted to by excellent men 
with all possible efforts. The Brahmanas, Ksatnyas, Vaxsyas 
2d Sudras whoever stay in the holy centre, are devotees rf 
Brahma in all respects. They bless all living beings. They go o 
the world of Brahma where Yogins go. . . 

9 The merit that a man obtains by plunging into all 
TIrthas'is derived by the man who ate the ho ly dip but 
once in the Jyestha Kunda (a holy pool of that name). 

10. After reaching the forest of Puskara «toej*n 
Eastern SarasvaO flows, a man is endowed wtth 
memory, mercy, judgement, .retentrve power and eompre 

hension. 


Runn of Kaccha, and Pampa (near Anagondi, Kamatak). 

god Brahma is the special feature of dus ho ypac. asNakulais 

1. It appears that there was a forts** ** W ^ ^ 
said to have conquered the forest-dwe ers _ through it. 

also vide Pd. P. V. 18.217) The Prad Sarosvati flo\ 




2000 


jXdrada Pur ana 


1 


;1 Those who stand on the banks of these rivers and 
merely look at the waters, attain the benefit of a horse-sacrifice 
and derive happiness. 

12. There are three famous and pure peaks. There 
are three springs. There are three lakes also which are called 
Jyestha, Madhya and Kanistlia. 1 

13-14. There is another very great Tlrtha called Nanda 
Sarasvati, O chaste lady, to the west of that lake, about a 
Yojana from it. By taking the holy dip therein in accordance 
with the injunctions, and by making a gift of a milch cow to a 
Brahmana who is a Vedic Scholar, the man shall attain the 
abode of Brahma. 

15. There is a Kotitlrtha here where a crore of sages 
had come. By taking a holy dip there and by worshipping 
Brahmanas, the devotee is liberated from all sins. 

16. By resorting to the hermitage of Agastya, 2 by taking 
the holy dip there and by worshipping the pitcher-born sage 
Agastya, the devotee becomes long-lived and enjoys pleasures. 
On death he attains heavenly goal. 

17. The devotee should then go to the hermitage of 
seven sages. With the intellect not turned to anything else he 
should take a holy bath there and worship them with devotion. 
Thereby, he attains the same world as they. 

18. By taking a holy dip in the hermitage of the Manus, 
the devotee is worshipped from all quarters. By taking a holy 
bath at the source of Gariga, he attains the benefit of a holy dip 
in Ganga itself. 


1. Both thcNP and Pd. P. mention three lakes— Jye$fha, Madhya 
and Kanisfha Puskara. Usavadata’s Nasik Inscr. No. 10 mentions his having 
donated gifts on their banks (Bombay Gaz. XVI p. 570). Now-a-days these 
three lakes arc assigned to the trinity of gods (Brahma, Visnu and Rudra). 
Bd. P. III. 34.11 and Vm. P. 65.31 refer to the Mcdhyama Pufkara , Bd. P . 
III. 35.39 states that Kanisfha Puskara is 2 Yojanas from Madhyama Puskara 
and Jyesfha Pujkara was two miles to the West of Madhyama Pufkara . The 
Sarasvati is said to have flowed from this lake to the sea. 

2. The hermitage of Agastya and the sacred pool named after him 
are near YajHa Parvata. The pilgrimage to Puskara becomes complete after 
bath in the Agastya Kunda ( Kalyarta 31.1. 290). 






2001 


Uttarabhaga 71.19-28 

19. By performing ablution in the Jyestha Puskara lake 
and by making a gift of a cow to a Brahmana, the devotee 
enjoys all pleasures here and is honoured in the world of 
Brahma. 

20. By taking a holy dip in the Madhyama (middle) 
Puskara lake and by giving a plot of land to a Brahmana, 
the devotee attains the world of Visnu riding in an excellent 
aerial chariot. 

21. A man who takes a holy dip in the Kanistha 
Puskara lake and gives gold as a gift to a Brahmana attains 
all desired benefits and in the end is honoured in the world 

ofRudra. . . 

22. By taking a holy dip in Visnupada and by giving 
something as gift to a Brahmana, the devotee attains all desired 
benefits, thanks to the grace of Visnu. 

23. By taking a holy bath in the Nagatirtha, by wor¬ 
shipping the Nagas (Serpents) and by giving gifts to Brahmanas, 
he rejoices in heaven for the period of a Yuga. 

24. By performing ablution in the Pisacatirtha and by 
giving food to a Brahmana, the devotee avoids the state of 
becoming a Pisaca (ghost). He shall go to heaven. 

25. By taking a holy dip in the Sivadutlhrada (the 
deep pool of that name), by worshipping Sambhu and by 
feeding the Brahmanas on sweet cooked rice, the devotee is 

honoured in the heavenly world. _ 

26. By taking a holy bath in the Akasa Puskara 1 that 
yields the benefit of the Mantras and Yogas, the man attains 
liberation, Truth; the truth has been stated to you. . 

27. He who meditates on the deity abiding in Akasa 
(a holy lake of that name) after taking a holy bath m Pus- 
kararanya uttering the Mantras Apo hi stha etc. attains the 

eternal region. . ., 

28. If the constellation pertaining to fire-god coincides 

with the full moon day in the month of Karttika, that Tithi is 
very great. The holy dip on that day in Akasa Puskara is 
meritorious. 

1. A sub-Tirtha of Pu?kara; it is not mentioned elsewhere though 
Narada praises it highly. 





2002 


Narada Pur ana 


29 The man who takes a holy dip in the Madhyama 
Puskara lake when the constellation pertaining to Yama 
coincides with the full moon day in the month of Karttika derives 
the same benefit as originates from the holy lake Akasa 

puskara. 

30. The man who takes a holy dip in the Kamstha 
Puskara lake when the constellation pertaining to the deity 
Prajapati (Rohini ?) coincides with the full moon day in the 
month of Karttika derives the same benefit as originating from 
bathing in the holy lake Akasa Puskara. 

31. When the sun is with the constellation BharanI, the 
Jupiter is associated with Krttika and the moon is with the 
constellation Rohini and it is the Nanda tithi, a bath taken 
at Puskara gives the full benefit of ablution in the Akasa 

Puskara. . 

32. When the sun is in the constellation Visakha and 

the moon isin Krttika (the constellation Pleiads), that conjunc¬ 
tion (yoga) is called Akasa Puskara—A person taking bath 
(in the Puskara lake at this juncture) goes to heaven. 

33. This is an auspicious Tlrtha belonging to Brahma. 
It has descended from the firmament. Those men who take a 
holy dip therein shall have the worlds of great rise and 
prosperity. 

34. O chaste lady, many Tirthas and shrines have been 
created by the sages and Siddhas in the forest of Puskara- 
ranyaka in the Sarasvall of Pancasrotas (five currents). 

35. It should be known that the Sarasvatl river is the 
cause of virtue and piety in all these. The charitable gifts of 
gold, plots of land and girls eight years of age in those Tirthas 
yield great benefit. 

36. He too who gives gifts of grains, gingelly seeds etc. 
to an excellent Brahmana in this holy centre derives worldly 
pleasures in this world. That man attains excellent state in 
the other world. 

37. He who takes a holy dip in the confluence of 
Ganga and the Sarasvatl and worships Brahmanas attains 
the highest goal after enjoying the desired pleasures in this 
world. 






2003 


Uttarabhaga 71.38-47a 

.jo The man who takes a holy bath in the tank called 

-ISTTK a holy bath iu ,he well called Saubha- 
I k„ performing the Tarpana rite to the ancestors, 
S: k r„a a «.io S good goal as well as unequalled good forlune 

* 40." By taking a holy dip near, by touching and by 
Viinnine- the two mountains of delimitation of the oun y, 
I”22 auaij the de,i re d world, as well as thcbcned. of 

nilsrimage with all its ancillanes. 

41 By resorting to the deity Siva called Ajagandha an 
hy wolpping the ford in accordance with the rnjunc unu 
fhe devotee defives the desired benefit in thts as well as .n 

the other ™ rl worships Savim 1 installed on the 

,o the sou" of the lake Stall be the knower of reahty (of the 

Pri ”iS 5 ; f, 0 MoM„,, there are separate Tlrthas £ 
taining to Varaha, Nfsiqdta, Brahma ^" rV Jva f ana 

Sun-god), Soma (Moon god), Guta, Pa ^ with 

(fire-god). O blessed gifts to 

great concentration and by making 

Brahmanas, the devotee attains good goa . nrmn itv of 

45b-46a. It is rare that people get opportun y 
taking the holy dip, or performing penance, or ma mg c 
able gifts or staying in Puskara. 

time of bathing, the devotee shall attain m 
dip in Puskara itself. 


irrrrnH Savitri, the consort of god Brahma 
1. According to a legend, Savitri, ,, not t0 miss the proper 

did not arrive at his sacrifice in n n • Gayatri and commenced 

muhurta, Brahma married a cow er s _ co-wife—occupying her 

Onh. rs^ Slwmfougd,^ where 

position near god Brahma ana g 
a temple is built for her on the top. 








2004 


jXarada Purana 


47b. Mankana and others who attained Siddhi by their 

penance resorted to Puskara with delight. 

48-50. In whatever place he may go, at Puskara, the 
pilgrim attains Siddhi desired by him. He too who mentions 
the name of Puskara, O daughter of Brahma, derives the merits 
of taking a holy bath in Puskara. There is no doubt about this. 
He who listens to the greatness of Puskara with devotion shall 
attain the merit of holy ablution therein. He rejoices in heaven 
like a Deva. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYTWO 

The Power of Austerities of Gautama 


Mohini said : 

1. O holy lord, O Vasu, the greatness of Puskara is 
heard. It is destructive of sins. Now kindly recount the great¬ 
ness of the hermitage of Gautama. 1 

Vasu said : 

2. O gentle lady, listen. I shall recount the excellent 
hermitage of Gautama. By visiting this place, the man does not 
encounter tortures any further. 

1. The hermitage of Gautama is located at various places such as 
Ahiari in Tirhut, Ahiroli near Buxar. But here the manifestation of god 
Siva is Tryambaka. The source of Godavari near it shows that Tryam- 
bakesvar in Nasik district is meant here. Gautama’s spiritual exploit in 
feeding sages throughout the famine of twelve years is described in the 
Devi Bhdgavata (xii. 9. 1-37) but the ruse of the ungrateful Brahmai?as to 
make Gautama guilty of a (fake) cow-slaughter given in the Devi Bh. 
(xii. 9. 47 ff) is edited out by the NP. The NP. attributes the installation of 
god Tryambaka to the austere Penance of Gautama which pleased god 
Siva and the heavenly river Ganga and as the Godavari she descended in the 
South due to Gautama’s merit (also Vide Pd, P . Uttarakhand 268. 52-54. But 
these episodes are later developments as the Mbh. does not mention them. 



Uttarabhaga 72.3-13 

3 The hermitage' of Gautama is meritorious. It is re¬ 
ported 'to by multitudes of Devas and sages. It dispels all sms. 

It bestows peace and calmness from all kinds of harassments. 

4 He who is endowed with devotional feelings and 
resorts'to the hermitage of Gautama for a period of twelve 
years, attains the abode of Siva. After going there, one ceases 
to suffer from any misery. 

5 The place where the son of MayadevI is engrossed m 
a severe penance, the Godavari and Gahga are destructive of 

all sins. 

6 O daughter of Brahma, while that sage was per¬ 
forming penance, there was a terrible drought lasting for 
twelve years. It was destructive of all animals. 

7 In that terrible period of famine, the sages became 
emaciaied due to hunger. O splendid lady, they came from 
different lands to the hermitage of Gautama. 

8 They submitted to Gautama who was performing 
penance, “Give us food whereby our life may cling to our 

bodies.” _ , 

9 Thus requested by the sages, sage Gautama became 

sympathetic and merciful. He told them who were confident 
of success due to the strength of penance. 

Gautama said : 

10 “O sages, all of you stay in my hermitage. As 
long as the famine last., I shall respectfully g.»= you 

regular y. ^ ■ [he Mges thus, thanks to his re- 

he meditated on Gahga. ,, 

12-13. Immediately after being remembered, *e goddes 

Gahga came out from the bowels 

Gahga that flooded the whole of tj* ^ ^ ^ 

sowed paddy seeds, in t e mor 

at midday. With the grains of that Sah rice, 

sages. 





2006 


Ndrada Parana 


14. Then the sages became delighted, partaking of the 
cooked rice they became contented. Joyously they took up 

their residence in the hermitage of Gautama. 

15 O gentle lady, with great devotional feelings, the 

sage thus extended his hospitality to those sages by means of 

the Sali rice-grains that ripened everyday. 

16. Even as the leading sage fed those Brahmanas 
everyday, the famine ceased at the end of twelve years. 

17 When the time of plenty arrived, all those sages in¬ 
formed 'the excellent sage and went back to their respective 
lands once again. 

18. O Mohini, sage Gautama whose prowess was ol such 
a nature performed penance for many years with perfect 
control over his sense-organs. 

19. Thereafter, lord Ambikapati (Siva) became delighted 
with his penance. He appeared before the sage accompanied 
by Ganas and said— “Tell me, what is the boon you would 
choose to have ?” 

20. On seeing Siva, the lord of Devas, the three-eyed 
deity, the excellent sage fell on the ground in front of him and 
made obeisance. 


21. Rising up immediately, he joined his palms in 
reverence and prayed to Him, “Grant me devotion unto your 
feet for ever. 

22. O Sankara, may I see you stationed on the 
mountain here near my hermitage. This is the boon I wish to 
have.” 

23. Thus requested, Siva, the consort of Parvatl, the 
bestower of desires on the devotees, granted him his presence 
there and made him delighted. 

24. O chaste lady, the three-eyed lord stayed there in 
that very same form. Ever since that day, that mountain is 
glorified by the name Tryambaka. 

25. Those who resort to Godavari, Ganga and take their 
holy dip with devotion, are liberated from the ocean of worldly 
existence, O blessed lady. 

26. By taking a holy bath in the waters of Godavari 
and by worshipping Tryambaka stationed on the mountain 




2007 


Uttarabhdga 72.27-35 

by means of services, the devotees shall become MaheSvara 
themselves. 

27. The greatness of Tryambaka has been succinctly 
described by me. Even your father Brahma is not competent 
to describe it in detail. 

28. As far as Godavari is directly visible, there are 
many holy hermitages on its bank. 

29. There is no doubt about this that by having a 
holy dip in them in accordance with injunctions and by per¬ 
forming a Tarpana rite to the Pitrs and deities, a man 
attains his cherished desires. 

30. O gentle lady, visible in some places and hidden 
thereafter, the meritorious river Godavari flooded the earth. 

31. Where the great goddess Godavari had manifested 
herself, thanks to the devotion of men, the Tirtha is highly 
meritorious. A mere holy dip therein is destructive of sins. 

32. Thereafter, the goddess of invariable holy rites 
reached Pancavatl and manifested herself clearly. She is the 
bestower of good goal Moksa to the people. 

33. O daughter of Brahma, he who takes a holy dip 
in the Godavari at Pancavatl and observes holy rites, in¬ 
variably shall attain cherished desires. 

34. In the Tretayuga, Rama came to Pancavatl and 
stayed there along with his wife and his younger brother. By 
staying here he made the river holier. 

35. O splendid lady, everything has thus been recounted 
regarding the hermitage of Gautama. It is destructive of 
sins of those who hear and those who read. It bestows the 
desired benefit. 







2008 


CHAPTER seventythree 

The Greatness of TryambakeSvara 


Narada. Puratia 


Mohmiw ^ eptor> the sacr ed anecdote of Gautama recount¬ 
ed by you has been heard. So also the greatness of Tryamba -a 

at "Ir^N^ht hi the greatness of Pundarlka- 
nurai and also how Mahadeva performed Tandava dance. O 
god on the earth (Brahmana), it is more meritorious than e 
most meritorious holy centres. 

Vasusaid : , 

Mahadeva is under the control of the devotees He is the 
bestower of boons immediately. He manifests himself before the 

devotees and carries out what they wish. 

4b-5. On one occasion, the great sage Jaimini, 
ciple of Vyasa was going on a pilgrimage to a holy place a ong 
with Agnivesa and other disciples. He went to the city of Pun- 
darika, comparable to the city of the king of Devas. 

6-9. It is prosperous and glorious. It is adome on 
sides by the trees blossoming in all seasons. It is rendered 
splendid by means of trees with cool shade, by large reservoirs o 
clear water; with very beautiful lotus-ponds which were occu¬ 
pied by different kinds of birds. It is frequented by women, cel¬ 
estial damsels and men having the lustre of Vidyadharas. It 
shines like an aerial chariot with pure shining houses. On see¬ 
ing the splendour of that city, the sage became highly delighted. 
He was inclined to take a holy bath there in that excellent 
lake which is rendered fragrant by means of different kinds of 
flowers and trees with pleasant shades. 


' H Puntfarikapura is generally taken as Pandharpur in Sholapur 
district of Maharashtra. But for the last eight centuries at least, it has been a 
centre of Vaisnavism or rather of the Waskari cult of Vithala in Maharashtra 
Kamatak. That god Siva performed a Tancjava dance here at the request 
of Jaimini is not known to the tradition of saints—the flowers of the Vitthala 
cult in Maharashtra. The author of the NP. being an cast Indian, far away 
from Maharashtra, has vague ideas about far off places in Maharashtra. 
Hence the confusion about Tryambakesvara and Pandharpur. 







Ultarabhagci 73.10-20a 

10 After taking rest for a short while on the banks hav- 
. thick shade, the sage took a. holy dip and performed the 
daily routine rites including the rites of Tarpana to the Dcvas, 
eoggs and Pitis. 

11. He made a Linga out of earth (clay) and worshipp- 
e d it with various services such as Padya, Arghya and others 
duly. He was not agitated. 

12-13. He adored Siva by means of scents, fragrant 
incense, lamps, Naivedyas and different fragrant flowers. 
When the sage stood by after worship, the lord who was 
pleased with him, manifested himself to him in that very 
Le clay, Linga emitting the lustre of different kinds o jew Is. 

14-15a. On seeing lord Siva directly, Jaimini fell on t e 
ground like a staff. After getting up again he stood with 
palms joined in reverence. He then addressed Han ha f of 
whose body was that of Siva, who dispels the anguish of those 
who seek shelter in him. 

>m!,1 15M6a “O God of gods, the Lord of the universe, I 

am blessed. I feel that I have accomplished all ob J ect ^ ° f 
life inasmuch as you who are worthy of being meditated 
upon by great gods like Brahma and others have persona y 

lord Girisa placed Ins hand 
on Jaimini’s headand told him-«Odear son, tell me what you 

W1Sh 17b-18. On hearing those words of 

plied, “May I see the lord accompanied by A ( 

Vighnesa (Ganapati) and Kumara (Karttikeya). 

Then Sankara appeared before him accompanied by his 

son as well as by Amba. me 

19a. Then the delighted lord asked agai 

dear son, what do you wish ? , r- , 

l 9 U,a. On seeing the mercilnl natnre of tb^bnl, of An 

preceptor of the universe, Jaimini smilingly said May 

you performing the Tancjava dance 

1. In the following vcr.cs wc have a graphic description of the 
Tantjava dance of Siva. 





2010 


j V dr ad a Pur ana 


i 


20b-21a. Then, in order to fulfil that desire of his, lord 
Ambikapati remembered Siva, Pramathas who are experts 
in different sports. 

2lb-22. The moment they were remembered, all of them ( 

led by Nandin, Bhmgin and others came there chattering enthu¬ 
siastically. After bowing down to the lord accompanied by 
Vighnesa (Ganesa)' Kumara (Karttikeya) and Amba they 
remained silent and stood there with palms joined in reverence. 

They eagerly waited for the behests of the lord of the Devas. 

23. Then at the behest of Jaimini, Siva assumed a wonder¬ 
ful form with ornaments and dress of variegated nature, and 
began to dance. He shone with the tremulous creeper-like 
serpents appearing as kindled fire. A slight smile flickered 
over his face. The crescent moon rendered the forehead splendid. 

His arms were lifted up like a banner. 

24. He excelled the moon (in beauty and splendour) 
and its light by the brilliances of Bhasman (ashes) applied all 
over his body by him of beautiful eyes (or by his beautiful-eycd 
consort Parvati). His body had been rendered wet by the spr¬ 
inkling of water of the celestial river (Ganga) that flowed out 
of his matted hair. The crescent of the moon (on his crest was 
scorched by his blazing eye in the forehead but the nectar that 
oozed out of the moon brought back to life the hide of the king 
of beasts who created a roaring hissing sound. 

25. When the peacock, the vehicle of Kumara, caught 
hold of a serpent with its beak, it began to hiss (Phunkrta). 

The head of the lotus-born deity (god Brahma) was enlivened 
by the nectar that was oozing out, and he was reviled by it 
(Tumkrta). The mouse that is the vehicle of Vighnaraja( Ganesa) 

was afraid of the serpent and so it squealed (Cunkria). His own 
great bull became afraid at the roaring sound of the lion (that 
was resucitated), the fear was visible in its eyes and it began to 
bellow. 

26. His lotus-like feet fell frequently on the surface of the 
earth that shook thereby. When he heard the excellent sound 
of musical instruments, he was delighted and hairs stood on 
their ends. His lotus-like feet were further brightened up by the 







Uttarabhaga 73.27-32 


2011 


the jewels on the crowns of the Devas and Asuras. Ganesa, 
Karttikeya and Sailaputri (daughter of the mountain-Parvatl) 
were eagerly looking at his face. 

27. The devotees who were highly delighted shouted cries 
of victory for him. The lord shone brilliantly with the Tandava 
dance that followed. He brightened the quarters. 

28. Then, on seeing the dance of Mahesa Jaimini was 
immersed in the ocean of bliss. With great concentration, he 
eulogised the lord with hymn consisting of verses having one 
quatrain from the Vedic texts in each. 

The Veda-Pada Hymn i 1 * * * V. 

29. O goddess residing Kampilya, O mother of the uni¬ 
verse, O deity whose lotus-like feet are bowed to by Brahma, 
Visnu and Siva, obeisance to you. 

30. O Ganapati, obeisance to you, O deity saluted by 
Ganesa, Brahma, Sun, Moon, India and Visnu, O lord of 
Brahman or Brahmanas. 

31. I salute Kumara who has gold earrings, whose fore¬ 
head is stroked by the lotus-like tender hands of Uma and who 
wears lotus garlands. 

32. Which man can adequately eulogise Siva, impercep¬ 
tible to Brahma and others. By your vision my eulogy is born 
like the shower from the cloud. 


1. VV.29-141 contain an eulogy of god Siva. It is c ^ d ^ 

hymn as every verse contains a Pdda from Vcd.c mantras. To take 

a few examples at random 

V. 37 d. Kselm&m pataye namah 

The same as Vdj. Sarhhita 16.18; Tail. Sam 4. 5. 2. 


V. 53. d rcah sdmdni jajnire 
V. 67 d. daridram nila-lohitam 
cf. Tait-Sam. 4. 5. 10. lb 
V. 82. d gdye tvd naxnasd gird Cf #V 8. 46. 17 
V 98 d yofdjdram iva priyam. Cf#F9. 32.56 

M » y ** ■>»»'“' b “* ,bOV ' ” “ ‘ h °” 
that the tide Veda Pada is justifiable. 



2012 


Narada Parana 


33 Obeisance to Siva accompanied by Amba, obeisance 
to Sarva, to Sambhu, Obeisance to Rudra who dances; obeis¬ 
ance to Sadasaspati (the lord of the assembly). 

34 Obeisance to the deity who has split the world wi h 
his feet-who has split the walls of the egg (i.c. cosmic egg) with 
£ S, who has wandered over ,he ends of quarters w.th h,s 
arms (the arms are stretched on to the quarters), obeisance to 

the lord of living beings. 

35. Hail be to the deity having a pair of jingling anklets, 

to the deity wearing shining hides as clothes; obeisance to t ie 
deity having the lord of serpents as a girdle, obeisance to the 
lord of Pasus (Individual souls). 

36. Salute to Soma; Kalakala (Death unto the god of 
death); obeisance to the trident-armed Yogin. Bow to the pure 
one bedecked in bones; obeisance to the lord of the worlds. 

37 Obeisance to the protector of the entire universe; 
Obeisance to the leader of all heaven-dwellers obeisance to 
you the lord of mountains; obeisance to the lord of holy centres. 

38. Obeisance to Sankara (the bestower of bliss), 
salute to Mangala (the auspicious Deity), obeisance to the or 
of riches, Hail to you the lord of food, obeisance to you the lord 
of Atman; obeisance to the most bountiful god. 

39. Obeisance to the eight-limbed one (one having the 
eight cosmic bodies). Salute to the excessively hearty one. Obeis¬ 
ance to the bestower of the desired things on devotees in dist¬ 
ress. Hail to the destroyer of sacrifice; obeisance to the 
most delighted deity; obeisance to the lord of well nourished 

beings. . , 

40. Hail to the lord of five elements; obeisance to tne 
overlord of Kala (God of Death, Time); obeisance to the lord 
of Atman; obeisance to the lord of the quarters. 

41. Obeisance to Mahesa, the creator of the universe; 
Hail to thePinaka-bearing god, the sustainer of the universe; 
obeisance to the fiery-eyed destroyer of the universe; obeisance 
to the one having manifold forms. 

42. O Isana, obeisance to you; O Tatpurusa, obeisance 
to you; obeisance always unto you, to Aghora; O Vamadeva, 
obeisance be to you. Obeisance to Sadyojata (a form of Siva). 


2013 


Ultarabhaga 73.43-52 

„ /.mlirllished with Bhasman. Hail to 
* "dttl A bow to Bhava; to 

til 

"et^ISSiSST-iobeisance to^he .housand- 
eyed MIdhus (sun-god) • rheeks Obeisance to Soma 

a *. Hail to the cod with good cheeKs.'-'ocibd 

with good physical body, salute y 

p “ r;~e * r 

— -) - 

victorious deity. ofhliss* I salute the lord 

47. I salute the lord who is mass ofbliss 1 sat • ^ 

who is beautiful in the course of his an “^ . ^ d Q f the 
the worlds and who is the wonderful Sadasaspati f 

I bow down to the imperishable -premelord^o 

Isa of fine-calf; to Ba wearing “ ° dcmons and 

down to the lotd who is capable of d«troy g (he 

goblins. I bow to the lord whose friend 

Yaksas. ,e and half woman deity 

49. I bow down to the half-m ^ has half t he 

who is both dark and ta * ny '"°“^ks inone half of his body, 

characteristics of man; whohas forelocks! the gar _ 

who is naked inone halfof h ; s ^^0 ^ ^ ^ 

lands of bones and lotus petals. (This is tne 

Siva.) _ . - i nrf i of the mobile 

50. I bow down to. Isana w o^ who bow down 

and immobile beings and who ^ of world ly existence. 

but once, to him to cross t g „r the worlds; who is 

»• ^^"‘iSderof Manus (Devas, and 
bestower of riches, wn 

who is the unvanquished conqu ■ death, I 

** b ^r n of°r SilGafi^iver on the 
salute to the upholder oi 


2014 Nfirada Pur ana 

head, I salute the lord who created these three worlds and 
who supports us all. 

53. I salute that Isvara who is omniscient; omni¬ 
present, who is identical with all, who is a seer from whom 
Vedas viz. the Rks and Samans originated along with the 
Yajus. 

54. I salute Lord Siva, the excellent seer, out of 
fear from whom the past, present and future beings abstain 
from other (i.e. sinful) deeds and who overviews the universe 
on all sides. 

55. I bow down to that Hara who annihilates, who re¬ 
strains and checks the Devas and at whose behest Narayana 
pervades the universe and stands by. 

56. I bow down to that Mahadeva at whose behest, 
god Brahma, the creator created this universe at the 
beginning of the Kalpa in the same manner as it was before. 

57. I salute that Isvara* whose Linga is worshipped day 
and night by the hosts of Maruts (Devas) whose eldest member 
is Indra, along with their wives. 

58. 1 bow down to that Rudra by worshipping whom 
only for once formerly the Devas, Pusa and others attained their 
respective prowess and position. 

59. I salute that god Isana who is Siva. The quiescent 
ascetics know him well and worship him perpetually. 

60. Perpetually do we offer obeisance to that auspicious 
body of yours, O Rudra, that has the splendour and refulgence 
of the lotus. O deity who have the cloth over the breasts of Uma 
spreading over his chest we bow down to it. 

61. Obeisance to you of terrible emotional feelings. Obeis¬ 
ance to you of terrible sports; obeisanee to you of fierce (very 
deep) quiescence; obeisance to you of terrible anger. 

62. O destroyer of Tripuras, obeisance to you whose feet 
rest on the chariots and horses of the Vedas and whose arms 
are equipped with the bow and arrows at the time of the 
conquest of Tripura). 

63. O, Sankara, I bow down to you whose bow-string 


*dcvam is probably a misprint for Vande . 



Uttar abhaga 73.64-74 


2015 


is the serpent Vasuki and who scatters arrows? May my salutes 
be to the great archer with Meru as the bow. 

64. Obeisance to you to your, Parasu (axe), to your 
trident of incomparable glitter. Salute to one identical with 
Hayagrlva (the horse-necked) or obeisance to your arrow. 

65. O Hara, whatever other weapons are in your quiver 
they remove the necklaces of the wives of Asuras (i.e. they kill 
the Asura husbands, thus making them widows) I make 
obeisance to them. 

66. Obeisance to you, to Aghora whose arms have been 
gently stroked with a toy-lotus by the daughter of the mountain. 
Obeisance to him who is praiseworthy to us. 

67. O Nilalohita, (Siva) save me who am ignorant, 
uneducated, devoid of any other person for shelter and I am 
leaderless, indigent and wretched and in adversity. 

68. O Isa, protect me who am wicked and in a wretched 
condition. My face is deformed and I am of evil activities. 
With this vision of mine I do not see anyone other than you 

for my propitiation. , 

69. O merciful Sambhu, be our protector. We are being 
burned by the fire of worldly existence which has love, hatred 
and pride for its flames. 

70. O Hara, of many great names, O oft-eulogised deity, 
protect me. I am after other men’s wives. I live in other’s 
houses. I am clad in others’ clothes. I depend upon others 
shelter. I eat other mens’ food. 

71 We do not endure insult heaped on your servants 
(i.e. devotees) by wicked people of the world. O lord of 
Devas, give us in plenty for many occasions. 

72 O lord, even as the haughty wicked persons who 
never exert themselves, look on, fill us with all desired wealth. 
Grant us field and longevity. 

73. O storehouse of kindness, you are indeed aware of 
' our great feelings of shame for begging. Grant us to the full the 

eulogisers with all these riches. . . . 

74 My wife, mother, father and others excessively hate 

me . I am so very lean (indigent); Grant me great learning along 
with the wealth that nourishes the universe. 




2016 


Narada Purdna 


75. We are incompetent to perform rites whether 
the results arevisible or invisible. O deity with Meru as your 
bow, grant the requisite strength to our bodies. 

76. O lord of Devas, I have incurred a thousand 
evils. Everyday, I am being separated from what is desired and 
desirable. Do destroy the ailment in my heart and also this death. 

77. Whatever ailments, ghosts, men and Devas op¬ 
press me, free me from oppression of all these. You are indeed 
very great. 

78. You alone are our protector. There is no one else 
to rescue us. Hence, O lord of Devas, O lord of Brahma, 
accept us and protect us. 

79. O lord of Uma, you alone are my mother; you alone 
are my father, you are my grandfather. You are my longevity. 
You are intellect. You are glory. You are my brother. You 
are my friend. 

80. Since, you alone are the doer of all rites, O lord of 
gods, forgive every evil deed committed by me. 

81. There is no one else equal to you in lordly glory. 
There is no one equal to me in worthlessness. Hence, O Lord 
Mahadeva you are mine and I am yours. 

82. In reverential terms* do I sing of you who are so 
gentle, whose smile is so sweet; whose person appears white with 
ashes; whose body is refulgent as the midday sun and whose 
face is beaming with delight. 

83. It is our desired boon that we may continue to 
look at you, the president of the assembly while you should go 
on dancing for a hundred years looking favourably at us. 

84. O lord, due to your favour we may live for a hundred • 
years; may we be blessed ones, learned, scholars conversant with 
Vedic texts and free from ailments. 

85. O Isana may we rejoice for a hundred years, drinking 
to our heart s content the nectar of your Tandava dance, shar¬ 
ing it with our wives and kinsmen. 


*The reading rumutsd gird may mean, ‘paying our obeisance to you, 
we praise you in words’, but if the reading be monosd gird : ‘I sing with my 
heart and soul and in words.’ 



.Uttarabhaga 73.86-96 


2017 


86. O lord of Devas O Mahadeva, may we be happy for a 
hundred years, drinking honey, from your lotus-like feet to 


our heart’s content. 

87. May we be your servants, O Mahadeva for hund¬ 
reds of years in every birth whether we are born as worms or 
serpents, ghosts or any other being. 

88. O lord Isa, O Mahadeva, may we hear for a hundred 
years, with our ears the sound of your vocal music, instrumental 
music, and behold your dance in the assembly chamber. 

89. May we repeat for a hundred years your divine 
names that destroy mundane existence, thanks to their mere 
remembrance. 

90. O Dhurjati (god with a massive matted locks of 
hair), O deity who burned the three cities merely by fixing 
the arrow to the bow, may we be unconquered by mental 
anguishes and bodily ailments perpetually for a hundred years. 

91. When will I see the youthful poet, the lord of the 
subjects, the deity who has the charming lustre of gold and 
whose chest is in contact with the cloth over the breasts of 
Gauri ? 

92. When will I serve that greatly lustrous Samba 
who is surrounded by the Pramathas (all goblin-attendants), 
whose face is beaming with delight, who is fond of clothes (?), 
whose semen is of brilliant radiance. 


93. Will Isa, the blue-necked deity of special reddish 
complexion accept me who have committed many sins, have uot 
performed even the smallest of meritorious deeds and am of 
wicked mind. 

94. When Isa of powerful neck who does not bow down 
(to anyone else) see me who am frightened, whose mind is agitat¬ 
ed and who am (pierced and) fixed to the fiery trident of Kala 

(god of death)? . . 

95. O men, O songsters, if you are desirous of attaining 

the fulfilment of love etc., come on. Sing the glory of the 


friend of Dhanada (Kubera). . 

96. O my tongue, hail to thee. Loudly proclaim the 

eulogy of the hymn of the lord of Uma, the bestower of learn¬ 
ing. Be as loud as the trumpet of a victorious king. 










2018 


Narada Purina 


97. (Defective) O you unborn one ! You are quiescent. 
Do you not know that by Siva’s satisfaction the whole world 
gets satiated ? Drink of his name if you are thirsty. 

98. O my mind, like a woman who embraces her beloved 
paramour embrace closely the deity who bestows the cherished 
desires, who is adorned by the moon, whose touch is pleasant 
and whose fragrance is enchanting. 

99. I recite the best of hymns that is greater than the 
greatest, unto Mahesvara whose resplendent ray is great; whose 
arms are greatly mighty; whose body is immensely big; whose 
elothes arc large and whose crown is big. 

100. With these beautiful hymns I worship Ugramahesa 
who is invincible, and proud. The hymns have been composed 
with great difficulty, yet with great respect, for the slightest of 
the pleasure of the lord. 

101. Obeisance to Siva, the destroyer of the three cities, 
Hail to the lord of the three worlds. Obeisance to the naked 
deity. Salute be to Hara the chief of deities. Obeisence to 
the lowest of all deities. Obeisance to one who is at the base of all. 

102. Obeisance to the Vikara (effect); obeisance to the 
Vikarin (cause), obeisance to you, to Bhava; obeisance to the 
source of origin of the world. Obeisance to you, O deity of 
many progenies, O deity of very wonderful features from whom 
the entire universe is born. 

103. Obeisance to the deity whose foot-stool is encircled 
by the lustre of different jewels on the crowns of leading Devas, 
to the deity whose unguent is Bhasman (ashes); obeisance to the 
greatest deity than whom there is nothing greater. 

104. Obeisance to you who perform beautiful Tandava 
dance. Within the mass of your matted hair, the king of serpents 
and the lord of herbs (moon) come into clash and so it is 
agitated. Obeisance to you in whom all this meets together 
and from whom all this departs. 

105. I bow down to the lord whose neck is as blue 
as the peacock’s plumage; whose lotus-likc feet are worshipped 
by Visnu; whose hands are reddish, thanks to the lac-juice 
from the feet of Uma; whose teeth have the golden lustre 


Uttarabhdga 73.106-113 


2019 


and who is fair-complexioned I go near him and bow down 
to him. 

106. I bow down to that Hara who is infinite, unmani¬ 
fest, beyond contemplation or thinking; who is single, and has 
the quarters for his garments (i.e. is naked); who is unborn, 
who is an ancient sacrificial post and one whose body is 
the sky. He is more minute than the atom. He is greater than 
the greatest. 

107. Without seeing the eternal Atman stationed within, 
foolish persons wander among the mountain caves; to the west, 
to the north, to the south and to the east. They do not know 
whether he is below or whether he is above. 

108. O Moon-crested lord, I bow down to this lord Siva 
of great bliss; devoid of sorrow and pain; who is the great 
Atman, who stays in the lotus-like cavity of the heart and 
from whom the quarters and the interstices of the quarters 
originate. 

109. O Moon-crested lord, I hear that you are the 
greatest of all physicians. See me who appear with the great 
ailment named Bhava (mundane existence) originating from 
lust, deception etc. and protect me. 

110. I am drowning in the ocean of distress. I do not 
have even an iota of happiness. I have not even touched any¬ 
thing meritorious. I have committed many sins and I am with¬ 
in the grip of the god of death. I am, therefore, frightened. 
Protect me from behind,* from front, from below and from above. 

111. O Lord, we are blessed with thy vision alone 
that is full of mercy and that is very cool, thanks to glancing 
at the charming face of Parvatl. With that we shall cross 
the miseries and evils even as one crosses the waters by means 
of a boat. 

112. I am immersed in the middle of boundless 
ocean of worldly existence. I clamour. My passion is by no 
means litde. I am helpless. O Mahesa, save me who have 
served you as one serves a donor by means of sumptuous 
Daksina. 

113. O enemy of Yama, remembering my sins accumu¬ 
lated formerly and the harsh and rough face of Yama, I fear 








2020 


Narada Purdria 


enormously. Grant me sufficient life, should I be dead or 

should my life be broken. _ 

114. When will the Pinaka-beanng Ugra of many 
forms and features embrace me with his steady limbs, that emit 
fragrance, that are white, due to the fine Bhasman, that contain 
infinite means of pleasure and that are soft and mild ? 

115. When will that lord of Devas who has golden 
features and golden vision protect me ? I am shouting loud to 
the lord. I am fallen into the ocean of worldly existence. I am 
extremely frightened like a frog stationed in an anthill wherein 
a serpent dwells. 

116. When will I see Samba (Siva) who has the colour 
and lustre of the sun, who is beyond darkness, whose smiles are 
charming, who is adorned with the digit of the moon and whose 
pair of eyes mingle with the side-glances of Gauri ? 

117. O ye primordial souls desirous of liberation, come 
and think of Siva within your lotus-like heart. Indeed those 
persons who have decisively learnt the perfect Vedantic 
knowledge, perpetually meditate on him for the sake of salvation. 

118. Gome, ye and take up the worship of Mahesa, 
Girlsa (Siva) to your heart’s content for the overlordship 
of the world. By worshipping him formerly, Hiranyagarbha 
(Brahma) became the sole lord of living beings. 

119. May they bow down to the single goal, the 
extensive glory; may those meritorious persons bow down to 
this Srikantha. He is glorious and prosperous. His feet are 
worthy of being saluted by the lord of Sri (Visnu). He is 
liberal. He is the supporter and bestower of prosperity and 
riches. 


120. May those men who are desirous of good sons, 
worship this youthful Girisa from whom Hiranyagarbha origi¬ 
nated formerly— Hiranyagarbha who is self-born and who is the 
creator of the universe. 

121. Of what avail is much talk ? Enough has been said. 
By resorting to him everything desired can be realised. By 
resorting to him day and night, formerly, sage Kumbhasambhava 
(the pot-born Agastya) whose hairs had turned grey became 
a youth once again. 


Uttarabhaga 73.122-130 


2021 

i 

122. O bees of my eyes (i.e. my eyes that resemble the 
bees) eschew everything else. Always resort to Siva. He is full 
of fragrance. He is soft. He is conducive to happiness. He is full 
of sweetness. Or is he a honeyed one ? 

123. (If you worship Siva) you will be one devoid of a 
rival. You will be one who has conquered all men and gods. 
Obeisance to you O Speech ? Eulogise this well-known youth 
seated in the pit (i.e. the cavity of the heart). 

124. p mind, whatever you think and desire for shall 
certainly and permanently accrue to you. The mind dwelling on 
worldly objects shall bring in misery (?) For the sake of good 
mentality we shall worship Rudra. 

125. O merciful one, if out of ignorance we have 
improperly offended you before, forgive us entirely. Be to us like 
.a father unto his sons. 

126. On seeing me bitten by the infuriated serpent 
called worldly existence with the fangs such as lust, hatred, 
madness, covetiousness may the merciful Pinaka-bearing- 
lord, the protector, protect me carefully without absentminded¬ 
ness) . 

127. (?) After saying this, those who, O Rudra, bow 
down to you at the end of Samadhi (ecstatic trance) go (to 
heaven) (though) they be bitten by the serpent of rebirth 
(Samsara). But I shall go unto you as a sutratman of the blue¬ 
necked deity while I shall be saluted even by Brahma. 

128. O heroic deity, stroke with your hand that is a 
penacea like ginger or pepper. O lord of the helpless ones, 
stroke us who are afflicted by the terrible fever of worldly 
existence, who have great ailments, who are the abodes of all 
sins and from whom the eyes of Kala are not far off. You are 
the slayer of Kala and you are being propitiated. 

129. May he who is the lord of all Devas and 
Danavas, who is the lord of the assembly-chamber, give us that 
great wealth, that tawny-coloured vision (?) whereby we shall 
conquer all these desired eight quarters, the places of the 
earth, of heaven, and of firmament and can have movement 
therein. 

130. Obeisance to you, to Bhava, to Hara, Obeisance 
to the deity whose chest shines with the Bhasman, who is the 








2022 


Narada Purdna 


■ offl : rt pH bv the fear of the attack of 
comrade when one is am Y p; n aka bearing 

worldly existence (Samsara). Obeisance to the Pm ^ ka bcan f 
rtpitv Hail to Siva, the protector of the universe; obeisance to 
t of perpetual dalliance; Bow to that lord whose eom- 

rad '1roS'tot“nc e e'.o the lord of the dM of 
gods Hail, Hail to the lord of Prajapati; obeisance, obeisance, 
to the lord of the rulers of the earth; Bow again and again 
to the lord of Ambika, obeisance, obeisance to the lord of 

Uma. , . 

132. I bow down to Vinayaka, the permanent destroyer 

of the anguish of those who bow down; who is the poet of poets 
(or the wisest among the wise) and who is the most renown¬ 
ed. His crown or head has never been scraped due to the bowing 
down or its sound (?) (i.e. He has not bowed to anyone). 

133. The Devas obtain Skanda in the battle (as their 
leader). The Brahmanas obtain him in the sacrifice. His name 
is mentioned in the Vedas. I salute Subrahmanya, Om, O 


Subrahmanya, Om, O Subrahmanya, Om. 

134. Obeisance to Siva (Parvatl), the mother of the 
universe, the beloved of Siva; salute to the goddess whose 
person is one with that of Siva. It was she who was born as the 
daughter of the mountain. She had braids of four matted hair. 
She was a lovely and elegant youthful maiden. 

135. I bow down to Gaurl whose colour and lustre is 
that of gold, the anklets of whose feet are set with jewels, whose 
face is delighted, who has a parrot and a lotus in her hands 
and whose eyes are large. She is the person well conversant 
with words’ she speaks. 

136. I bow down to this Uma who is the daughter of 
Mena, who cannot be comprehended, who is full of splendour, 
who cannot be measured and who makes her breasts whitened 
by means of the Bhasman at the time of embracing her 
beloved lord. 

137. I bow down to Uma, who is resplendent, whose 
refulgence of limbs is magnet-like inaction and whom Hari, 
Brahma and Indra bow down to. She is the goddess who 
stays near Girisa (Siva) and surveys the worlds. 


2023 


Uttarabh&ga 73.138-146 

138. I salute Gauri whose breasts are prominent and 
plump; whose crest jewel is the moon; whose unguent all over 
the body is disturbed and who, for the sake of miserable 
living beings, urges her own splendour to be propitiated for the 
accomplishment of their desires. 

139. I salute this daughter of Mena whose pastime is 
the protection of the wretched ones; who bestows honour and 
bliss; who is master of the lores and’ the auspicious 
words and who makes use of affable and courteous words for 
propitiation. 

140. O Bhavanl, O goddess Siva who dispel the great 
fear of distress of worldly existence, whose sole pleasure is 
your ornaments (?), grant us an excellent intellect free from 
hindrances whereby we shall cross all evils. 

141. O Siva, where and how can your equality be 
extended to ? The creation of the universe is your sport; Siva 
is your husband. Hari is yourxservant; Indira (LaksmI) is your 
maid-servant. So also are Saci and Sarasvati. You are the for¬ 
tunate (blessed) bestower of wealth,” 

Vasu said : 

142. After eulogising Siva thus with this hymn, that great 
sage, bowed down to Sabhapati (the lord of the assembly 
chamber). His eyes were filled with tears of affection. 

143. He frequently imbibed the auspicious nectar of the 
Tandava of Ha. After attaining all cherished desires, he 
obtained the state of being the chieftain of the Siva Ganas 
at the end. 

144. Like the women who embrace their husbands., 
pleasing words, realisation of powers, intellect, splendour and 
prosperity embrace that excellent twice-born who devoutly 
reads this hymn orally expressed by Jaimini. 

145. If a king who is desirous of fighting, reads tins 
hymn with respect, his enemies will quickly repair to the 
presence of the haughty god of death, entertaining fear in 
their hearts. 

146. If a person belonging to one of thefirst three castes 
reads this eulogy ever and anon with devotional feelings 
towards ISa, at the end of the fall of his body (i.e. death) t 








2024 Ndrada Purdjia 

he remains at the sides of Siva. He becomes pure and attains 
divine equality. 

147. Those who are desirous of intellect and then read 
the hymn derive good intelligence. Similarly, those who are 
desirous of nourishment derive splendour and glory; men who 
are desirous of food-grains obtain food-grains. Men who are 
desirous of sons get sons. 

148. He who retains in memory a quatrain or half of 
it, from this hymn, goes to the world of Siva. 

149. O splendid lady, that spot is a great Tirtha where 
Siva performed his Tan^ava dance. It is more meritorious 
than the most meritorious of the Tirthas. By taking a holy bath 
there, one is liberated. 

150. The excellent man who performs Sraddha to the 
Pitrs there, leads his ancestors to the heaven. No doubt need be 
entertained in this respect. 

151. If he gives a Brahmana, a cow, gold, plot of land, 
bed, cloth, umbrella, beverages, or cooked rice at that place, 
it becomes everlasting. 

152. He who listens to, or narrates this story of Pun<Ja- 
rlkapura* shall be the favourite of Rudra. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYFOUR 

Thi Glory of Gokarna 

Mohini said : 

1. O preceptor, the narrative of Pun<Jarikapura recount¬ 
ed by you, has been heard. Kindly instruct me in the great¬ 
ness of the holy centre Gokarna. 1 


*De, p. 161 identifies Puiujarikapura with Pandupura which he regards 
the same as Pandharpur, the centre of Vitthala cult in Maharashtra. 

1. A sacred Saiva Ksetra, in Kumta Tehsil of North Kanara district. 
It is about 30 miles south of the temple God. The NP. does not state the 
story how this Atmaliriga of god Siva got twisted like a cow’s ear due to 
Ravana’s frantic efforts to uproot it and take it to Lanka. It tells us how it was 



Uttarabhdga 74.2-11 


2025 


Vasu said : 

2. Listen, O MohinI, I shall recount to you the TIrtha 
Gokarna, which is a holy centre of Hara; which yields merit 
unto men and which is destructive of all sins. 

3. O fair-complexioned lady, it is situated on the shores 
of the western sea. It extends to one and a half Yojanas. By its 
mere sight it yields salvation. 

4. When the surface of the earth was gradually dug up 
by the sons of Sagara, O gentle lady, the ocean increased in 
size and flooded the land nearby. 

5-6a. It flooded an area extending to thirty Yojanas (360 
kms) inclusive of the holy centre, sacred water-reservoirs and 
forests. Then Devas, Asuras and human beings who had been 
staying there left that spot and occupied Sahya and other 
mountains. 

6b-7a. As they pondered over the fact that the holy 
centre named Gokarna became hidden under the sea, the 
excellent sages made up their mind to reclaim it from the sea. 

7b-8. All of them who had occupied the upper ridges 
of the mountain consulted together. Desirous of seeing Para- 
surama who had settled on the mountain Mahendra, O gentle 
lady, the excellent sages went there with the desire of reclaiming 
Gokarna. 

9-10. After climbing the mountain, they saw his her¬ 
mitage that was pleasing in all the seasons; that was teeming 
with both wild ruthless animals as well as tame and domes¬ 
ticated ones. The whole penance-grove contained a dense 
growth of fruit-bearing trees in full bloom. It spread its 
cool shade; it was incomparable. The wind was very fragrant 
and pleasant. 

11. After reaching the penance-grove, they entered the 
hermitage that was resonant with Vedic chants. They were 
delighted in their minds, and they went in (in the order of 
their seniority in age) with the aged ones going ahead. 

submerged in the sea-water and how sages went in deputation to Parasurama. 
who ordered the sea-god to vacate this part of the land around Gokarna 
lest he should be constrained to evaporate the sea by his missiles. The 
seagod yielded. The story is similar to that of Dasarathi Rama at the time 
of building Setu to Lanka. 









2026 


N&rada Purdna 


12. They saw that ascetic comfortably seated in the 
pasture onBrahmasana over a soft deer-skin and surrounded by 
disciples. 

13. They approached the sage how was the most excel- 
lent one among the descendants of Bhrgu; who was like the 
resplendent fire of world destruction that had become tranquil 
after burning the three worlds, and they saluted him humbly. 

14. On seeing those sages come, the leading scion of the 
family of Bhrgu, properly (with due formalities) and respect¬ 
fully greeted them with Arghya, Padya etc. 

15-16. When they were seated after the hospitality had 
been duly extended, the descendant of Bhrgu (ParaSuraraa) 
said <c O blessed ones, welcome to you. Tell me wherefore 
you have come here ? Confide in me. What is it that I can 
do for you ?” Then the excellent sages told Rama why they 
had come. 

17. “O excellent descendant of Bhrgu, know us to be 
the sages residing in Gokarna. We have been dislodged from 
that holy centre by the sons of Sagara who were digging the 
earth. 

18. O leading Brahmana, it behoves you to grant us 
back the excellent holy place (called Gokarna) by means 
of your own power, after causing the waters of the ocean to 
recede”. 

19-20a. On hearing their words, the sage who had 
already set aside his weapons, thought over the problem. He 
considered that the protection of good men was righteous on 
his part and so took up his bow and arrows. He set off along 
with them. 

20b-21. Descending from the mountain Mahendra, he 
hastened in the direction of the South-West. Quickly crossing 
the mountain, he reached the sea-shore along with the residents 
of Gokarna. 

22. After resting there for a short while, the most elo¬ 
quent sage spoke to Varuna, the lord of aquatic animals, in a 
voice as resonant as thunder. 

23. “O Pracetas (Varuna) reveal yourself to me. I am 
Rama, the descendant of Bhrgu. I have come here along with 


Uttarabhdga 74.24-35 


2027 


the sages on a certain mission. There is an urgent task to be 
performed by you”. 

24. Although the lord of the aquatic animals was thus 
called by Rama, and although he heard his words clearly, 
Varuna, the lord of aquatic animals, out of haughtiness, did 
not come to Rama. 

25. When he did not come out even after being repeat¬ 
edly invoked, Bhargava (Parasurama) became infuriated and 
seized his bow. 

26. Bhargava fixed to that bow, an arrow, the deity of 
which was the firegod, for drying up the lord of the rivers, 
the ocean. 

27. When the miraculous missile was fitted on to the 
bow by Bhargava of great soul, O gentle lady, tbfe ocean 
became agitated. The aquatic animals were in a confused state. 

28. Scorched by the missile of Rama, Varuna became 
exceedingly frightened. Approaching him in his own personal 
form Varuha grasped Rama’s feet in reverence. 

29. Then Rama withdrew his missile and immediately 
spoke to Varuna, “O lord, let Gokarna be visible, cause your 
water to recede”. 

30-3la. Then at the behest of Rama, the ocean with¬ 
drew the water flooding Gokarna. After worshipping lord 
Sankara at the holy place called Gokarna, Rama went back to 
the mountain Mahendra. Those Brahmanas however stayed 
there itself. 

31b-32a. All of those sages observed holy rites, performed 
penance and attained great bliss. They attained a state from 
which there was no return, thanks to his love for that holy 
centre. 

32b-33a. Being conscious of its greatness Sankara 
perpetually stays there with Bhutas(goblins), Devas and goddess 
Parvatl. By visiting Mahesa (Siva) at Gokarna, sins are dis¬ 
pelled immediately like a dry leaf in a storm. 

33b-35. It is not out of compulsion that men become 
interested in resorting to that holy centre. All living beings 
mobile and immobile, that die there, immediately go to t e 
eternal heaven. 






2028 


Narada Purana 


36. The holy place named Gokarna by mere remem- 
brance of which a man will become absolved of all sms, is the 
abode of all Tirthas. 

37. Through the vision of the deity, these men derive 
those benefits which they derive by taking holy bath in all 
other sacred places and by worshipping Sadasiva. 

38. Those who stay there free from lust, fury etc. attain 

Siddhi in a short time. 

39. Those who stay there wedded to the vow of celibacy, 
quiescent and invariably engaged in Japas and Homas accom- 
plish their desired Siddhis. 

40. O chaste lady, the benefit accruing from charitable 
gifts, Homas, Japas etc and the worship of Pitre, Devas and 
Brahmanas at that place is a crore times more than that in 
other centres. 

41. Thus, O gentle lady, the greatness of the sacred 
place called Gokarna has been recounted to you. It dispels all 
sins of those who listen to and read it.* 


CHAPTER SEVENTYFIVE * 1 

The Greatness of Laksmanacala 

Mohini said : 

1. O Vasu, the greatness of Gokarna that is destructive 
of sins has been heard. Now it behoves you to recount the 
greatness of Laksmana also. 


♦The printed text of the NP. gives the introductory remark as follows : 
‘‘Thus the greatness of Jyotirlinga (luminary Linga) Tryarabakesvara is 
completely recounted. Henceforth, the greatness of Gokarna is being 
recounted.* * 

1. The NP. takes this opportunity to* restate the story of Rama. 
His effort to apply the Vyuha Theory to Rama shows the then dominance 
of the Pancaratra system. The NP. gives a twist to the story about the end of 
Laksmana. VR. 7. 106. 8-17 tells us that as soon as Rama ordered Laksmana 
to die, he straightway went to the bank of Sarayu and by a Yogic process 



Utiarabhiga 75.2-13 


2029 


Vasti said : 

2. O gentle lady, listen. I shall describe the greatness 
of Laksmana. On seeing the deity there, a man is liberated 
from all sins. 

3-5. (The Caturvyuha concept is applied to Rama here). 
The god (Laksmana) is Sahkarsana himself out of the 

incarnation of the four Vyuhas (manifestations of Lord Visnu 

or Vasudeva.) He is the thousand-hooded serpent Sesa. 

6. On being requested by Brahma and others formerly, 
lord Ramapati (Lord of LaksmI, Visnu) was born of king 
Dasaratha in four forms with the names of Rama etc. 

7. After . some time, O gentle lady, the leading sage 
ViSvamitra approached the king and requested him for 
Rama and Laksmana for guarding hisYajna. 

8. Afraid of the curse of the sage, king Dasaratha 
entrusted to him his sons Rama and Laksmana who were 
loved by him more than his own life. 

9-10a. They went to the forest and guarded the Yajna 
of Visvamitra, the leading sage. Rama killed Subahu and 
Tatfaka. With the arrow charged with the missile called 
Manavastra, he cast off Marica far into the ocean. Thus 
he pleased Visvamitra. 

10b-ll. From the excellent sage who was delighted, he 

acquired a group of miraculous missiles. For sometime, he 
stayed there with his younger brother duly honoured by 
the sage. Thereafter, he was taken to the city of Janaka by 

12. Then king Janaka asked Viivamttrn who had been 
duly received and honoured. .'Of wha. great Ksatnya kmg s 
sons are thtse boysj ^ ^ ^ ^ „ 

brokers' Rama and Laksmana and that they were the sons of 
king Dasaratha. 


r i tvjp states that after Rama’s order, Laksmana 

? ave up his mortal coil. The NP. states tnat « his 

went to the south and performed penance on a cer a * 

body by . Yogis pmcen .to Rkm.’s donate » » „ 

The information about Lak?ma.iacala is too sea y 
geographically. 







2030 


JVarada Purdna 


14. On seeing Rama and Laksmana the king of 
Videha Janaka, became much delighted. In his mind he 
decided that they should become the husbands of his daughters 
Slta and Urmila. 

15-16a. The sage who was aware of the three units of 
time understood his desire. He joyfully told Janaka, “show 
him that bow which had been a deposit of MaheSvara and 
has been placed in the Svayamvara (self-choice of a husband 
by the girl) of Slta. 

16b-17a. On hearing the words of ViSvamitra, the king 
got that bow brought immediately through three hundred of 
his servants. He showed it to Rama with great enthusiasm. 

17b-18a. With his left hand, Rama lifted that bow of 
Siva instantaneously. He tied the string, stretched it and broke 
it suddenly like a lordly elephant breaking a sugarcane stem. 

18b-19a. Then the king of Mithila (Janaka) was highly 
pleased. He duly honoured Rama and Laksmana and offered 
his two daughters to them in accordance with the Sastric 
injunction. 

19b-20a. From the leading sage Visvamitra he under¬ 
stood that king Dasaratha had two more sons. He invited 
Dasaratha along with those two sons and gave in marriage his 
brother’s daughters to them. 

20b-22a. He was duly honoured by Videha. At the behest 
of the sage, king Dasaratha went back to Ayodhya along with 
all the four sons who had been duly married. On the way, 
Rama suppressed the haughtiness of Parasurama. Along with 
his brothers and father, he spent many years at Ayodhya 
joyously. 

22b-23a. He had his own splendour explained to him by 
Vasistha and other scholars. Rama understood his own splendour 
called Brahman, but he pretended to be a human being. 

23b-25a. Then king Dasaratha became delighted on 
observing that his son had learnt everything that should be 
learnt. He, therefore, made preparations for crowning him 
as the Heir-Apparent. Kaikeyi, the youngest but the most 
beloved of all his queens, came to know of this. With stubborn¬ 
ness, she prevented it and wanted her own son to be crowned 
thus. 


Uttarabhaga 75.25b-38 2031 

25b-26. To please her, Rama went to the forest though 
not permitted by his father. Accompanied by his wife Slta and 
Laksmana, the son of Sumitra, he went to Citrakuta hill, 

O splendid lady. For some time he remained there alone, 
assuming the dress and features of sages. 

27-28a. On hearing of the death of his father, Bharata 
returned from his maternal uncle’s house. On knowing that his 
father had died crying “Ha Rama”, Bharata rebuked Kaikeyl 
and went to Rama to persuade him to return. 

28b-31. Rama gave his sandals and made Bharata return. 
He then went to the hermitages of Atri, Agastya and Sutiksna, 
Thus he spent twelve years in those places. The prosperous 
scion of the family of Raghu (i.e. Rama) went to Pancavatl 
accompanied by his wife and younger brother. He stayed in 
the place called Janasthana. He slew Trisiras, Khara and 
Dusana who had been incited by Surpanakha who was 
rendered ugly by Laksmana. Then fourteen thousand Raksasas 
came there. With the iron arrows, having feathers of varie¬ 
gated colours, he (Rama) led them to Yama’s abode. 

32-33 On hearing about this, the king of Raksasas (i.e. 
Ravana) caused them to go away (from the hut) by showing 
Marlca who had assumed the form of a golden deer, and 
abducted Slta. He killed Jatayus who had obstructed him on 

the way. He then took Slta to Lanka. 

34-35a The brothers returned and began to search ior 
Slta who had been abducted. They saw Jatayu and cremated 
him when he died. Rama then killed Kabandha, blessed 

Sabarl and came to Rsyamuka. , , . 

35b-36a. At the instance of Hanuman, he became the 
friend of Sugriva, the king of Monkeys. He then lulled 

Valin his enemy and made Sugriva the king. 

36b-37. On being ordered by Sugriva, the monkeys who 

( s i ,a ) La mont Hanuman alone reached Lanla. 

on theother shore of the ocean. There he saw the chaste lady, 
the wife of Rama. 


2032 


Narada Purana 


39-40. He created confidence in her by giving her the 
jewelled ring of Rama. He told her that both of them were hale 
and hearty. From her he took the crest-jewel. He then des¬ 
troyed the trees in the Asoka grove, and killed Aksa (the prince) 
along with his army. He voluntarily submitted to captivity 
at the hands of Indrajit and so could talk to Ravana. 

41. He then burned the entire city of Lanka and met 
Slta once again. After taking her permission, he crossed the 
ocean and told Rama about her. 

42. On hearing that Slta was in the abode of the demon, 
he came to the ocean along with an army of monkeys. 

43. With the permission of the ocean, he caused the 
bridge to be made over the great sea by means of huge boulders 
from the peaks of mountains and reached the other shore. He 
encamped his army there. 

44. Although his younger brother Vibhisana advised 
Ravana to return Slta to her husband, he did not like it. 


45. Kicked by Ravana, Vibhisana sought refuge in Rama 
and Rama laid siege to Lanka. 

46. Thereafter, his counsellors, ministers, sons and 
servants were ordered by him to fight. In the battle with those 
two, they were all destroyed by the leading monkeys. 

47. Laksmana killed Indrajit by means of sharp arrows. 
Rama killed Kumbhakarna and Ravana. 

48-49. He made Vibhisana perform the obsequies of 
Ravana. He asked his beloved to enter fire and purify herself. 
Rama then gave Vibhisana the lordship of the Raksasas the 
city of Lanka and life till the end of the Kalpa. Having thus 
completed his holy vow of spending fourteen years in the forest, 
Rama returned to Ayodhya by the aerial chariot Puspaka 
along with Sugriva and Vibhisana. 


50-51. Taking Bharata who was staying in Nandi-Grama, 
he entered the city of Ayodhya. He then bowed to all 
mothers. The other brothers made the priest Vasistha crown 
Rama m the kingdom. Lord Rama ruled over the subjects as 
though they were his own bosom-bom sons 

r • iif 52 ‘, J hC tn ° WCr ° f VinUC (Dharma ) ^ he was, he was 
frightened due to the rumour current among the people and so 


Uttarabhaga 75.53-66 

he abandoned Sita. Sita reached the hermitage of Valmlki and 
lived there comfortably. 

53-54. She gave birth to two sons well-known by the 
name of Kusa and Lava. They were good singers. After perform¬ 
ing the requisite holy rites for them, Valmlki the hberal- 
mfnded sage, composed Ramayana and taught it to them. The 
Zo brothers used to sing this in the Yajnas and assembhes of the 

sages and so they became famous. 

55-57a When Rama performed a horse-sacrifice, they 

came to that assembly and sang the poem. Delighted to hear 

his own story sung, Rama invited the sage al °"S S ^' Sl ; 
the mother of the universe, informed Rama that they 
" entered a crevice in theground. I. was a g—c e. 
57b-58a. Thereafter, Rama observed the vow of celiba y 

and performed Yajfias and other rites. For thirteen thousand 

years^ the most excellent among the Raghus stayed on the earth. 

58b. Then after some time Durvasa- came there, on 
being sent by Brahma for going back to Vaikuttiha. 

59-60. O gentle lady, in an isolated place be to 

Rama .'Let no one come here. If anyone comes, let h,m 

worthy of being killed”. Rama promised it. 

fil Rama called Laksmana and said -.—“Stand here 
a, the^hreshr^who comes in - he 
tilled". He said, “So be it” and began to carry on 
behest. He did not allow anyone to go near Ram • 

62.64a. While Rhma was sitting alone « 
discussing, Durvasa w o ca t to | d him after 

ES& Z-SX *** in 

- enter;otherwise I will reduce you 

to ashes. Remember it . _ Lak?ma na became 

66. On hearing t ewor entere d within to inform his 
perplexed. Afraid of the sage, he entered 

elder brother. 








2034 


Ndrada Purana 


67. On seeing Laksmana, Kala who had already complet¬ 
ed his discussion stood up and said “Keep your promise” 
He was bidden farewell to by Rama and went away. 

68. Then Lord Rama, the most excellent among the 
righteous ones, came out and propitiated the sage Durvasa 
and fed him. 

69-70. After feeding him and bidding him farewell after 
due obeisance, Rama said to Laksmana—” Brother, Laksmana, 
a delicate situation has arisen due to Dharma. As a result of 
it, you have become worthy of being killed by me. Fate indeed 
is more powerful. Abandoned by me, now you can go wherever 
you please.” 

71. Laksmana bowed down to Rama who adhered to 
Truth and Virtue. He went towards the south and performed a 
penance on the mountain. 

72. Lord Rama too, at the request to Brahma, re-entered 
his abode without excitement. The people of Ayodhya and 
Kosala accompanied him. 

73. Those who thought of Rama and plunged them¬ 
selves in Gopratara in the Sarayu entered Rama’s splendid abode 
that is rare even to the Yogins. They attained divine bodies. 

74. After performing penance and observing Yogic 
practices, Laksmana followed Rama by his Yogic power. He 
then re-entered his unchanging abode. 

75. Laksmana granted that mountain his perpetual prese- 
ence and then continued his regular duty. Hence, this holy 
centre is excellent. 

76. Those who see Laksmana on the Laksmana mountain 
with great devotion, are blessed and contented. There is no doubt 
about this that they go to the abode of Hari. 

77. They praise charitable gifts in the place, of gold, 
plots of land, cows and horses. Whatever is given becomes 
everlasting in its benefit. The homa and the Japa too derive 
great benefits. 

78. Of what avail is much talk? Its mere sight is of rare 
occurrence. O gentle lady, if it is seen, there is salvation 
undoubtedly. 


Uttarabhaga 75.79—76.6a 


2035 


79. Both he who listens to this story of Rama along with 
the anecdote of Laksmana and he who tells this story become 
great favourites of Rama. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSIX 

The Greatness of Setu* 


Mohini said : 

l-2a. O excellent Brahmana, well done. It is very nice, 
that the Ramayana has been narrated by you. It is destructive 
of all sins of men and conducive to the increase of merits. Now I 
wish to hear the excellent greatness of Setu. * 1 

Vasu said : 

2b-3a. O gentle lady, listen, I shall recount to you the 
excellent greatness of Setu on seeing which, O queen, one is 
liberated from the ocean of worldly existence. 

3b-5. The very sight of the Setu is meritorious. Lord Rame¬ 
svara there grants immortality to men by its vision only. By- 
worshipping Ramesvara with fully controlled mind, a man 
enjoys all prosperities and glories. No doubt need be entertained 
in this respect. There is another holy centre here Viz. . 
Cakratlrtha. It is destructive of sins. 

6a. The holy bath, charitable gifts, Japa and Homa 
there, facilitate everlasting benefits. 


♦The line of rocks jutting out of the sea between Ramesvara &Sri Lanka 
is supposed to be the relic of the bridge that was built by Rama with the 
help of monkeys. It is regarded holy even in the Bh. P. (VIII.14.31.X.79.15) 
Parasara (XII.65-67) recommends a visit to Setu as atonement for 

1. As compared with the sttu-mahdtmya m SK. P. III. chs. 1-52, 
this chapter of 20 verses shows that the NP. gives a brief sketch of the 
Setu Id sub-Tirthas like Agastya, Agni, Jata, Sita-Kumja near it. Some 
Kundas, especially in the temple of Ramanatha (i.c. Ram^vara) are m 
good conditions and one feels like taking bath (or basketful of water) 
from each. The PhalaSruti of these baths is the usual routine one. 








2036 


Narada Purdna 


6b-7a. He who goes to Talatirtha and takes his holy dip 
there, attains excellent birth and rejoices on the earth like a 
Deva. 

7b-8a. Then, O blessed lady, after reaching the holy 
centre Papavinasana (a Tlrtha Destructive of sins) and by 
taking a holy bath, the man is rid of all sins. He is honoured in 
the heaven. 

8b-9a. He should then go to Sltakuntfa and perform 
the rite of ablution perfectly. By performing the Tarpan.a rite 
of the Pitrs and Devas, he shall attain all desires. 

9b. By approaching the Mangala (auspicious) Tirtha and 
by taking a holy dip, he is liberated from sins. 

10. By taking a holy bath in the tank called AmrtavapI 
the man attains immortality. By taking a holy bath in 
Brahmakuntfa a man shall attain the world of Brahma. 

11. By performing ablution in the Tlrtha of Laksmana, 
a man attains the goal of Yogins. By taking the holy dip in 
Jatatlrtha a man becomes free from illness. 

12. By taking a holy bath in the Hanumatkunda a the 
man becomes unconquerable to the enemies. By plunging into 
the Agastya Tirtha, the man becomes blessed with sons and 
wealth. 

13. The man who plunges into the Ramakuntja attains 
the world of Rama. By means of ablution in the Laksmitirtha, 
the man shall become fortunate and handsome. 

14. By taking a holy dip in the Agnitirtha, the man 
is liberated from all sins. By means of ablution in the 
Siva tirtha, the attainment of Siva’s world becomes possible. 

15. One who has taken a holy dip in the Sankha- 
tirtha does not attain a wretched state (hell). By taking a 
holy dip in the Tirthas, Yamuna etc. he goes to the heaven. 

16. By plunging into the Kotitirtha one attains the 
benefit of all Tirthas. A man who takes a plunge into the 
Sadhyamrta attains the same world as that of the Sadhyas. 

17. By taking a holy dip in the Sarvatirtha, a man 
attains cherished desires. One who takes a holy dip in the 
Dhanuskoti duly, is liberated from bondage. 


Uttarabhdga 76 . 18 — 77.2 


2037 


18. A man taking a plunge in the Ksira-kuntfa shall 
attain various worldly pleasures. By taking a dip in the 
Kapitirtha a man does not take any ignominious-rebirth. 

19. One who takes a holy dip in the Gayatri and the 
Sarasvatl is liberated from sins. By taking a holy dip in the 
Tirtha Rnamocana etc. the devotee is rid of indebtedness. 

20. O splendid lady, thus the greatness of the Tirthas 
at the Setu has been recounted. It is destructive of all sins 
•of those who read and those who listen to it. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSEVEN 

Sanctity of the Tirthas in Narmada 

Mohini said : 

1. O excellent Brahmana, the excellent greatness of Setu 
has been heard by me. Now I wish to hear the collected list of 
the Tirthas on the river Narmada. 1 

Vasn said : 

2. Listen, O Mohini, I shall recount every thing. There 
are four hundred most important Tirthas on both the banks of 
the Narmada together. 

| - 

1. The Narmada, though not mentioned in the Vedic literature is 
•eulogized in the Mbh, Vana (chs. 121-122) and Puranas like the Mt. P, 
(chs. 186-194, 554 verses), the KP, 2. (chs. 40-42, verses 189), the Pd, P, Adi 
(chs. 13-23, 739) while SKP, has devoted one complete book Reva-Khapfa 
to it. As compared with the above, the treatment of Narmada in the 
NP. in 35 verses is sketchy. Narmada is superior to Ganga as its 
mere sight inmediately sanctifies the seer. (V. 31). Thousands of 
sacred places happen to abide in various parts of Narmada is a 
Puranic exaggeration. People normally visit its source (AmarakuGtaka), 
Mahismati (or Omkara Mandhata) and Bhrgukaccha (Broach). Routine 
recommendations for the performance of Sraddha , Dana, Japa are the 
.features of every Tirtha need not be repeated. 

I 

i 

I 

i 

i 








2038 


Narada Purdna 


3. There are eleven Tlrthas on the northern bank and 
twentythree on the southern bank. The thirtyfifth Tirtha is 
said to be at the meeting place of the Reva with the sea. 

4 From the mountain Amarakantaka (where the 
Narmada rises) round the Omkara Tirtha within two Krosas 
kms) in all the quarters, there are three and a half crores of 

Tlrthas. , ... a 

5. There are a crore of Tirthas situated in the connu- 

cnce of the Kapila (with the Narmada). A hundred thousand 
Tlrthas are founded in the Asoka grove. 

6. A hundred Tirthas are at the Angaragarta, ten 
thousand at Kubja,* a thousand in the confluence with Vayu 
and a hundred Tirthas of Sarasvati are situated here. 

7. They know that there are two hundred holy spots in 
the Suklatirtha, a thousand in Visnutirtha, a thousand in 
Mahismati and ten thousand holy spots in the Sulabheda. 

8. There are a thousand holy spots in the Devagrama 
village, there are seven hundred in Uluka. There are a hundred 
and eight Tirthas at the confluence of the Ivlaninadi* 

9 . As many Tirthas are in Vaidyanatha, and as many in. 
Ghatesvara. There are a hundred and fifty thousand sacred 
places in the meeting place of Reva (Narmada) and the sea. 

10. There are eightyeight thousand Tirthas in Vyasa 
and also hundreds of islands. In the confluence of the 
Karanja, ten thousand and eight Tirthas are situated. 

11. In the confluence of the Erandi (modern Uri) there 
are a hundred and eight Tirthas, there are sixtyeight tirthas, 
in the Dhutapapa and one and a half crores in the Kokila. 

12. O queen of men, there are a thousand Tirthas in 
Romakesa and a thousand in Dvadasarka. In the Suklatirtha 
there are eight hundred lakhs and two thousand Tirthas. 

13. They know that in all confluences of rivers with. 
Narmada there are hundred and eight Tirthas. There 
are five hundred Tirthas in Nanda, the confluence of the 
river Kaveri. 


*v.l. At the confluence of Kubja with Narmada. 



Uttarabhaga 77.14-27 


2039 


14. In the Ksetra (holy centre)of Bhrgu, there are a crore 
of Tirthas. In Bharabhrti there are a hundred and eight Tirthas. 

15. There are a hundred and fifty Tirthas in Akruresa 
and hundred thousand in Vimalesa. In the sphere of Nar¬ 
mada, the number of Tirthas is one and a half crores. 

16. O splendid-faced lady, there are ten Tirthas of the 
sun, nine of Kapila and eight of Vidhu (the Moon god). 
There are a crore and eight Tirthas of Nandin. 

17. O Mohini, there are seven Tirthas in each of 
these holy spots namely Nagavarta, Agnyavarta and Siddha- 
varta and there are five Tirthas named Kedaradaiva, Indriya- 
daiva, Varidaiva, Isadaiva and Nandi daiva. 

18-19. The following are mentioned to be of four Tirthas 
in each Viz : Yames'a, Vaidyanatha, Vamana, Angarakesvara, 
Sarasvata, Munlsa, Darukesa and Gautama. There are three 
Tirthas at Vimalesvara. There are then the Tirthas of 
Sahasrayajna, Bhlsmesa and Svarna Tirtha. 

20. The following are great Tirthas viz. Dhautapapa, 
Karanjesa Rnamuktiguha, Dasasvamedha, Nanda, Manmathesa 
and Bhargava. 

21-23. O auspicious lady, each of these is a great Tirtha 
Parasara, Ayoni, Vyasa, Pitrnandi, Gopesa, Marutesa, 
Jafigalesa, Suklaka, Aksaresa, Pippalesa, Mandavyesvara, 
Dlpakesvara, Uttaresa, Asokesa, Yodhanesa and Rauhina, 
Lokesa is said to be two in nnmber. There are one thousand 
nine hundred individual Tirthas, O fair one. 

24. In groups there are two hundred and four hundred 
Tirthas. There are Tirthas pertaining to Siva. The Tirthas 
pertaining to Visnu are twentytwo. 

25. All these Tirthas pertain to Brahma; twentyeight 
Tirthas pertain to Sakti. Among them, O splendid-faced lady, 
seven pertain to Mothers and three to Brahml. 

26. There are two Tirthas of Vaisnavl. O gentle lady, 
Raudri (among the Mothers) is stationed in the remaining 
Tirthas. O splendid-faced lady, one Tirtha is mentioned as 
that of Ksetrapala. 

27. O Mohini, three and a half crores of Tirthas have 
been mentioned by Vayu. They are intermediary Tirthas. Some 
are hidden and some manifest. 






2040 


Narada Parana 


28 29a These Tirthas are in the Reva (Narmada) 
region on the ground, in the atmosphere or in the heaven. The 
man who takes a holy dip anywhere m these Tirthas O 
blessed lady, becomes pure in soul and attains excellent goal. 

29b-30a. Holy dip, charitable gilt, Japa, Homa, the 
study of the Vedas and the worship of the deity, everything 
performed on the banks of Narmada has everlasting benefits. 

30b-31a. The waters of Saras vati sanctify in three 
days. O chaste lady, the waters of Yamuna sanctify in 
seven days. The waters of Ganga are meritorious even in a 
single dip; but the waters of Narmada are holy even by 
their sight. 

31b-32a. Thus, O gentle lady, the multitudes of Tirthas 
on Narmada have been listed. These Tirthas suppress great 
sins of those who remember them. 

32b-35. The man who hears about these Tirthas, he 
who narrates and he who reads this list, O gentle lady, is 
liberated from sins. There is no fear of pestilence, or from 
arson in the house where these names of Tirthas have been 
written down and are revered too. There is no fear from kings, 
thieves and enemies, nor from sickness. That house is filled with 
fortune, riches and food-grains perpetually. It is always joyous 
and auspicious through the marriage and other celebrations of 
sons, grandsons etc. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYEIGHT 

The Glory of Avanti 

Mohini said : 

1. O Brahmana, very wonderful is this greatness of 
Narmada. It. has been heard by me as it was described by 
you. It is destructive of sins. 





Uttarabhaga 78.2-9 


2041 


2. O blessed holy lord, now tell me the greatness of 
Avantf 1 and that of Mahakala worthy of being adored by the 
Devas. 

Vasu said : 

3. O gentle lady, listen. I shall recount the greatness 
of Avanti. If duly glorified, it yields merit unto men and 
destroys their sins. 

4. The grove Mahakalavana is meritorious. It is an 
excellent place for penance. Lord Mahakala is perpetually 
engaged in penance there. 

5. There is no other holy centre on the earth greater 
than Mahakalavana. O gentle lady, by visiting it, a man 
competes with the deities. 

6. O lady of beautiful eyes, by taking a holy dip in the 
Tirtha named Kapalamocana, with devotion, even a Brahmana- 
slayer becomes sanctified. 

7. Similarly, by worshipping the deity called Kalakalesa, 
the man gains victory in disputes and always succeeds in his 
undertakings. 

8. There is another Tirtha here viz : the Apsarahkunda. 
The man who plunges therein shall become blessed and enjoy 
all worldly pleasures. He shall be like Kandarpa (cupid) 
himself. 

9. One who takes a holy dip in the Kunda called 
Mahisa shall conquer the enemies in battle. One who takes 
a holy dip in the lake Rudrasaras is honoured in the world 
of Rudra. 


1. Avanti is the region with Ujjayini as its capital, though later on 
they were identified. It is known since the time of Panini. The NP. states 
that in different Yugas it was known under different names such as Amara- 
vati, Kusasthali, Kanaka srnga, Padmavati, Kumudvati and Ujjayini. It 
is associated with Mahakala, a famous jyotiT-lihga. The fight between god 
Siva and Andhakasura took place in the Mahakalavana in (the country 
called) Avanti. A number of sub-Tirthas are mentioned in the NP. with 

the usual recommendations of bath, Tarpana,. Dana, Sraddha etc. e . 

has devoted one Volume ( Kha*dd) to describe the great sanctity or 
Avanti. 



2042 


Narada Purana 


10. By visiting Kuntfalesvara and by worshipping the 
deity in accordance with the injunctions, the devotee gains in 
business and activities and becomes a favourite of Siva. 

11. By taking a holy dip in the Tlrtha called Vidya- 
dhara, the man becomes purified. By worshipping Markantfe- 
svara the devotee becomes rich and long-lived. 

12. If a man worships goddess Sltala stationed in 
Kalavana, he need never fear swelling boils (smallpox). 

13. By visiting the holy centre Svargadvara, by taking 
a holy bath and by worshipping Sadasiva, a man never 
attains wretchedness. He is honoured in the heavenly world, 

14. By visiting the holy centre Rajasthala and taking 
a holy dip in the oceanic Tlrtha, the devotee attains the 
excellent benefit of holy ablution in all theTirthas. 

15. By taking a holy bath in the tank of Sankara, the 
man of regular holy observances attains desired pleasures 
and in the end goes to the city of Rudra. 

16-17. By worshipping Sankaraditya, a man shall be 
invincible. By taking a holy dip in the Nilaganga and by 
devoutly worshipping goddess Gandhavati, the man is liberated 
from all sins. By taking a holy dip in Dasasvamedha, one 
attains the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. 

18. By visiting the shrine of the goddess Ekanamsa (?), 
and by worshipping the goddess of Devas with scents, fragrant 
flowers etc. one attains the desired benefits. 

19-20a. By worshipping Harasiddhi a man shall be a 
lord of all Siddhis. By worshipping the fourteen deities begin¬ 
ning with Pisacaka, a man obtains the desired benefits. No 
doubt need be entertained in this regard. 

20b-21. The man who takes a holy dip in the lake of 
Rudras and worships Hanumatkesvara with faith, shall attain 
riches. By worshipping Valmikesvara, one shall become a 
storehouse of all lores. 

22. The man who worships Sukresvara and other Lingas 
faithfully shall be richly endowed with worldly pleasures 
and shall be free from ailments. 

23. By worshipping Pancesana, a man shall attain all 
Siddhis. By roaming over Kusasthall, the devotee attains the 
desired benefit. 





Uttarabhaga 78.24-36 


2043 


24. By worshipping Akruresa, one attains fearlessness 
from cruel persons and beings. By taking a holy plunge in 
MandakinI, one shall attain the benefit of a holy dip in the 
Ganga. 

25. By worshipping Ankapada, a man shall become an 
attendant of Siva. By worshipping Candraditya, one shall 
attain different worldly pleasures. 

26. By worshipping Karabhesvara, one shall attain 
happiness .of vehicles. By worshipping Latfdukapriya Vighnesa 
(Vighnesa fond of sweets) one shall be happy. 

27-28a. By worshipping Kusumesa and others, one 
enjoys all pleasures. By taking a holy dip in the Yajnavapi 
and by worshipping Markandesa, the man obtains the benefit 
of all Yajfias. He stays in heaven for the period of a Yuga. 

28b-29. O chaste lady, by taking the holy dip in the 
Somavati and by worshipping Some^vara, the man obtains the 
desired benefits both here and hereafter. O Mohini, by 
worshipping in Yatanakalana, the man never faces tortures in 
hell. 

30-31. By worshipping Narakesa, one attains the goal 
of heavenly world. By worshipping Kedaresa, Ramesvara, 
Saubhagyesa and Naraditya, the devotee obtains the desired 
benefit. By worshipping Kcsavarka, the man shall be a 
favourite of Kesava. 

32-34a. By taking a holy dip in Saktibheda, one is 
liberated from terrible and difficult calamities. By taking a 
holy dip in Svarnaksura BrahmavapI and by worshipping 
Abhayesvara and Agastyesa, O daughter of Brahma, one shall 
become the abode of all riches. The man who perfectly wor¬ 
ships Orhkaresa and other Lingas, shall obtain all desires. 
Thanks to the grace of Mahesa. 

34b-35a. O gentle lady, there is no limit to the number 
of Lingas in Mahakalavana. By worshipping any Li nga situat¬ 
ed anywhere, one shall be a favourite of Siva. 

35b-36. The names of Avanti are Kanakasrnga, Ku£a- 
sthall, Avantika, Padmavatl, Kumudvati and Ujjayini. In 
every Kalpa it has a different name. It is called Visala an 
Amaravatl as well. 



2044 


Narada Parana 


37. The man who takes bath in Sipra river and worships 
Mahesa, shall attain his cherished desires, thanks to the grace 
of the deity. 

38-39a. By taking a holy dip in the Gomatl Kuntfa 
the man obtains heavenly goal. By taking a holy dip in 
Vamana Kunda, by eulogising Srldhara, the lord of all Devas, 
by uttering his thousand names, a man shall become Hari 
himself on the earth. 

39b-40a. He who takes a holy dip in the lake Viresa- 
saras and worships Kalabhairava, enjoys riches and attains 
Siva’s world. 

40b-41a. He who visits Kutumbesvara and worships him 
with various means of service, achieves his different cherished 
desires, and in the end achieves heavenly goal. 

41b-42a. He who worships Devamadhava in the 
Devaprayagasaras derives devotion for Madhava and attains 
the region of Visnu. 

42b-43a. O chaste lady, he who takes a holy bath in 
the Tlrtha of Karkaraja with controlled mind, shall be rid of 
all ailments. He shall become rich and enjoyer of pleasures. 

43b-44. The man who faithfully worships Vighnesa 
Bhairava, Uma, Rudras, Adityas and other Devas in the course 
of his pilgrimage in the Antargrha (?) with whatever means 
that are available, shall gain heavenly world. 

45-46. O lady, there are many other Tlrthas in 
Rudrasaras. By worshipping Sankara in them, the man shall be 
happy. By taking a holy dip in the Astatirthl (collection of 
eight Tlrthas), the man obtains the benefit of pilgrimage to 
Kalaranya. O daughter of Brahma, truth, it is the truth that 
has been mentioned by me. 

47. Thus everything in regard to the greatness of 
Avanti has been narrated. By listing to the greatness of Avanti, 
the man is liberated from all sins. 






2045 


Uttarabhaga 79.1-6 

CHAPTER SEVENTYNINE 

The Greatness of Mathura 


Mohint requested : 

1 O Vasu, the greatness of AvantI that is destructive 
of sins of men, has been heard. Now I wish to hear the 
greatness of Mathura. 1 


Vasu said : 

2 O MohinI, listen. I shall recount the greatness of 
Mathura that is conducive to auspiciousness. It was here that 

the lord was born on being requested by the lotus-born deity 

Brahma. 

3 After manifesting himself there, the lord went over to 
the cowherds’ colony of Nanda. Staying there, he played all 

games in the company of young cowherds. 

4 After killing demons beginning with Putana, sent 
by Kariisa, he sported in the twelve forests along with the 
cowherdesses. 

5 O MohinI, listen. Now I shall recount to you 
those Tirthas that are in the forests and in the area of 

Mathura. „ „ 

6 The first forest 2 is what is called Ma uvana. y 
taking a holy bath there and performing the Tarpana n es 

.. =r.■ 

the descriptions of Mathura and . Aneultara (I. 167) 

since the 6th century B.C., as we get re 1 d; disciple Maha- 

and Majjhima (II. 84) Nikayas to Buddhas ^ 

Kaccayana preaching in Mathura. Emmj* ^ a]$o flourish ed 

in addition to Brahmanism, * nd ® u fi ^ 0.40 AP 11.8-9 mention 
at Mathura. The Va. P 99.383, VP. V. 6. 28-40, y yJ ^ 

it but it is glorified in details in Vaisiiava uranas describes it as a 

BA. P. X Skandha. The NP. being a Wva »d««.^ ^ 
Tirtha. The NP. uses two terms —Mathura Mm ^ which the 

Mathura within the radius of twenty Yojanas in the m 

town of Mathura is situated (W. 20-21.) . . now mere names 

2. VV. 6-18 enumerate 12 forests round Ma*m*now ^ ^ 
only. The NP. describes the fruits of religious ac p 



2046 Narada Purana 

unto the Devas, sages and Pitrs, the excellent man is honoured 
in the world of Visnu. 

7. O gentle lady, the second excellent forest is what is 
called Tala. The man who takes a holy bath there with 
devotion, has all his objectives in life accomplished. 

8. O lady of beautiful eyes, the third one is what is 
called Kumuda. By taking a holy bath there, the devotee 
attains cherished desires and rejoices here and hereafter. 

9. The fourth one is glorified by the name of Kamya- 
vana. It contains many Tirthas. By visiting it one attains the 
world of Visnu. 

10. There is an excellent Tirtha called Vimala Kunda. 
It is the most excellent of all Tirthas. O gentle lady, the 
man who takes a holy dip there, attains the region of Visnu. 

11. The fifth forest that is destructive of sins, is called 
Bahula. By taking a holy ablution, the man attains all desires. 

12. There is the sixth forest named Bhadravana. The 
man who takes a bath here, sees everything auspicious, thanks 
to the grace of lord Krsna. 

13. O gentle lady, the seventh forest is Khadira Vana. 
Merely by taking a holy dip here, the man attains that 
greatest region of Visnu. 

14. The eighth forest is Mahavana most liked by Hari. 
By visiting it with devotion, the man is honoured in the world 
of Indra (i.e. heaven). 

15. The ninth forest is Lohajangha. The man who takes 
a oly bath there, attains worldly pleasures and salvation, 
thanks to the grace of Mahavisnu. 

16. O lady of beautiful waist, Bilva is the tenth forest. 
He who takes a holy dip there, goes to the world of Siva or 
Visnu as he pleases. 

17. The eleventh forest is Bhanclira, most liked by the 
Yogms The man who devoutly takes a bath there, is libe¬ 
rated from all sins. 

18. Vrndavana is the twelfth one. It destroys all 
sms. O chaste lady, there is no other forest equal to this on 
the surface of the earth. 







Uttarabhaga 79.19-27 


2047 


19. The man who takes a holy bath there and performs 
Tarpana to the Devas, sages and Pitrs, becomes liberated from 
the three-fold indebtedness. He is honoured in the world of 


Visnu. 


20. The precincts of the holy centre Mathura extend 
to twenty Yojanas (240 kins). If any person takes a holy bath 
anywhere within this area, he shall attain devotion to Visnu. 

21. Within it, is the city named Mathura. It is the most 
excellent of all cities. Merely by seeing it, one obtains devotion 
to Visnu. 

22. O queen of men, there is a jewel among Tirthas 
named Visranti. 1 The man who devoutly takes a holy dip 
there, attains the region of Visnu. 

23. Near Visranti and to the south of it, is the excel¬ 
lent Tirtha viz. Vimukta. It is certain that the man who 
devoutly takes bath there attains liberation. 

24. O queen of the people, still south of it, is the Rama 
Tirtha. The man who takes a holy bath there shall certain y 
be liberated from the bondage of ignorance. 

25. To the south of this, is the excellent Tirtha called 

Samsara Moksana. A man who takes a holy dip there, is 

^irvnrmrprl in the World of VisnU. 



lady, the man 


places. 



Tirtha. 



2048 


Narada Pur ana 


28. To the south of it is the holy centre Tinduka. The 
excellent man who takes a holy bath there attains the benefit 
of Rajasuya sacrifice. He rejoices in heaven like a Deva. 

29. Beyond that is the holy centre Patusvami Tlrtha. It 
is a favourite of the Sun-god. By taking a holy bath and 
seeing the Sun, the devotee enjoys all worldly pleasures and 
goes to heaven. 

30. O gentle lady, to the south of it is the excellent 
Dhruva Tlrtha. By taking a holy bath and by having a sight 
of Dhruva (pole star), the devotee obtains the region of 
Visnu. 

31. Beyond Dhruva Tlrtha, to the south of it is the 
Tlrtha frequented by seven sages. By taking the holy 
plunge and by visiting the sages, the devotee rejoices in the 
world of sages. 

32. To the south of Rsitirtha is the excellent Moksa 
Tlrtha. Merely by taking a holy bath therein, one is liberated 
from all sins. 

33. To the south of it is BodhinI Tirtha. The man who 
takes a holy dip there and offers Pintfa to the Pitrs leads 
them to the heaven. 

34. To the south of it is Koti Tirtha. By taking the 
bath therein, a man is liberated from all sins. He shall attain 
the world of Visnu. 

35. To the northern side of Visranti is the holy centre 
Asikundaka. O gentle lady, the man who takes a holy bath 
there attains the region of Visnu. 

36. O lady of beautiful eyes, Nava Tirtha is to the 
north of Asikunda. By taking a holy dip there, the man is 
honoured in the heavenly world. 

37. The Tirtha called Samyamana is situated to the 
north of it. By taking a holy dip therein and offering charitable 
gifts, the devotee does not see the world of Yama. 

38. To the north of it there is a great Tirtha 
Dharayatana. By taking the holy bath therein, the man 
rejoices in the company of ancestors. 

39. To the north of it is the Naga Tirtha. O Mohini, 
by taking a holy dip therein the devotee derives fearlessness, 





Uttarabhaga 79.40-49 


2049 


protection from the serpents. He is honoured in the 
heavenly world. 

40. To the north of it is theTirtha named Brahmaloka- 

Ghantabharanaka. By means of a holy dip this Tlrtha 
dispels all sins. It bestows the goal of the world of Brahma. 

41. To the north of this is the great Tirtha named 

Soma. He who takes a holy plunge in it, attains the world of 
Soma (Moon). Rid of sins he becomes the most excellent 
of men. 

42. O auspicious lady, one should take a holy bath 
in Praci Sarasvati which is to the north of it. Merely by 
taking a holy dip there, the man shall become the lord of speech. 

43. To the north of it is the Cakra Tirtha. The 

man who takes a holy dip there, conquers hosts of his 

enemies and rejoices in heaven for the period of seven Yugas. 

44. O blessed lady, the Tirtha Dasasvamedha is 
situated to the north of it. By taking a holy dip therein, one 
shall attain the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. 

45. By worshipping Siva designated Gokarna, in accord¬ 
ance with the injunctions, the man attains his cherished 
desires. In the end he is honoured in the world of Siva. 

46. To the north of it is situated the Tirtha named 
Vighna-Raja. By taking a holy bath there one shall attain 
the benefit of his holy rites without an obstacle. 

47. To the north of it is the Tirtha named Ananta. The 
man who takes a holy bath there shall attain the benefit of 

twentyfour Tirthas of Mathura. 

48. O blessed lady, Lord Hari himself is stationed in 
Mathura, in the form of Caturvyuha (four manifestations 
of Visnu). He is the bestower of liberation on the citizens of 
Mathura 

49. The four manifestations are : one is the form of 
Varaha (the Divine Boar), another one is called Narayana; 
the third form is called Vamana and the fourth is Haladhara 
(i.e. Sankarsana) .* 


Thu is another variety of the Vyuha Theory including Varaha, 
Narayaoa, Vamana and Sankarsana as the four Vyuhas. 



2050 


Ndrada Purdna 


, 50. By visiting the lord of the four Vyuhas and by 
worshipping him in accordance with the injunctions, man 
attains liberation. 

51. By visiting and duly worshipping Rangesa, Bhutesa, 
Mahavidya and Bhairava, the devotee shall attain the benefit 
of the pilgrimage. 

52. By taking a holy dip in the Catuhsamudrika 
(where four oceans meet), the well of Kubja and Ganga 
called Krsna and of the lord of Ganas (attendants), the 
devotee is liberated from all sins. 

53. O auspicious-faced lady, lord Kesava, the destroyer 
of all miseries presides as the overlord of the entire zone 
called Mathura. 

54. O gentle lady, if one does not see Kesava in the 
sacred zone of Mathura, one’s life becomes purposeless. He will 
drift about in the ocean of worldly existence. 

55-56. O splendid-faced lady, there are many other 
numerous Tirthas there. By taking a holy dip therein and 
by giving something to the people staying there, a man 
wards off a wretched state. He does not go to hell. The truth 
has been stated to you. He who narrates or listens to the 
greatness of Mathura attains devotion to Hari and (thereafter) 
attains all cherished desires. 


CHAPTER EIGHTY 

The Glory of Vrndavana 

Mohini requested : 

1. O bestower of honour, the greatness of Mathura and 
the forests has been heard. Tell me a little about the secret of 
Vrndavana too. 

2. O Brahmana, Vrndavana is, as it were, the glory of 
the earth preserved in secret. I desire to hear about it. Narrate 
it to me in detail. 





UttarabhSga 80.3-13 


2051 


Vasu said : 

3. O gentle lady, listen to the esoteric secret from me 
about Vrndavana. After acquiring it from the excellent pre¬ 
ceptor, it has never been recounted by me to anyone. 

4. O gentle lady, the secret of the lord of the cowherd- 
esses had been communicated to my preceptor by Narada of 
great soul. But it had been at first confided to Narada by Vrnda. 

5-6. That I shall recount to you as it is conducive to the 
uplift of the universe. On one occasion, Narada, the dear 
friend of the lord, was wandering over the worlds. He 
reached Vrndavana and stopped on the banks of the lake 
Puspasaras. 

o gentle lady, it is situated in the north-west sector of 
the sacred place Mathura. 

7. A fourth part of Vrndavana is the secret rende¬ 
zvous of the lord of cowherdesses. The mountain Govardhana 
is also there near the Sakhlsthala. (the rendezvous of his 

friend). T • • vr j- 

8. That is the penance grove of Vrnda. ItisinNanat- 

grama near the Yamuna. O chaste lady, the beautiful Vrnda¬ 
vana is on the charming banks of the Yamuna. 

9. O blessed lady, the highly meritorious Puspasaras 
lake is also there. On the same beautiful bank is the hermi¬ 
tage of Vrnda which is extremely conducive to pleasure. 

10-il. It is here that Hari takes rest every day at 
midday along with his woman friends. Narada resorted for a 
short while in the cool shade of a tree. He drank die cool 
water of the lake Puspasaras after performing the midday holy 

rites. He sat on the bank of the lake. . _ 

12 Even as Narada sat watching, O Mohim, cowherds 

and cowherds came into that beautiful henmtage of Vptda 

in groups and in groups they went away. 1 

13 For the period of a Yama (three hours) he stayed 
there thus, when the day was short of half a Prahara he entered 
the wonderful hermitage. 

-i vv —io 33 describe how Narada who wanted to know the 

1 . VV. 1Z-33 a«cru>cnu woman and enjoyed. 

Secret of Love-devotion to Kr?na, was cnangea 
by Lord Krsna, 



2052 


Narada Purdna 


14. Vrnda, the gentle lady devoted to the love of Krsna 
was staying there receiving the visitors and extending hospi¬ 
tality to them with fruits etc. 

15. O gentle lady, on seeing that ascetic woman, 
Narada who was highly esteemed by saintly persons, bowed 
down to her, with great humility. He sat on the bare ground. 

16. At the end of her meditation and Yogic practice, 
Vrnda opened her eyes. She offered a seat to Narada who 
was the guest. 

17. Desirous of knowing the secret of the lord of cowherd- 
esses (i.e. Krsna) from her, Narada stayed there on being 
respectfully honoured by Vrnda. 

18. The son of Brahma (i.e. Narada) accepted the 
hospitality extended by her. Knowing that she was delighted 
in her mind, he informed her of his heart-felt desire. 

19. Having gauged his desire of knowledge with her 
Yogic power and meditation, O beautiful lady, she sent for her 
friend named Madhavl and told her : 

20. “O Madhavl, see that Narada, the great soul, 
realizes his desire so that the meritoriousness of myself and 
this hermitage is enhanced. 

21. If one does not carry out the loving request of a 
visitor to the hermitage, it is in vain. It is comparable to a 
jackal’s den. 

22. At the behest of her mistress Vrnda, Madhavl, the 
good lady, took Narada to the excellent bank of a lake. 

23-25a. She directed him to take his holy bath facing 
the north-west. Then, O gentle lady, at the behest of that lady, 
Narada of divine vision dipped himself into the water medi¬ 
tating on Srikrsna’s contact. When the excellent sage Narada 
plunged into the lake, the lady Madhavl went back to Vrnda, 
O gentle lady, after completing her task of carrying out his wish. 

25b-26a. Narada came out of the water after the 
plunge and found himself in the form of a woman. It was very 
surprising. 

26b-27. Narad! (the lady Narada) smilingly glanced all 
round and saw a woman stationed in the north-east. She was 
beautiful and was bedecked in excellent ornaments. She was 




2053 


Uttarabhdga 80 . 28-39 

beckoning with the gesticulations of her hand to NaradI to 
come towards her. 

28. NaradI was called by her and so she'went near that 
lady. After instilling confidence into her, she was taken to 
another place. 

29. NaradI was taken by the lady to a certain 
chamber full of woman and ornamentally decorated with gems 
and jewels. The lady withdrew thereafter and NaradI was 
received duly by those women. 

30. She was received by the groups of companions, 
Visakha etc. After consoling her, O gentle lady, she was taken 
within the inner chamber by a maid. There NaradI saw the 
lord of the cowherdesses. 

31. When the messengers returned, NaradI was called 
by the lover of cowherdesses. After bowing down to the lord, 
she went near him bashfully. 

32. The man of taste (LordKrsna) embraced her, had 
the sportful dalliance with her and then dismissed her. Gradu¬ 
ally she came once again to the lake Puspasaras. 

33. She was then made to plunge into the lake on the 
south-west side. Narada then regained his manhood. He was 
surprised at it. 

34. At the behest of Vrnda, Narada performed a penance 
in the south-eastern side of the lake in an isolated spot and 
stayed there eagerly to see that (?). 

35. Narada thus continued his penance sustaining him- 

•selfwith the fruits sent by Vrnda. 

36. Once Narada was moving about here and there with¬ 
in his hermitage. He heard some charming sound uttered by 
some lady. 

37. On hearing it, Narada of a spiritual vision became 
curious. He searched the forest but could not see any trace 
of the person. 

38. Surprised much at this, he respectfully asked Vrnda 
about it. She narrated to him the story of the Kubja (hump- 
backed lady) from the beginning. 

39. This hump-backed lady is stationed in a house under¬ 
ground. She is the excellent beloved of the lord. In an isolated 
place, she receives her Lord and renders service to him to his 
heart’s content. 




2054 


Ndrada Parana 


40. O excellent sage, excepting me no one knows her. 
Hence I shall succinctly narrate. It is because you were 
desirous of seeing her that you performed the penance. 

41. Early in the morning, Krsna was wakened up by his 
mother. He took his bath and breakfast. Followed by his friends 
he went to the forest for grazing the cows. In that connection 
he entered Vrndavana. 

42. He spent his time sporting about along with his 
friends (the cowherds) and preventing the cows (from straying). 
He entered my hermitage along with his two or three dear 
friends. 

43- Propitiated by means of fruits, roots and other 
edibles offered by me, he used to sleep along with his beloved 
lady in the calf-shed cove table by everyone. 

44- The cowherd fond of cowherds’ colony was 
served by his intimate lady friend Radha. Thus, he used to sport 
about in different bowers severally for a period of about four 
hours and a half. 

45. While he was asleep there, he was fanned by Radha 
and others. Within a Yama and a half, he himself used to wake 
up and honour his beloved ones. 

46-47. Surrounded by cowherds and cows, he delightedly 
used to go back to the cowherds’ colony in the evening. 
His female friends used to take Radha 1 , his beloved to the 
spot called Sakhl-Sthala. Every day the beautiful ladies of 
large eyes, used to go to their own houses along with her. 
Coming to and fro like this sportingly, he frequented that place 
everyday. 

48. He is seen, O dear one, only by me and not by god 
Brahma, Siva and others. O dear one, the grandeur of the 
rendezvous of the hump-backed lady was not observed even by me. 

49. I know it through the utterance of the delighted 
lover. I am telling you a secret that should be well guarded 
as well. She got this excellent rendezvous through the merit 
accruing from the offer of unguents to Lord Krsna. 

1. The author of the NP. regards Radha as the highest deity 
along with Krsna. Radha the anonymous cowherdcss—beloved of Krsna 
in the Bh. P. has attained topmost eminence in prc-Jayadeva period in 
East India (Bengal-Orissa region). Hence this chapter is the crowning piece 
of the NP. * 







UttarabhAga 80.50-61a 


2055 


50-52. She was always eagerly occupied in Krsna’s 
service. She was alone and he too was alone. But there are 
hundred crores of similar couples imitating Kubja and Krsna 
and engaged in different kinds of dalliance. Born of the first 
pair they enliven the immobile ones as well. Though they are 
devoid of going (out of existence ?) and coming (into existence), 
they are still ever fresh and new (?) (Defective) that is unap¬ 
proachable to the third person where the second person 
becomes united with one. 1 

53. O Brahmana, their form comprising in itself the 
origination, sustenance and dissolution of the universe is extra¬ 
ordinary. I alone know this. Having heard what has been heard 
you too know this. 

54-55. A Mantra (what is secretly discussed) is burnt 
(doomed) if it reaches six cars. Follow (in practice) this saying. 
On hearing this highly inaccessible secret through the utter¬ 
ance of Vrnda, sage Narada thought of both. The sage 
acquired that great principle. O daughter of Brahma, this 
is the subject-matter between a preceptor and a disciple. 

56. They alone understand not anyone else. The same 
principle holds good in regard to us both. O auspicious lady, 
only one knows; there is only one hearer and he knows from 
one the speaker. 

57. Hence, there is only one reality. There are not many 
things here. O highly-blessed lady, the secret of the lord of 
cowherdesses has been related to you.. 

58-60a. I shall narrate to you the open public behavi¬ 
our of the lord. Listen with proper attention. O daughter of 
Brahma, in the forest of Vrndavana, this Brahmakun<ja is highly 
meritorious. It is the place where Reality was clearly mani¬ 
fested to your father. The man who takes a holy dip there, 
pondering over the original dress and feature, visualizes a part 
of the grandeur of the Eternal Player. 

60b-61a. O gentle lady, it is Govindakunda where 
Govinda was pondered over by Indra who understood the 

1. This is the Advaita (non-dualism in Bhakti). This is the esoteric 
secret in the path of Vaifttava Bhakti . 




2056 


Narada Puraria 


Tattva (the real principle). By taking the holy dip there one 
shall attain ‘That’. 

61b-62a. Where the Rasa dance was begun by 
Kunjaviharin (one who sports about in bowers i.e. Lord 
Krsna) who assumed single as well as multifarious forms and 
danced with the cowherdesses, a Tirtha has been formed of the 
same nature and efficacy. By taking a holy dip therein, one 
can realise the lord. 

62b-63a. At the spot where Nanda and other cowherds 
saw the magnificence of the omnipresent Lord, is a Ththa 
called by the name Tattva-Prakasa (Revealer of Reality). 
It is waters of Sri Yamuna. 

63b-64a. The place where the encounter with and 
pounding of Kaliya was shown to the cowherds is mentioned as a 
meritorious Tirtha. It is destructive of sins of men. 

64b-65a. The place where the cowherds were rescued from 
the forest fire along with their womenfolk, children, infants and 
wealth by Krsna is a holy Tirtha. which is destructive of sins by 
means of a holy dip therein* 

65b-66a. A man who takes a holy dip in the place 
where demon Ke sin who had assumed the form of a horse had 
been killed by Krsna playfully, attains the abode of Visnu. 

66b-67a. The place where the wicked demon Vrsa 
was killed by him who thereby became pure, is well 
known as Aristakunda. It yields salvation merely through 
holy dip therein. 

67b-69a. There are Tirthas in the places where the 
demons Dhenuka, Agha, Baka, Vatsa, Vyoma and Lamba were 
killed by Krsna sportively. By taking bath and by perform¬ 
ing Tarpana rites devoutly to the Pitrs and the Devas, the 
devotee attains the desired benefits, thanks to the favour of 
Gopala. 

69b-70a. The places where he slept, took food, 
walked about, something was heard by him, or seen by him, 
or committed by him in an extraordinary manner are all 
Ksetras (holy centres). They yield heavenly goal by means 
of a holy dip therein, O gentle lady. 





Uttarabhiga 80.70b-83 , 2057 

70b-71a. Wherever he was heard, thought about, seen, 
bowed, embraced, eulogised or requested for by meritorious 
persons, there exists a Tlrtha that bestows salvation. 

71b-72a. O gentle lady, the place where a terrible 
penance was performed by Sriradha is Sri Kunda which is 
highly meritorious for a holy dip, charitable gifts, Japa and 
other things. 

72b-77. The holy place of Vrndavana extends to five Yojanas 
(60 kms.) all round and the following are the main Tlrthas : 
Vatsl tlrtha, Candrasaras, Apsaras lake, Rudrakunda, Kamakunda, 
the great temple of Hari, Visala (rich in merit by) having the 
Alakananda, the beautiful Nipakhanda, Dharmakunda, devoid 
of impurities, the spot of Krsna’s taking meals, the region of 
Bala, Brhatsanu, the place of rendezvous of Hari, Nandigrama, 
Kunda (holy pool) of Kisori (girl), Kokilakanana (the 
forest of cuckoos), the milk ocean of Sesasayin, Kridadesa (the 
place of sports), Aksayavata, Ramakunda, Ciracaurya (the 
place where garments of cowherdesses were stolen by Krsna), 
Bhadrabhandlrabilvaka, the sacred lake called Mana, the bank 
called Bhaktabhojana, the Akrura Tlrtha, Tarksyagovinda 
and Bahularanyaka. O auspicious lady, such is the holy centre 
Vrndavana. 

78. It is very holy. It is resorted to by the meritorious 
persons. By its mere sight, it bestows salvation. Even the 
Devas desire for its view which is difficult of access (even to 

them). , . , 

79-80a. People are not competent to witness the interior 

sport even by means of penance. O beautiful woman, in all the 
three worlds, there is nothing difficult of access to that person 
who eschews attachment everywhere and resorts to rn avan 

80b-81a. O lady (dear to all), perpetual devotion to 
Nandanandana rises up even in a person who utters the name 
‘Vrndavana’. 

81b-82. O Mohini, in the holy Vrndavana, men, 
women, monkeys, worms, insects, locusts, birds, trees, deer, 
mountains always utter the names Radha an \^ a ' , 

83. I think that a visit to Vrndavana is difficu o 
men who are overwhelmed by Krsna’s Maya and whose minds 
are defiled by lust. 



2058 


Narada Purdna 


84. O auspicious lady, their lives have been rendered 
fruitful by those meritorious persons by whom Vrndavana has 
been visited. They deserve the compassion of Hari. 

85. O daughter of Brahma, of what use is much talk 
said and heard? The splendid and meritorious Vrndavana must 
be resorted to by those who desire to attain liberation. 

86. Vrndavana must be seen, approached, resorted to 
and meditated upon always. There is nothing else on the earth 
that is as conducive to the enhancement of glory. 

87. It was here that in an ancient Kalpa, a Brahmana 
named Govardhana performed a great penance after becoming 
detached from the entire world. 

88. O gentle lady, the unchanging lordVisnu, the lord of 
Devas, went to that place of his in order to grant the boon 
to that Brahmana. 

89-92. The Brahmana saw the lord of gods thus; He 
was holding the conch, discus and iron club. The jewel 
Kaustubha was shining on his chest. His earrings had the shape 
of the shark. He had a good crown and beautiful bangles. He 
was bedecked in anklets that produced a sweet jingling sound. 
A garland of sylvan flowers was worn round his neck. There 
was a mark of Srivatsa on his chest. He was clad in a yellow 
silken garment. He had the lustre of a fresh cloud. His um¬ 
bilicus, neck, cheeks, nose, teeth, knees, thigh, and the waist 
were all fine and beautiful. He was an ocean of mercy. He 
wasjoyous : His lotus-like face indicated his pleasure. 

93. On seeing the lord, the Brahmana got up immediately 
and prostrated on the ground straight as a staff. On being 
asked, ‘‘Tell me the boon you wish to choose 51 , Govardhana said 
to Hari : 

94-96a. “Place your feet on my back and stand there. 
This is the boon I crave for 55 . On hearing it, the lord thought 
over it again and again and finally stood on his back. Then 
the Brahmana said again : “O lord, O lord of the universe, 
I cannot approve of letting you come down from my back. 
Hence, be steady like this. 


1. W. 87-101 explain that the Govardhana hill so dear to Krsna 
was originally a Brahmana who was devoted to Krsna. 






Uttarabhaga 80.96b-106 


2059 


96b. Ever since that time, the lord, the Atman of the 
universe did not abandon the Brahmana Govardhana who 
assumed the form of a mountain. In some cases he goes to 
Yogivana. 

97-99. During the time of his incarnation as Krsna, 
the lord knew that the Brahmana Govardhana had attained 
Sarupya (the identity of form) with himself. Hence, he fed him 
through Nanda and others by means of a heap of cooked rice 
and milk. After propitiating the Brahmana turned into a 
mountain he realized that he was thirsty. So he made him 
drink from the fresh clouds. By this action he became a friend 
of Vasudeva. 

100. O gentle lady, the man who devoutly worships the 
mountain by means of services and circumambulates it, gets 


no rebirth. 

101. The mountain Govardhana has become meritorious, 
thanks to the residence of Hari. If one visits this, he need not 
visit other holy mountains. 

102. The sand-banks of the Yamuna are beautiful and 
rendered more so by the sports of Kr?na, O blessed lady, say 
yourself : Where else on the surface of the earth, can you see 
a holier place? 

103. Hence, after abandoning other holy forests, rivers 
and mountains that yield merit unto men, Vrndavana should 


always be resorted to. 

104. The river Yarn! (Yamuna) is holy. The mountain 
Govardhana is holy. Hence, is there any forest on the earth 
holier than Vr n davana? 

105. There is nothing else worthy of being resorted to by 
persons whose minds are deeply attached to worldly objects 
and who are afraid of the sins of Kali age. There is no ot er 
place in the three worlds but Vrndavana that is worthy of being 

106. In it Hari roams about all the while along with the 

cows, cowherds and cowherdesses. Peacock feathers a orr ) 
crest. He has the form of an excellent dancer. a ”? 1 
flowers adorn his ears. By the soun o u ®» 

sound of the female swan is conquered (i.e. it exce s . 
Vaijayanti garland covers his body. He has acquired a number 


2060 Narada Purdrut 

of jewels from Nanda’s person. He is the supreme soul called 
Hamsa (swan) and Aham (?) 

107. Girisa (Siva) who melts (i.e. is overwhelmed) with 
devotion, meditates on him day and night in the company of 
the daughter of the mountain (Parvatl) in secret. He is indeed 
called Ardhanarlsvara. The lotus-born deity Brahma keeps 
his wife Gayatrl within the cavity of his heart. Indra looks 
at SacI with his thousand eyes (?) 

108. (Defective) A person who appreciates the taste but 
not a master of the ear confines his wife in a secret (isolated) 
place due to the fear of hearing the sound of the flute. What 
else is the popular talk ? The flute (which was originally a 
piece of bamboo) underwent the process of cutting, drying, 
burning and perforation (?). Still it yearned to imbibe the 
nectar from the lips of the lord of cowherdesses. 

109. How can I describe the good fortune of those 
Ballavls (cowherdesses) accompanied by whom, the son of 
Nanda came to Vrndavana during the nights and sported in 
dalliance in the bowers brightly illuminated by the rays of the 
moon. Even the dust from their feet is not attainable to Sri 
(LaksmI), Siva, Brahma and others. 

110. Even the grasses, deer, birds, worms and other 
living beings that have attained Vrndavana are worthy of being 
worshipped by Brahma, Hara and Rama (LaksmI). A person 
who comes there and is engaged in the nondualistic states (of the 
Lord) and who has attained Brahman-hood becomes happy 
in love and plays about immersed in the billows of the ocean of 
happiness. 

111. There (in Vrndavana) wild beasts of prey forget 
their natural enmity and behave like friends and enjoy the 
bliss of Vrndavana. If one eschews this and goes elsewhere, can 
he be happy (in the world) that is a boxofKrsna’s Maya ? 
Can a person who eschews lord of wealth and goes elsewhere 
get wealth ? 

112. That Vrndavana forest is the form of the merit of 
the whole world. Resorting to it, the darkness in my mind (is 
dispelled). I am able to excel the whole world and keep it 
permanently suppressed. At every step, the lord of the cow¬ 
herdesses is soaked in love. He does not differentiate between a 




2061 


Uttarabhaga 80.133 81.2 

high born and a low born person, but uplifts all devotees 
irrespective of their states. 

113. Lord Krsna is prepared even to serve a devotee who 
remembers and sees the cowherds, cowherdesses, birds, deer, 
mountains and the dust of the land trodden by the cows and 
the cowherds and bows down. He is tied to them by means of 
the rope of love. Hence do not think of any other lord worthy 
of being resorted to, other than the lord of the cowherd’s colony. 
O daughter of Brahma I do not know any other such deity. 

114-115. Thus the greatness of the forest of Vmdavana 
has been succinctly narrated to you, O daughter of Brahma. 
There remains nothing to be recounted. 

116. This alone should always be heard, glorified, remem¬ 
bered and meditated upon by sinless men afraid of worl y 
existence. 

117. O daughter of Brahma, the pure man who listens, 
to the greatness of Vmdavana and glorifies it, is undoubtedly 
Visnu himself. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYONE 1 

The Review of the Story ofVasu 


T O blesed lady, attain everything .ha, tab- £* 

fied in the section on the excellent g^ness ° y centres), 
by undertaking pilgrimage to the zones of Tiithas (holyc 

° < l ueen - r T shall invite Brahma, your father, 

2. O queen of men, 1 shall m the deer . 

and going back to Vmdavana roam abou g 

__ . j T^p bv Nar&da’s reciting 

1. This chapter “y “^permanendy stayed^ V «ja on 

the deeds of Krsija throughout his hie. vas w 

hearing Krfpa’s glory. 









2062 


Narada Purarxa 


SGta said : 

3. After saying thus to Mohini, O Brahmanas, Vasu, her 
priest was honoured and repeatedly worshipped. Thereafter, he 
went to the world of Brahma. 

4. After going there he bowed down to god Brahma, the 
creator, the maker of the worlds and reported to him the 
complete details of Mohinl’s activities. 

5. On hearing the words of the Brahmana Vasu, O 
Brahmanas, Brahma was delighted. He said to him—” O dear 
one, indeed you have accomplished a meritorious work. 

6. O Brahmana, the daughter of mine, Mohini, who had 
been engaged by me for the purpose of Devas was unsuccess¬ 
ful in her mission. She was cursed by you and her destruction 
was effected. 

7. Again, at my behest O dear one, she had been resus¬ 
citated to life by you now. She had been thus made contented 
and blessed. Hence who else can be more virtuous and fortunate 
than you ? 

8. The excellent news about Mohini has been conveyed 
to me by you. Delighted thereby, O Brahmana, I shall grant 
you a boon. Tell me what you wish to have.” 

9. On being thus asked by Brahma, the creator of the 
worlds, that Brahmana bowed to him and chose as boon (the 
facility) to reside in Vrndavana. 

10. O leading sages, on hearing these words, the 
creator of the worlds, the remover of the anguish of those who 
seek refuge in him, spoke with smiles in all his four faces, ‘so 
be it 5 . 

11. Delighted in his mind, Vasu bowed down to Brahma, 
came to Vrndavana and performed penance with concentra¬ 
tion and mental purity. 

12. O Brahmanas, even as Vasu performed the penance, 
many years More than five thousand years passed by. There¬ 
after Hari was delighted with it. 

13. Accompanied by two or three of his most beloved 
cowherd friends he appeared before the excellent Brahmana and 
said Tell me, O Brahmana, what do you wish to choose ? 

I am satisfied with your penance. 






Uttarabhdga 81.14-28 


2063 


14. Thereafter, Vasu (prostrated himself before him) 
touching the ground with eight of his limbs. He got up subsequent¬ 
ly and said—“O lord, I wish to stay in Vrndavana for ever”. 

15. O excellent Brahmanas, Visnu granted him his desire. 
Saluted by him again, the lord vanished. 

16. Ever since that day the Brahmana stayed there 
assuming the forms he pleased. He pondered perpetually over the 
lord who was enthusiastic over the forest Vrndavana. 

17. On one occasion, as he was seated on the banks of 
Yamuna, thinking about him (the lord), he saw Narada. the 
son of Brahma, who came to Vrndavana. 

18. On seeing his grand preceptor (preceptor’s 
preceptor) he bowed to him and asked him about the holy 
rites that were conducive to the increase of devotion to the lord. 

19. On being earnestly asked by him thus, Narada who 
had visualized the Self recounted to him the entire future deeds 
of Hari. 

20. c< O Brahmana, once I went to lord (Siva) residing on 
the Kailasa mountain; to visit him as well as to ask him about 
the future secret of Vrndavana. 

21. Afterwards I bowed down to the lord of Devas 
surrounded by Siddhas. I bowed down to Mahesa whose 
greatness pervaded the entire sphere of the cosjmc egg. 

12-23. I asked him about the desired welfare. Lord Hara 
smilingly spoke to him— u O son of Brahma, I shall tell you 
what has been formerly heard from the tongue of Surabhi (the 
divine cow) in regard to the future activities of Hari about which 
you have asked. Once Surabhi was seen by me staying in the 
middle of the world, Goloka. 

24. She was accompanied by her progeny. She was 
delighted and affable mentally. Thereafter, the mother of cows, 
rich in milk was asked about the future events. 

25-26. O divine sage, she told me the future history of 
Hari— “Now Lord Kr?na is seated comfortably in the 
Goloka accompanied by Radha. 

27-28 O Mahesana, he accords happiness to the cow- 
herds and cowherdcsses, O Siva, once (sometime in future) he 
will appear on the world of earth, in the region of 


2064 


N&rada Purdna 


Mathura and will display wonderful sport in Vrndavana. 
Radha the daughter of Vrsabhanu will angrily curse Srldaman 
who will be a great favourite of Hari and his friend, and who 
will be stationed at the threshold ofViraja’s house (?) O blessed 
one, he too will curse Radha in return. 

29-30. He will curse thus : “Go down to the mortal 
world”. And thanks to this mutual course—afterwards request¬ 
ed Brahma, Hari will attain earth for removing the burden 
of the earth. He will take birth in the house of Vasudeva and 
he will be called Vasudeva. He will be the delighter of the 
Yadavas. 

31. Afterwards due to the fear of Kamsa, he will go to 
the cowherds 5 colony of Nanda. After going there he will kill 
Putana, the murderess of infants. 

32. He will also kill the Danava Gakravata (the Cyclone) 
and the Asura Vatsa of huge body who will harass Devas. 

33. He will subdue Kaliya, the serpent, and expel him 
out of Yamuna. He will kill Dhenuka of unbearable 
prowess, Baka (crane) and also the demon asura Agha. 

34-36a. He will kill Dava, Pradava as well as Pralamba. 
He will remove the pride and arrogance of Brahma, Indra, 
Varuna and the erring sons of Dhanada (Kubera). The lord 
will kill the Asuras, Vrsa, Sankhacutfa, Kesin and Vyoma. Stay¬ 
ing in Vraja (cowherd’s colony) for eleven years, he will sport 
with the cowherd esses. 

36b-38a. Going to Mathura, he will kill the washerman 
and straighten the humpbacked lady. He will break the bow and 
kill KuvalayapI<Ja, the excellent elephant and the wrestlers 
Canura and others. Thereafter, Krsna will kill Kamsa, his own 
maternal uncle. 

38b-39a. He will release his imprisoned parents. After 
killing the king of Yavanas, and due to his fear of Jarasandha, 
Krsna will go to Dvaraka. 

39b-40. The lord will then marry RukminI, Satyabhama, 
Satya, Jambavatl, Kaikeyl, Laksmana, Mitravindaand Kalindika 
After killing Bhauma (i.e. the asura Naraka) he will marry 
sixteen thousand wives. 






2065 


Uttarabhaga 81.41-51 

41. After killing Paurujaka (the pretender Vasudeva), 
Sisupala, Dantavaktra, Viduratha, Salva and Dvivida, he will 
kill Balvala. 

42. Then he will kill, Vajranabha, Sunabha along with 
(the demons) the residents of Satpuras (six cities), and the 
Daitya Trisarlra who will be powerful, thanks to the boons. 

43. O Siva, eager to remove the burden of the earth he 
will create causes for mutual quarrel and kill Kauravas and 
Pandavas. 

44. He will make Yadus, members of his own family, 
quarrel and destroy one another and then will come back to 
his own abode accompanied by his followers. 

45. O Sambhu, thus the future story of Hari has been 
recounted to you. Go, when Hari comes down to the surface of 
the world of mortals you will see everything”. 

46. O son of Brahma, on hearing the words of Surabhi, I 
was much delighted and I came back to my own abode. This has 
now been mentioned to you by me”. 

47. On hearing the wotds of the trident-bearing lord 
conveyed by Narada, Vasu was delighted much. He felt his 
hairs standing on their ends due to delight. 

48. O excellent Brahmana, I sing about the lord. I am 
elated. With the string of the lute, I divert the dejected 
universe. 

This future story has thus been narrated to you by me. 

49a. Just as Gautama, I too am engaged in the welfare 
of the worlds”. 

Suta said : 

49b-50a. Narada said this to Vasu, the Brahmana, and 
went away sounding his lute and pondering over the scion of the 
family of Yadu (i.e. Lord Krsna). 

50b-51. On hearing his words, Vasu was delighted in his 
mind. O Brahmana, he permanently stayed in the Cowherds’ 
colony, Vraja. 



2066 


Narada Purdna 


CHAPTER EIGHTYTWO 1 

The Benefit of Listening to the Narada Purdna 
The sages said : 

1. O Suta, O virtuous saint, the nectar-like story of 
SriKrsna recounted by you has been heard. We are blessed 
thereby, thanks to your favour. 

2. What did Mohini, the daughter of Brahma do after 
Vasu had departed to the world of Brahma. It behoves you to 
narrate it to us. 

Suta said : 

3. O sages, hear ye all, the auspicious story of Mohini, 
the pilgrimage she undertook afterwards to the holy centres. 

4. In the manner indicated by Vasu, Mohini, the 
daughter of Brahma went to the banks of the celestial river (the 
Ganga) in accordance with the injunctions for the pilgrimage. 

5. After going there, the daughter of Vcdhas (god 
Brahma) took a holy bath therein and journeyed over the Ganga 
and other holy rivers) with a delighted mind, in the company 
of Brahmanas. 

6. She resorted to each of the holy centres in the manner 
laid down by her preceptor Vasu and took the journey of 
pilgrimage. 

7. In those Tlrthas she worshipped Visnu and other 
deities. She offered different charitable gifts to the Brahmanas. 


1. This chapter is divided into two parts. Part I—W. 3-22 describe 
the performance of pilgrimage to various sacred places by Mohini. VV. 23 ff 
describe the period of Vedha (overlapping of Tithis) assigned to Mohini 
which should be avoided by the observer of the Ekadas'I fast. 

W. 29-49 describe the merit accrued by listening to the NP. 

VV. 50 ff show the catholicity of outlook of the NP. The one-ness 
non-duality) of Brahman is the main thesis of the NP. 

In V. 62, the author thanks his audience as it is due to them that he 
was reminded of Hari, ‘the cause of all causes’ 





Uttarabhaga 82.8-21 


2067 


8. At Gaya, she duly offered Pinda to her husband. 
After worshipping Visvesvara at Kasi she went over to the holy 
centre Purusottama(Jagannatha of Puri). 

9. At that holy centre she partook of Naivedya of 
the lord of the universe and purified her body. She then 
reached the mountain Laksmanacala. 

10. After duly worshipping at the shrine there, she went 
to Setu and worshipped Ramesvara. At Mahendra mountain, 
she paid obeisance to Bhargava Parasurama. 

11. O Brahmana, she went to the holy centre of Siva, 
viz : Gokarna and worshipped Isvara. Then along with those 
excellent Brahmanas, she went to Prabhasa. 

12. She took a holy dip and performed Tarpana 
rites for the Devas and others. After completing the pilgrimage, 
she visited Hari at Dvaraka and went to Kuruksctra. 

13. There also the queen of men duly fulfilled the 
prescribed rites of pilgrimage and came to Gangadvara 
where she took holy bath in accordance with injunctions. 

14-15. After visiting and joyously bowing to Kamoda, 
she reached Badaryasrama and worshipped the sages Nara and 
Narayana. She then hastened to visit Kamaksl. After bowing 
to Siddhanatha, she went to Ayodhya. 

16. After duly taking a holy dip in the Sarayu and 
after worshipping the lord of Slta, she resorted to the pilgrimage 
of middle centres, she then went to Amarakantaka. 

17. After worshipping Mahesa there, she went up the 
current of the Narmada. After serving Omkara and visiting 
Isana she went to Mahismatl. 

18-19a. After worshipping Tryambakcsa, she reached 
Tripuskara. After giving many charitable gifts at the Puskara 
in accordance with the injunctions, she reached Mathura, the 
most excellent of all excellent Tirthas. 

19b-21. She performed the inner pilgrimage (Abhyantari 
Yatra) upto twenty Yojanas. (240 KMs.). After going all over 
the city, she visited Caturvyuha (the fourfold incarnation of 
the lord). After taking a holy dip in the Vimsati Tirtha, 
she concluded the circumambulation. To the citizens of 
Mathura, she gifted ten thousand cows, all richly adorned after 





2068 


Narada Purana 
and with her mind 


feeding them with excellent cooked rice 

melting with devout feelings. 

22 She bowed to them and bade farewell to them. She 
entered Kalindi the divine river that destroys sms. > 

23-25a. Therein she stabilised herself in the end of 
Y-ima’s Tithi. She has not emerged out of it till today. V\ hen 
Mohini attains the point of sunrise she defiles all Smhna rites 
(rites laid down inSmnis). When Mohmi attains the point of 
Arunodaya (predawn), she defiles the Srauta rites (those laid 
down in Srutis) and when she attains the midnight point, she 
defiles Vaisnava(pertaining to the followers of Visnu) rites. The 
man must'observe fast on the EkadasI day when there is no 
Vedha (overlapping ofTithi) of Mohini and worship Visnu 
on the Dvadasi day. Thereby undoubtedly he goes to 
Vaikuntha. 

25b-26a. O Brahmanas, goddess Mohini was born of god 
Brahma and EkadasI was born of Visnu. It was due to a spirit 
of rivalry against Visnuja, the daughter of Visnu that Mohini 


was created by Brahma. 

26b-28. The saintly king Rukmangada was devoted to 
Visnu’s loyal devotion. She was not competent enough to 
prevent him from the holy vow of Ekadasi. When the king 
went to the world of Visnu accompanied by his wife and son, 
Mohini stationed at the end of Yama’s Tithi, vies with Ekadasi 
Tithi. Thus, O leading Brahmana, the story of Mohini has 
been recounted by me. 

29. I have told you this also viz, Why she was created 
by Brahma and how she stationed herself there. Thus the latter 
half of the Naradlya Purana is recounted. It yields worldly 
pleasures and salvation. 

30. In this work, Hari’s devotion is achieved at every step 
of men. The Naradlya Purana is endowed with all the ten 


characteristics. 

31. It is the effective cause of the four aims viz. virtue, 
wealth, love and liberation. The man who listens devoutly to 
this shall attain the region of Visn.u. 

32-33. This is the eternal seed of all other Puranas. 
O excellent Brahmanas, everything, viz.: Pravrtta and Nivrtta 



Uttarabhaga 82.34-44 


2069 


(theworldlyactivitiesandtheirrenunciatio.il) has been men¬ 
tioned in detail by the intelligent son of P arasara. Naradiya 
Purana is full of superhuman stories. 

34. It should not be imparted to anyone and everyone 
indiscriminately. It has been recounted to me by Vyasa over¬ 
looking Paila and other disciples. He recounted this Narada- 
sarhhita to me and not to them. 

35-36a. Obeisance to that Vedavyasa who is identical 
with Visntf, and who expounded the Narada Samhita i.e. the 
Narada Purana to me. It was Sanaka and other highly 
blessed sages who revealed this Purana Samhita to Narada, 
the learned. 

36b-38. The lord in the form of a swan had instructed the 
eternal Brahman enhanced by perfect knowledge to these 
sages. The same thing, Narada of spiritual vision, revealed to 
sage Veda-Vyasa. He told him the esoteric secret. This is 
difficult to be obtained in the world and it has been revealed 

by me. . 

39. To men who listen and narrate it is conducive to 

the fulfilment of fourfold aims of life. A Brahmana shall become 
the storehouse of the Vedas, a Ksatriya will conquer the 
Earth. 

40. A VaiSya shall be richly endowed with wealth, a 
Sudra shall be liberated from misery. This Samhita is glorified 
as containing twenty-five thousand verses (?)• 

41. It consists of five Padas (sections) as mentioned by 
Krsna Dvaipayana. When this is being heard, all doubts of 
men who are devotees with some specific desires are 

cleared. . 

42-44. Those men who are devoid of desires, are libe¬ 
rated. The devotees shall visit holy Tirthas such as Naimisa, 
Puskara, Gaya, Mathura, Dvaraka, the hermitage of Nara and 
Narayana, Kuruksetra, Narmada and the holy centre Sn 
Purusottama. He should then confine himself to a diet of 
Havisya (cooked rice soaked in ghee), should lie (sleep) on the 
bare ground. He should avoid sexual intercourse. He should 
conquer all the sense-organs. Thereafter, if he reads 
this Saihhita, he is liberated from the ocean of worldly 
existence. 





2070 


Ndrada Purana 


45-46, Just as Ekada&L is the most excellent of all holy 
vows, just as the Ganges is the holiest of all rivers, just as 
Vrndavana is the most excellent of all forests, just as Kuruksetra 
is the most excellent of all holy centres, just as KasI is the 
most excellent of all cities, just as Mathura is the best of all 
holy Tlrthas, and just as Puskara is the holiest of all lakes, so 
also, O Brahmanas, this is the best of all Puranas. 

47. Devotees of Ganesa, Surya, Visnu, Sakti and 
Sambhu—all these are authorized in this Purana whether they 
have any desire to fulfil or not. 

48. Whether a man or a woman listens to this or 
narrates this with a specific desire in the mind, he or she shall 
certainly attain that. 

49. By regularly reading the Naradiya Purana, one 
who is dejected due to ailments, shall be liberated from 
ailments. 

One who is overwhelmed by fear, shall become fearless. 
He who is desirous of victory shall be victorious over the 
enemies. 

50. Obeisance to that lord identical with all, the Atman 
of all, who creates the universe in the beginning by the attri¬ 
bute of Rajas, who maintains it in the middle by the quality of 
Sattva and who swallows it in the end by the quality of 
Tamas. 

51. Obeisance to that Brahmatman by whom the sages, 
Manus, Siddhas, guardians of the quarters and Prajapatis, 
Brahma etc., have been created. 

52. One shall know that to be the real form of Atman 
that is formless and identical with knowledge that form from 
which words recede and in whom the mind does not penetrate. 

53. I salute that attributeless Being beyond darkness 
which has a wonderful form and by the truth of which 
this universe evolves and develops truly. 

54. The lord is birthless, single and imperishable in the 
beginning, in the middle and in the end. He shines in different 
forms. I salute that unsullied Being. 

55. This universe consisting of the mobile and 
immobile beings is bom of the unsullied Being. That is the 






Uttarabhdga 82.56-62 


2071 


truth, knowledge and non dualistic entity, that in which the 
world stands and is dissolved. 

56-57. The followers of Siva call that supreme Being 
Siva, the knowers of the Sankhya call him Pradhana. O 
Brahmanas, the Yogins call that Purusa, and the people who 
follow Mlmarhsa call him Karman. The Vaisesikas and 
others call him Vibhu, those who ponder over Sakti call him 
Cicchakti. I salute that non-dualistic Brahman that is 
the cause of different forms and activities? 

58. Devotion of men to the lord facilitates the assumption 
of the lord’s form. Who except a brute desires for other benefits 
after attaining that devotion. 

59. O Brahmanas, except through the association 
with the good, those worldly men who are averse to the lord 
cannot hope to gain liberation from the forest of worldly 
existence. 

60. Virtuous men of good conduct are always conducive 
to the welfare of the worlds. O Brahmanas, they are sym¬ 
pathetic towards the wretched ones. Indeed, they redeem those 
who seek refuge in them. 

61. You are the most blessed sages in this world. You 
have gained approbation of the righteous ones since you 
glorify the renown of Vasudeva, fresh at every time like the 
fresh tender sprouts. 

62. I am lucky and blessed. I have been obliged by you all, 
since you have reminded me of Hari, the auspiciousness of the 
world, who is the cause of all causes. 









INDEX 


Ablution, fruits of—in holy centres 

1757ff c , non c 

Acamana (sipping of water) 367 n b 
A chaste lady. Anecdote ofIblUtt 
Adhana (conception) 810 
Adharma, passed on as Dharma lbB/ 
nl 

Adhyatma, a discourse on 536 
Adi and a crane, combat between 

1369 n. 1 loco 

__—Vasistha and Visvamitra 1368 

Aditi, mother of Devas 181 

- , meditation of 184-8o 

Aditi-tlrtha 1762 
Agastya 1819 

- , hermitage of 2000 

Aghamarsana, an expiatory rite 241 
Aghamarsana hymns 1894 
Aghora Mantra 1878 n. 

Agnicit 1761 
Agnihotra 1751 

Agni mantra, mantra of the fire, 
method of fixation 978 
Agni Purana, Contents 1374 ff 
__ y encyclopaedia of mediaeval 

India 1371 n 1 

_ = Vahni Purana. Views ot 

Hazra 1391 n 1. 

Agnistoma sacrifice 59, 71 «15 
Agni-tirtha, explanation of 1990 n. I 
Agastya tirtha 1819 
Ahamkara, the Cosmic Ego 500 
Ahargana (total of days) 720 n 36 
Ajamila, a sinful Brahmin who attain¬ 
ed Vaikuntha 207 n3 , 

Akasa-Ganga (Celestial Ganga) 1816 
Akathaha Cakram 933 
Aksava-trtlya 1767 
Aksayavata (the ever-growing banyan 
tree) 1796 . . 

Altars of sacred fire (three in number) 

1940 

Amaravati 139 n22 

Amsuman 162 

Anahata Cakra 1896 

Angaraka mantra, mantra of Mars 983 

Animals representing constellations 

1300 

Aniruddha, son of Pradyumna and a 
grandson of K.r?na 83 n!3 


Ankurarpana : auspicious sowing 813 
Annaprasana (the. first feeding) 811 
Annapurna, worship °f 1244: 

mantras _1244f.n. 1, 1245 n2 
Antrana= Antra mudra or Vaktra 
mudra 1012 

Anucana, characteristics of 606 
Apad dharma, dharma in emergency 
337, 339n 5 „ 

Arcika, pertaining to Rks 634 n / 
Arghya (water=libation) 17b5 
Arthavada 73n 22 

Asanamantra of Siva-Sakti 1214nl 
Ascetics or Yogins, restrictions of time 
to stay in a town or a village 53dn 
Asramas, stages in life 522 ff; 876 
Asfaka days 354n 13 
Astakas 1804 r 

As^akavarga chart, benefic lines 
77 2n 64a 

Astavarga or Astakavarga 860n 58 
Asterisms, classified 857n 32 

- , down-looking 794, 

-upward-looking 795 

_, naksatra-s, classificauon ot 

795 

Asterisms and their deities 854n 3 
Asterisms recommended for sowing 
seeds 857n 35 

Astrology Natural 778, Cara-s of the 
Grahas 778 ff 

Astronomy, topics of 699 ff 
Asunya Sayana or Asoka Sayana— 
a rite 1589n 1 

Asuri, Kapila’s disciple 562 n 4 
Asvamedha (a horse sacrifice) 1755 
Atisukra (Pratisukra), journey oppos- 
ed to Venus 862 n 92 

Atithi 1370 nl 
Atman, beyond Prakrti 587 
Atyagms^oma—a Variety of 294 n 9 
Aurva 149n 6, 157 
Avakirnin, a religious student who 
committed incontinence agamst his 

vow of Celibacy 251 

Avaranas=coverings 1155n_1 
Avidya, imperfections of 5oo 
Avimukta 139n 21 
Avimukta-Kasi 1826 
Ay ana days 353n 10 
Avana-s, two Ayanas 790 





2074 


B 

Badari= Badrinarayana 1937 
Badarikasrama, Agni-Tirtha—hot- 

water-spring at 1976 

- = Badrinath in Garhwal (Utta- 

ra Prades'a) 1975 

Badarikasrama—five rocky slabs at 
1976 n. 1 

Badarikasrama Kapalamocana at 
1979 n. 1 

- Kes'ava-Prayaga on the Alaka- 

nanda river 1979 n. 

- Urvas'i Kunda 1981 n. 

- Vasudhara, a waterfall 1980 n. 

Bagalamukhi mantra 1246 n. 1 
Bahu=Bahuka 149 n 1 
Bahuda 138 n 15 

Baka-Pancaka, abstinence from flesh- 
eating in Karttika 1643 n 2 
Bala Sundari, mantras 1240-42 
Bali, Criticised for excess in gifts 208n 
18 

- , defeat of Devas by 181, 186 

Balimantra-s 1236 n. 1, 1237 n. 1 
Bali-Vamana episode 188 fT 
Bath, procedure for 367 n 9 
Bath in ashes (Bhasma-Snana) 1795 
Bhadrasila 327 n7, 333 n 7 
Bhagavata, the term explained 573 n 4 
Bhagavata-s (devotees of the Lord) 
Characteristics of 106, 118 
Bhagavata Purana, Contents of 1362ff 

- No. of Verses acc. toNP 1362 n 1 

- Ten characteristics of 1363 nl 

- Topics versus Skandhas 1363- 

65 n 2 

Bhagiratha, a King 271 

-, bringing Ganges to the East 

866 n 127 

Bhaglratha’s prayer to Visnu 275 ff 
Bhakti, devotion, glory of 102 ff 

-, -, ninefold 270 

-, tenfold as distinct from nine¬ 
fold bhakti 270 

- (devotion) as a favourite topic 

of Purana-writers 207 n 1 

- of ten types 266 ff 

Bhakti based on Advaita 472 n 2 
Bharata, description of 89 ff, glori¬ 
fication of 101 n 15 

-, description of different regions 

and their position in the country 
852 

Bharata, Story of 585 
Bharata Khanda 585 
Bharata-Varsa 1851 
Bhavisya Purana, a Vaisnava Purana 
1376 n 1 


Narada Purina 

- in the form of a dialogue between 

Savarni and Narada 1377 n 1 

- Compared with the printed 

edition 1377 n 1, 1378 n 1 

- Contents of 1374 ff 

- No. of Verses 1377 n 2 

Bhavisya Purana accounts do not tally 
with the printed editions 1374 n 1 
Bhcrunda 1273 

Bhima, son of Pandu 1681 n 1 

- , married to Hitjamba, ibid 

- , father of Ghafotkaca, ibid. 

Bhimarathi (river) 136 n 8 
Bhimasthala=Bhimagoda 1973 
Bhisma-pancaka 1643 n 1 
Bhogamalini 1269 
Bhudina=ahargana 720n 30 
Bhuta-suddhi—purification of ele¬ 
ments 935 n.l, 1110 n. 1 
Bhuta-s, constituents of 506ff 

-, elements or living beings 499 

BhuvanesVari 1214 
Bindusaras—Nadesvara 282 n3,282 n4 
Body compared to a house of clay 
574 n 18 

Brahma, his praise of Visnu 1565ff 
statement of 1567ff 

-, on yoga 589 

-, statement of 1567 

Brahma-hatya, murder of a Brahmana 
151 n 8 

Brahma-Kunda 1803 
Brahma-Kurca 249 
Brahma-medhas=B rahma-y aj n a 
294 n 12 

Brahma-saras 1796 
Brahma-tirtha, a well 1807 
Brahma-Vaivarta Purana 1376 ff 
Brahma versus Trinity 237 n 15 
Brahma-yupa (Sacrificial post) 1807 
Brahmana, identification with 531 

-, nature of 573 n 8 

Brahman = truth 

Brahman, Body, pervaded by 545 n 9 
Brahmana-slayer 256, 269 n 4 
Brahmana compared to the magnet 
584 n 2 

Brahmanas, Duties of 532 n 19 

--> Traditional Duties of 514 

Brahmaiida Purana, Contents of 1418 
Division, number of verses, con- 
tents, similarity with Vayu. 1418 n 1 
Brahmangada and Mohini 1588 
Brahman, two-fold : Sabda—and 
—and supreme 563ff 
Brahmapada Qakra 864 n 108 
Brahma Purana, Contents of 1346ff 
> number of verses in 1349 n 4 







Index 


2075 


Brahrha-Raksasa 172fF 
Brahmatman (Supreme being), pra¬ 
yers to 2070 
Brhan-Naradiya 165 
Brhaspati 480fT 

-, the preceptor of the devas 876 

Budha-Mantra 987 

G 

Gaitra-ratha, garden in the Capital 
city of Kubcra 878 
Cakra (river) 586 
Cakramudra J944, 1012 
Cakras, nine of Srlyantra 1292 n.l 
Candala, three kinds of 1596 n 1 
Candesvara, mantra 1340 prayers to 
1341 

Candrabala, Strength of the moon 
866 n 130 

Candra mantra, mantra of the moon- 
god 981 . 

method of fixation 978 
Candra-Tarabala (strength of the 
moon and planets) 806 
Candrayana”, an expiatory rite 240, 
250 n 7, 1751 
Caste, four-fold division 520 

-, later in Origin 519 

Caula, Cudakarma (Tonsure) 164, 
340, 346 n 3, 812 
Oesta (activity) 504 
Chaste lady,the anecdote of a 161 Off 
Citra 1283 

Citragupta—the record-keeper of 
merits and sins of human beings in 
Yama’s Office 1566 
Community, existence of perfect—in 
the past 498n 2 

Continents, seven 99n 11, 149n 2 
Cosmic Egg, Creation of 1902 
Cosmogony; The Origin of the uni¬ 
verse 497 

Country, Division of 867n 132 
Creation, a dream 311 n 15 

- , a synthesis of Sankhya and the 

Puranic Concept 1906ff 

- , hour of 1422n 2 

■Creation as illusion 532n 18 
Creations : Prakrta and Vaikrta 98 
notes 6, 7 

Cremation-ground, Concept of 1224 
n. 1 

Cyavana 1821 

D 

Dadhivamana, mantra of 1030 n. 1 
Daksa Prajapati 1970 n. 


Daksa—Prayaga (a Centre) 1763 
Daksina-manasa (Southern manasa) 
1805 . 

Daksinamurti mantra 1334 
Damstramudra 1012 
Danda : Uttama Sahasa (1000 panas) 
239 

Dasahara 1484 n 2; efficacy of—1485 
n 1 

Dattatreya, an incarnation of Visnu 
1369n 2 

- , explains Anviksiki to Alarka 

and Prahlada 1369; 1369 n. 2 
Day lunar (Astro) 855n 12 
Day, Constituents of 859n 50 

- , five aspects of 865n 119 

- , pure in relation to its five 

aspects ibid 

Days avoided for marriage 36In 71 
Days of the week and their effect 
793-94 

Days prohibited for auspicious deeds 
857n 39 

- - -study 858n 40 

Deeg (a river) a tributary of the Ravi 
598n 

Defiling the preceptor’s bed 258, 270n 7 
Deities, installations of 830 
Deity, ablution of 1913 
Deity as the embodiment of the uni¬ 
verse 51 On 7 

Detachment, Kapila’s philosophy of 
562 

Dcvala, Devalaka 219n 3 
Dcvayatana, Temples 234n 1 
Devotion to Hari 438 ff Characteris¬ 
tics of ibid 

Dharma, discourse on 220 ff 

- , four-footedness of 488, 498n 1 

Dharma-prHha 1795 
Dharma-raja Yadhisthira 1799 
Dharma-raja (Yama) 1776 
Dharma and Adharma as the cause of 
all effects 591 

Dharma and Bhagiratha, a dialogue 
between 210 

Dharma and Dharmaranya 1807 n. 
Dharma and Propitiatory rites 238 
Dharmangada Conquers the world 
1631 ff 

- honours mothers 1622 ff 

-, his marriage and order as a 

Ruler 1634 ff 

- , his submission to his parents 

1720 ff 

-, son of Rukmangada from San- 

dhyavali 1726 

Dharmaranya, locations of 138In 1 
Dharmas, Exposition of 547 


2076 


Ndrada Purana 


Dhatu-s, five 504, 506 
Dhenumudra or Gomudra 944 
Dhrtarastra and Pandu, both sons of 
Vicitravirya 1687 n 2. 

Dhumavati, mantra 1262 n. 1 
Dhvajaropana (installation of the 
banner) 300, 305n 1 
Dig-rasis 865n 112 
Digvarga-yoni (Astro) 864n 106 
Dinaksaya—loss of lunar day 857n 33 
Dina-vyasa-dala (day-radius) 721 
Disease, bom of sins 420n 4 
Diti, mother of Daityas 181 
Divine Boar 1761 
Divine year explained 719n 26 
Drekkana (decanate) 860n 61 
Drona, a measure 718 n 19 
Durga, mantra of 1205 n. 1 

-mantras 1249 PUhamantra 1250 

Duti 1275 

Duties of profession higher than recourse 
to pilgrimage 1931 
Dvadasamsa 860n 63 


Dvadasi, Govinda—1760 
Dvadasi day 283ff, 293 n 1; special 
form of Visnu to be worshipped 
on—in different months 294n 1; 
how to observe—294 n 3 
Dvadasi-s, Eight kinds of 1602n 1 

- associated with Naksatras 151 In 

1 Pusya with Aparajita, Rohini 
with Jayanta. Sravana with Vijaya, 
Magha with Jaya 


E 


Earth, description of 89ff 
Eclipses, Solar and Lunar 711 fF 
Ecliptic, division of 72In 51 
Ekadasi, Apara 1443n 1 
Ekadasi day, greatness of 1545ff 
Ekadasi Vrata, Decisions about the 
observance of 386, 390n 5 Suddha 
—390n 7 

- greatness of 324ff, 333 notes 1, 

6, 7 

- Observance of—when there is 

no Vedha (overlapping of tithi) 
of MohinI 2068 

Ekamra=Bhuvancsvara on the 
Gandhavati river in Orissa 
1350 n 23 

Ekargala (Astro) 861n 73 
Embryology, Science that deals with 
its inception from sexual intercourse 
420n 5 

Esoteric Secret disclosed to Markan- 
<jleya by Visnu 106 ff 


Evolution, theory of420n 2, 510 notes, 
1 , 4 

Expiation, mode of 391,401 n 2 for 
mahapatakas 392 for wine-drinking 
393 for theft 394 for adultery 396 
for Association of great sinners 397 
for Miscellaneous sins 397 for Minor 
sins 398 for the homicide of a 
Brahmana 401 n 3 

Expiation for adultery 403n 13 for 
association with sinners 403 notes 
13, 14 

- for miscellaneous sins 403 n 15 

- for stealing gold 402n 9 for 

stealing silver 402n 11 for wine- 
drinking 401 n 6 

Expiatory rites for the slaughter of a 
sacrificial cow 568 

F 

Fortnights, Division of a Month into 
two—790 


G 

Gadaloka, a tirtha 1813 
Gajendra narrative 84n 17 
Galava, a sage 327, 333n 6 
Galinlmudra 967 n. 

Ganda-s (Astro), Junctions of aster* 
ism, tithis, lagnas etc., inauspicious 
862 n 91 
Gandaka 1762 
Gandaki (a river) 1762 
Gandanta (a yoga) 1987 
Gancsa, controller of ganas 65n 2 

- and his Sakti-s 952 

- Gayatri 969 

- Bali mantra 973 

- Mantra 967 

- , Pada-nyasa of Ganes'a mantra 

968 n. 1 

- ,Varna-nyasa of 968 n. 1 

Ganga, mantra of 1780 

- , a holy river 1747 n. 1 

- , Coming out of the earth 2005 

- , flowing from the feet of Visnu 

180 

-, glory of 1261T, 133n 1,142,152ffi. 

166ff, 188; Origin of 188 

-- , glory of ablution in 1753 

- , greatness of 1747ff 

- , hymn to 1781 ff 

- , idol of 1766 n. 

- , - described 1779 

- , descent of— from heaven on 

Dasami day, 1485 n 1 


Index 


2077 


__ f planting fruit trees on the 

bank of—1769 

__ y procedure of costing off bones 

in the—1785 . 

_ ? procedure of Worship 177411 

.-- , Siddha-ksetra on 1786 

- , Visnupadi 81 n 3 

- , water of-as a purifying 

element 268; for liberating manes 
from hells 268; for destroying sins 
270 

Gahgadvara 1760. 1974 
Gahgadvara or Haridvara, greatness 
°f 1969 

Gahgavatarana, the descent of the 
Gahga 186n 2 
Garbhadhana, a rite 340 
Garga, a Brahmapa from Kalinga 
180n 10 

Garuda, worship of 1012 

Garuda mudra 957 

Garuda Purana, Contents of 1413 

- no. of verses discussed 1413 

Gandhamadana, the location of 1591 

Gautama, hermitage of 2004 n. 
Gautami—Mahatmya of the Brahma 
Purana not mentioned in the Con¬ 
tents by N P 1349 n 4 0 

Gaya, a sacred place in Bchar 1650n 3 

- , an episode of ghost at 1792 

- , asura 1788 n. 

_ , brahmanas of—cursed by 

Brahma for greediness 1789 
■ — , glory ol 1814 
- . Grdhravafa (Banyan tree) 

1793 

- , Greatness of 1787 n. 

- , holy places at 1793. 

_ , importance of ofTenng Pmdas 

at 1808 

- , important spots 1817 

_ .rocky hills and their peaks 182_ 

- , sacred rivers at 1817 

Gayasirsa, a chain of hillocks 1822 
Gayasiras (place), described 1807 
Gayasraddha 1790; efficacy of 
1790 ff 

Gaya VaitaranI 1817 
Gayatri, a cowherd’s daughter married 
by Brahma 3003 n. 

, invocation of 368 notes 12-14 
Gayatri mantra 124n 5 
GhrtacI, transforming hcrscU into a 
shc-parrot 874 

Gift, auspicious occasions for making 

1903 

Gift, of land, cows and knowledge as 
highly meritorious 208 notes 12, 13 


Gift of education 236n 11 
Gifts 235n 4, 236 

- , articles to be gifted as cows 

i772 

- , as false Dharma 208n 18 

- , procedure for 1763 

- , procedure of presenting 208n 

- , prohibition of 208n 17 

Gifts of girls in marriages to Brahma¬ 
nas 236n 11 r 

Gifts to brahmanas on the bank 01 
Ganga 1769 . . Q ^ 

Girikarna (SabarmaU), a river 181b 
Go-vrata 252n 20 

Gocara (Astro), Results of transits 

860 . 

Gocarma, (1) land measuring device 

(2) a piece of land in which a 
thousand cows with their calves 
and bulls will comfortably accom¬ 
modate themselves 237n 2 
God-realization, means of 573n 9 

- , path of 545n 1 

Godavari (river) 135n 7 
Goddesses Vasini etc, mantras nyasas, 
worship etc. 1266 QC1 

Godha (the Lizard), Salvation of 1599 
Gokarna, glory of 2024 n. 1 
Golaka 219 n 5 
Goloka-nyasa 1324 
Gopika-candana 235 n 5 
Go-pracara 1809 

Gopreksa (a holy centre at Varanasi) 

Govardhana, a mount 85n 20 
Govardhana Puja or Annakuta 142bn 1 
Graha-s, influence of—over varna-s 
768n 13 

_ , names of 9-according to 

Susruta 1095 n. 1 
Grahanyasa, procedure of 12i/ . 

Grammar Exposition of 657, Sancim-s 
= Samhita-s 660ff Declension-s 
662ff, Avyaya-s 664 ff Feminine 
words 663 Taddhita-s, (Secondary 
suffixes) 665 Conjugations 667 

(active and passive) Kftand k-rtya 
suffixes 670 Samasa (Compounds) 
670 

Grdhra-Kuta hill 1793n. 
Grhastha-dharma, duties of the House¬ 
holder 347, 352n 1 
Grhya-Sutra-s defined 857n d4 
Guda-dhcnu, days for gifting 1773 
Guda-dhcnu (a jaggery cow), pro¬ 
cedure for the gift of 1770; a note 
on ibid n. 1 
Guhyaka 1775 


2078 

Gulika, the hunter 458; story of 458ff, 
464n 1 

Guna-s : Sattva and others subject to 
the control of Karmans 590 
Gundica, a temple at Purusottama 
ksctra 1874 

Guru-mantra, mantra of Jupiter 988 
Guru-s, preceptors 1243 n. 1 

H 

Haihaya-s 149n 4 
Hala cakra 855n 15 
Hanuman, bom of Anjani 1052 

- , matamantra of 1057 

- , mantras 1051ff, 1060 n. 1067 

n. 1, 1068fT 

- , procedure of lamp to 1068 

-, story of the life of 1107 

Hanumat Kavaca, 1102 
Hari, efficacy of uttering the name of 
866n 125 
Haridvara 1757 

Hariscandra, a King 1604n 1, 1669n 1 

Havisyanna (rice boiled in milk) 
653n 1 

Hayagriva, Worship of 1030 

-, mantra of— in Sarada Tilaka 

1032 

Hell, Crude tortures of 41 In 2 
Hells 269, notes 1-3 

- , descriptions of 254 Tortures 

256 

- , different — for different 

crimes 260ff 

- , numbers of 269n 2; tortures in 

n 3 

Heti, anasura 1813, 1815 
Himavan, description of 271 
Hiranya-garbha 113 
Hiranyakasipu, son of Diti 181 
Holidays, Vedic 346n 5 

Hora, strength of the planetary hour 
860n 60 

Horoscopy, Delineation 723 

- , topics of 69 Iff 

Hours, Calculation of 855n 14 
House, Occupying the new-built 
849ff 

Houses (Astro, bhavas) 12 in number 
865n 118 

I 

Idols of Krsna, Rama, Subhadra 1875 
Indra 480ff 

Indra and Brhaspati, dialogue bet¬ 
ween 486n 1 


Narada Purana 

Indra, cutting the wings of the flying 
mountains 866n 226 
Indradyumna, Purusottama’s reve¬ 
lation to—about idols 1874 
Indradyumna (of Avanti) Carved 
three images ;Jagannatha. Balarama 
and Subhadra 1350n 4 
Indrani Tirtha 1763 
Initiation, procedure of 926 
Ista and Purta 234n 2, 253n 27; 
dharmas 450n 5 rites 244;—results 
of ibid. 

Istf-s, Decisions about the perform¬ 
ance of 386 

J 

Jaganmohana mantra 1003 
Jahnuhrada 1762 

Jahnu’s As'rama at Sultangunj 1762 
Jaimini, approaches wise birds called 
.Dharmas in Vindhya Mountain 
1368 

Jainas, JIva-gourd analogy of 530 n 3 
Jamadagnya (Paras'urama) 87n 27 
Jambuka, a daitya 1845 
Jamitra-dosa 860n 56 
Janaka, King of Mithila 877 
Janaka, lord of .Mithila, anecdote of 
547 

Janaka’s meeting with Paficasikha 561 
Jananti, a sage 448ff 
Jayadhvaja, a King 473ff, 479 notes 1,3 
Jatakarma 165 

- and Namakarana (Birth rite 

and Naming Ceremony) 811 
Jatya, a variety of Svarita 634 
Jaya 69n 7 

Jaya-Nrsimha mantra 1020 n. 1 
Jimuta-Vahana, story of 1604n 2 
Jnanamudra 1035 n. 2 
Jnana-nirupana, spiritual knowledge 
445 

Jnana-yoga and Karma-yoga 45In 2 
Jnomon in general use in ancient 
India 718n 20 

Jovian years, Five—make up a yuga; 
Lords of 5 yugas of Jovian years 
named 789 

Jvalamali mantra of Nrsimha 1017 
Jvalamalini 1281 

Jyestha-sama, a portion of Samaveda 


K 

Kailasa (mount) 499 
— , a mountain where Siva lives 


Index 


2079 


Kala, a note on 766n 1 
Kalasa, a Centre 1762 
Kali, worship of 1225 nyasa of 1226 
yantra of 1223 n. 1 
Kali age 1753 

- , description of 489 fT, 498n 4 

Kali-varjyas—activities to be avoided 
in Kali age 335, 338n 4 
Kali yuga 1956 
Kalki mantra 1022 n. 2 
Kalmasapada 180 notes 6, 10, 11 

-, a King 173 

Kalpa, rituals 636ff, Kalpadhyaya 654 
Kalpa=Vcdic ritual, kinds of 656 
Kalpa, Vinayaka 642 
Kamada, a virgin churned out of the 
milk-ocean, a legend of 1983 fT. 
Kamaksa, both a Saktipitha and a 


Siddhapitha 1989 

- , greatness of 1984 n. 1 

Kamas (love-gods) five 1294 n.l 
Kamadhenu, a wish-yielding cow 112 
Kamesvari 1267 
Kanakananda (a centre) 1794 
Kanakhala 1761, 1971 f.n. 

-, a holy place 1915 

Kanina, a child bom of unmarried 
woman 1549 n l 
Kapila 159 
Kapila (a river) 1819 
Kapila cow 1768 
Kapilahrada 1972 

Karana, a member of five-membered 
Hindu almanac 722n 53 
Karma, synthesis of—and Bhakti 27n 
1, 270 

Karma-vipaka, doctrine of 41 In 4 
Karnavedha—perforation of the ears 
of boys 795 

Karttavirya 108 names 1098ff 
Karttavirya Gayatri 1084 n. 1 
Karttaviryarjuna, mantra 1078 fixa¬ 
tion of mantra 1078 n. 1 different 
mantras 1082 14 syllabled mantra 
1083 mantra for offering the lamp 
1086; n. nine-syllabled mantra 1087 
Karttavirya kavaca 1090 
Karttika 1758 

- glory of the month of 1638ff 

-as the holiest month 1642 

KasT 139n 20 Can<Jikas at 1841, des- 
% cription of 1693; greatness of 1824, 
1846 holy centres visited by gods 
for Pilgrimage 1839 Pilgrimage to 
1833ff, important holy spots at 1833ff 
Vinayakas (spirits) at 1841 
Kasi-ksetra, extent of 1825 
Kasi-pradaksina 140n 25 
Kasi as an abode of Visnu, anecdote 


of 1604 n 1 

Kasi Visvesvara 140n 24 
Kasthila 167 In 1 

- , story of 1671 ff, 1685ff, 1701 

Kas'yapa 1763 

- , a Sage father of India 181 

Kasyapa made to pay obeisance to the 
future incarnations of Visnu 208nl 
Kausambi=Kosam, King Udayana’s 
Capital 208n 15 
Kausiki (a river) 1793 
Kavaca (protective Mantra) 1893 
Kaveri (river) 137 
Kendra (quadrant) positions in a 
12 member chart 86In 78 
Kesin, an asura follower of Kamsa 
84n 18 

Kcsidhvaja and Khandikya, Relation¬ 
ship between 573n 6 
Khadga Ravana mantra 1337 
Kikata (Magadha) 1821 
Kimiccha Vrata 1370 n. 1. 
Kiritamantra 1139 
Krauncapada (a mountain) 1796 
Krcchra 40In 5 

Krcchrardha, an expiatory rite 240-41 
Krsna 61 

Krsna (river) 136n 9 

Krsna-astami 1759 

Krsna, Balarama, Subhadra 1855 

- destroying Putana at Gokula 

865n 120 

- , procedure of worshipping 1143 

- , Rama and Subhadra, Deva’s 

prayer to 192Off 

- , review of the mantras of— 

1136ff, 1165ff mantras of—-1137 
fixation of the mantras 1138 

- Six-syllabled mantra of 1151 

n. 1 

Krsna and Radha, One thousand 
names of 1179ff, also n. 1 
Krsna, procedure of Chakra- 
nyasa 1159 n.2 
Krsna mantra 1022 n. 2 

- Srstinyasa, Sthitinyasa of 1152 

Samharanyasa 1158 n. 1 method of 
fixation of mantra 1158 n. 2 
Krsna mantras of different syllables 
1151, 1154 

Krsna Vibhuti Panjara Nyasa 1159 
Krttivasesvara, a Unga at Varanasi 
1834 

Ksatriya equated with a Brahmaria 
401 

K§ipra, a kind of Sandhi 653n 19 
Ksitijya (Earth-sine) 72In 48 
Ksurikabandhana (Girding the sword) 

816ff 


2080 


Narada Parana 


Kukkutesvara, a linga at Varanasi 
1836 n. 2 
Kula Sundari 1276 
Kumaun 1762 n. 

Kumuda, a siddha gate-keeper of 
Vaikuntha 911 
Kunda 219n 4 
Kurina, mantra of 1022 n. 2 

- , second incarnation of Visnu 

85n 22 

Kurma Purana, Contents of 1408ff 

-, No. of Verses 1408n 1 

-, Pasupatization of originally 

Vaisnava Text 

-, Variations, older and extant 

editions 1406n 1 

Kurma-vibhaga (Division of the 
Globe) 852 

Kuruksctra 1754, 1756, 1760 

- a holy dip in pools in 1959 

- , extent of 1954 n. 

- , forests in 1956 

- hermitage of sage Vimala in 

Kuruksetra 1957 

- ,Pilgrimage to 1956 

- , rivers 1956 

- Tirthas in—and a holy dip in 

1 Qfil 

Kurukulla Vidya 1283 n. 1 
Kusa, a kind of grass for holy purpose 
244 

Kusavarta 1760 
Kuta, Rajju or Nadi 

L 

Laksmana, mantras of 1048ff 
Laksmana mountain, the story of 
Rama, King of Ayodhya 2028ff 
Laksmi, mode of worship 1218 
Laksmi or Mahalaksmi, mantras for 
her prayer 1476 

- goddess of wealth worship of 

1218 

-incarnations of 1238 

Lalapka-yoga 865n 113 
Lalita 1265 n. 2, 1267 
Lalita-sahasranama, One thousand 
names 1286-1302 
Langala-Cakra 855n 15 

- = diagram of the plough 796 

Lanka 720n 37, 855n 13 
Liberation, kinds of 135n 5 
Liberation, path of 594, 898 ff Suka’s 
talk with Sanatkumara on the subject 
of renunciation 898 
Liberation from the cycle of Rebirth 
499 

Life, stages of human 903n 


- , — from birth to death 413 to 

418, Rebirth 418, 420n 3, Escape 
from Rebirth 419 
Lilavati of Bhaskara 717n 7 
Linga 139n 23 

Linga Purana, NP had a different 
and older version than the extant 
published Edition of LP 1380n 1 

- Contents of 1379 

- No. of Verses examined 1380n 2 

- Similarities in the extant and 

older versions 138In 2 
Lokaloka mountain 99 n 10 
Lokapalas, nyasa of 1228 n 1 
Loka-s, seven above 98n 8;—below 
ibid . 

Lomasa (a sage) 1793 
Lunar Day defined 719n 29 ibid n 31 
Lunar days (tithis) classified 856n 25, 
861n 69 

Lunar month 719n 30; ibid n 33 
M 

Madayanti 168ff 
Madhu and Kaitabha 1213 

- Asura brothers 282n 4 

Madhu-dvis, slayer of Madhu 82n 5 
Magadha land 1765 
Magha 1758 

- , glory of 1708 

- > glory of the month of 1708 ff 

- , relative value of 1939 

Magha month at Prayaga, ablution in 
1939 

Magnitudes, of the sky, quarters, 
earth and wind 501 
Mahabhuta-s 504 

Mahalaksmi, mantra of 1203 n. 1 
Mahamahiivaruna 1973 
Mahanadi (phalgu) 1795 
Maha-pataka-s 72n 18, 15 In 11, 
269n 4 

- Great sins 25In 12 

Mahapuranas, description of their 
contents Chs. 92 to 109 
Maha-Sankha, mantras for worship¬ 
ping 1233 

Mahasimha, mantra of 1206 n. 1 
Mahasudarsana mantra 1039 ff 2. 
Mahavajrcsvara 1274 
Mahavakya-s, great sentences 436 
Mahavaruna (aTirtha) 1973 
Mahavisnu, Japa of 990 

narrat ive of the mantra of 

1323 

Malasnana 943 
Manasa 1794 

==■ Lord Visnu 500 ff 



Index 


2081 


Manasa lake 1762 

Mandara, a Himalayan range 1574n 1 

- , a mount 85n 22 

- , description of mount 1574ff 

Mandhata 1639ff 

- ,'King of Solar race 154-5n 2 

- , Dialogue between — and 

Vasisiha ibid 

Mandocca —higher Apsis 720n 34 
Manikarnika 1762 

- (a sacred pool at Varanasi) 1830 

Mantra-s of Visnu 272fT 
Mantra to release a prisoner 1065 
Mantras, procedure of repeating 932 
Mantrasnana 943 
Manu 87n 30 

- , an ancient progenitor of man 

719n 27 

Manu-s fourteen 481 


Manvadi days 354n 13 
Manvantara-s fourteen 486n 2 
Marici, son of Brahma 1347 
Marmasandhi (Astro), Vital points 
863n 97 

Markandcya, Anecdote of 102, 112n 1 

-,his life H4ff n. 122 

Markandcya pool 1878 
Markandcya-Purana 122n 3 

- available in 2 editions 1368 

- Contents of 1368 

- Date of—1368n 1 

- No. of Verses in—1368n 3 

- problem of no. of Verses ex¬ 
plained 1369 

Marriage, 21 major blemishes in 822 

- , restrictions on 352 4, 5 

- , prescriptions notes 352n 3, 

Defects of girls in selection for— 
352n 5 forms of—353n 7 Remarks 
on the prescriptive and prohibitive 
rules of—353n 8 

_years, months, days etc. aus¬ 
picious and unauspicious 820ff 
Marriages, Abhijit-auspicious for 829 

._ t agreement in Gana 828 

___ 9 agreement in Rajju or Nadi 

9 , blemishes to be avoided 822 fF 

_ ? Agreement of yoni in 828 

_ ’ Situations of happy—828 

-- Types of—829 

_ ? Yoni, animals relating to 

astcrisms 828 

Masaka, a weight of 8 Gunja seeds 243 
Matanga, a sage 1793 
Matangi, mantra 1257 n. 1 

- , Worship 1257ff 

Mathematics, topics of 


Mathematics and Astronomy 691 
Mathura 61 

- greatness of 2045ff also n. 1 

- 12 forests round 2045 n.2 

-Visranti-tirtha where Krsna took 

rest after slaying Kamsa 2047 
Matsya Mantra of 1022 n.2 
Matsyanatha or Matsycndra 1987, 
1988 n. 

Matsya Purana, Contents of 1410 

- No. of Verses 1410n 1 

Mauna, Kasja— (silence of a log of 
wood) 1776 

Maunji-bandhana, an auxiliary rite 

858 

- and Upanayana, Tying the 

Maunji belt and commencing 
studies 813ff 

Maurvi-homa 241, 251n 11 
Maya, the deluding potency of Visnu 
84n 15 

Meditation, a Discourse on 534 

- , Virtue of 418 

- On Visnu 1013 

Meru, a mountain 1749 
Mcru-srhga, peak of Mount Meru 
81 n 2 

Method of subjugating women 1311 


n. 1 

Milky ocean 107 
Mind, destruction of 554 note 1 
Mitaksara, a commentary on YS 
(Yajnavalkya Smrti) 642 n 1 
Mithila, capital City of King Janaka 
877 

Mlecchas in the Nathacult 1987 n: 1 
Mohini, Brahma’s intercession for 
1736 ff 

- , daughter of Brahma 1713 

- , - , her pilgrimage to 

sacred places 2066 ff 

- , Fascination of 1596, 1596ff 

- , Her conditions for marriage 

with Rukmangada I593ff 

- , incurs a curse 1728 

- , questions of 1656, 1656ff 

- ,regains her physical body 

1742 ff J _ 

- , Rukmangada episode Chs. 

eleven to thirty-seven of Uttara- 
bhaga 

- , Spirit of rivalry between—and 

Ekadasi tithi 2068 

- , statement of 1617, 1617 ff 

- , Story of 1670ff 

- , the love-making of 

' 1627ff 

Mohini and Rukmangada, dialogue 
between 1647ff 





2082 


Narada Purana 


Mohini’s condition of marriage- 1593ff 
Moksa-dharma, Exposition of 907 
Momentariness, Buddhist theory re¬ 
futed 553 

Moments inauspicious 717 n 3 
Months 854 n 2 

-, names of 790 

Moon, nectarine juice in 1752 
Mothers, honouring 1622 
Mrkandu 107ff 
Mrtyunjaya mantra 1332 n. 2 
Mudras, Kinds of 1200 n. 2 
Muhurta-s 861 n 71 

- , Godhulika 89, 862 n 

Mundaprsfha (a hill) 1793, 1794 
Murari, slayer of Mura 74 n 24 
Musalmudra 957 n. 

Music, seven svaras 207 n 5 
Musicians, Visvavasu, Narada, Tum- 
buru, Haha, Huhu 875 
Muspmudra 943 n. 3 

N 

Nagara (a city) 598 
Nahusa, his redemption from hell by 
Yudhisjhira 1605 
Naimisa 1754 

- , forest 57, 70 n 12 

Nakta (night), the time when the 
stars appear in the sky 1775ff 
Naksatra trees 1300 n. 1 
Naksatras and their humours 862 n 87 
Nara 68 n 5 
Narada 60 

- , turned into Naradl and en¬ 
joyed by Krsna 2051 ff 
Narada Purana, glory of 62 ff 

- greatness of 1539, 1539 n 1 

- influence of Sankhya on 97 n 2 

- merit accrued by listening to 

2066ff 

- contents of 1366ff 

- division of—in 5 parts and their 

contents as mentioned in NP tally 
with the contents of the extant 
Purana 1367 n 1 

- earlier edition of NP bigger 

than the extant NP 1366 n 1 

- endowed with ten characteristics 

2068 

Naraka 74 n 23 

- = Bhaumasura 85n 19 

Naramedha-human sacrifice 294 n 10 
Narasimha, fourth incarnation of 
Visnu 82 n 9 
Narayana 67n 4 

- , etymology of 1892 

Narayana as the son of Dharma and 


Murti 1698 n 1 

Narayana mantra, mantra of Nara¬ 
yana 990 n.l 
Narmada 1754 

- , TIrthas on 2037 ff also ibid 

n.l 

Names of the lord Krsna,glory of 487 
Nastika, concept of 15In 9 
Natha, a cult 1987 
Natha-cult, Matsyendra, the origi¬ 
nator of 1987 
Nathas, nine 1287 
Navamsa (Astro) 860 n 62 

- , Strength of 770n 32 

Nava-ratra or Durga Puja 1425 n 3 
Nescience, exemplified 574 n 16 
Niksira 1794 

Nilakantha (a Siva shrine north of 
Kathamandu) 1939 
Nilakantha mantra 1336 n. 1 
Nilapataka 1279 
Nipata, a particle 690 
Nirukta (Etymology) 674ff 

-Dhatu-s of the ten ganas from 

Bhvadi to Curadi explained 680ff 

- , Exposition of 674 

-, (Extinction as a prelude to 

Salvation) through nirveda 522 
Nirvana, Liberation 125 n 8 
Nitya deities 1267 

- , their narrative worship, etc. 

1303ff 

Nityaklinna 1271 
Nivrtti Dharma, greatness of 898 
Niyama-s enumerated 533 n 34 
Niyoga, practice of 1687n 2 
Notes and Syllables 605 
Nrsimha mantra 1020 n. 2, 1022 
n. 1, n. 2 

- , the thousand-syllabled mantra 

1023 n. 

- , Worship of 1008 

-- , mantra of 1009 n.l 

Nrsimha-Gayatri mantra 1029 
Nuchty, an option to Sannyasin 269 n 

Nyasa 1898 

-, Vyapaka 1268 n .1 

O 

Oblation to crows 1809 

- to dogs 1809 

- to Yam a 1809 

a^sacred syllable, three matras 

- , Concept of 434; identity of 
the trinity of gods with 437. n 19 






Index 


2083 


Omkara Mandhata, a jyodrlinga on 
the Narmada 1939 
Ornaments, History of 1612 n 1 

P 

Padarthas three 916 
Padas four 916 

Padma Purana, as a Vaisnava Purana 
1352 n 1 

- used by Kalidasa for the plot 

of Sakuntala and the narrative of 
Raghuvamsa 1353 n 

--• Contents of 1352ff 

Palasa (a kind of tree) 244 
Parhsunirvapana (Offering of balls of 
rice on the dust) 1792 
Pancagavya. 238ff 

- , a mixture of 5 products of the 

cow being milk, curd, ghee, urine 
and dung 861 n 76 
Pancaka (Astro) five sources of energy 
860 n 67 

Pahca mahayajhas 319n 2 

- Five great sacrifices 369n 17 

Pancak§ara (five-syllabled) mantra 
of Siva 866 n 

Pancaprakrti mantra 1199ff 
Pancaratra doctrine of four Mani¬ 
festations 1350 n 2 
Pancaratra system, influence of—On 
the Narada P. 1892 
Pancaratra-Vrata also called Hari- 
p an cam I, a holy rite of five nights 
316, 319 n 1 

Pancasunas (five household articles, 
oven, grinding stone etc.) 1823 
Panca-tirthi 1808 

. , a group of five tirthas 1804 n. 

- , a note on 1855 

- (Collection of five holy bathing 

places) 1806 

- in the five Tirthas, procedure 

for the holy ablution 1877 
- at Jagannath Puri (the pilgri¬ 
mage to the five holy centres) 1876 
Panda^ikha, a teacher of Sankhya 
School 560 n 2 

Panini explained in N. P. 692 notes 
i-38 

Pankti-Pavanah 101 n 14 
Papapurusa 1129 n. 1 
Paraka 323 n 2, 403 n 12 
Paramikarana mudra 957 n. 

Parva, Ardhodaya 1758 n. 

- , Mahodaya 1759 

Pasas (=fetters) five 1838 n. 

Pasu, PaSupati, Pasupasa 916 n. 1 
PaSupata Philosophy, principles of 


915 ff 

Pata (node) 720 n 35 
Pata-s Vyatlpata and Vaidhrta highly 
malignant in Character 722 n 58 
Pauranikas 58 

Pause (Virama) in Pratisakhya works 
624 n 1 kinds of ibid. 

Phalgu-tirtha 1806 
Phanicakra=diagram of the serpent 
Rkhu 796 

Physiology, Narada Purana’s contri¬ 
bution to 513 

Pidana, compression or contraction 
of the place of utterance 635 
Pin^a-s 245 

- (balls of rice) to be offered to 

Pitrs 1764 

- , procedure of offering—in the 

Gaya-yatra 1797 
Pitha-s nine 1229 n. 2 
Pitha mantras of the Goddess 1231 
n. 1 

Pitrkalpa (Sraddha) 647 
Pitr-yajna 650 
Pitrs, propitiation of 1764 
Planet, effect of Viddha—856 
Planets, classified as males, females 
and neuter 856 n 28 

- , divided as males, females and 

eunuchs 859 n 49 

- , exaltation of 772 n 60a 

- , Pacification of 645 

- , strength of 769 n 19,860 n 55 

Prabhasa 1751 

- (a hillock at Gaya) 1797 

- , greatness of 1989 

- = Somanathapattana = Deva- 

pattana=Veraval 1989 n. 

- , Somesa—the famous Jyotir- 

linga at 1990 

-- , Tirthas on the—region 1889ff 

Pracaya, a specific quality of the 
Anudatta accent 623 n 
Pradyumna, son of Krsna and Ruk- 
mini 88 n 11 
Pradyumna tirtha 1763 
PrahlSda 86n 25 

- , Son of Hiranyakasipu 181 

Prajapatya, a krechra penance 253 n 21 
Prakrta-laya, dissolution into the 
Prakrti 409 . 

Prana or Asu (respiration) denned 
721 n 50 

Pranagnihotra, method of 940 n. 1 
Prasandhana, repeating a word in 
the Krama-patha and joining it 
with the next word 635n 17 
Prastara (prosody) 872 n 1 




2084 


Narada Pur ana 


Prathma Artava (First Manstruation) 
809 

Prayaga 134 n 3, 1757, 1763 

- , episodes about the glory and 

greatness of 1943 

_ , glory of, due to the confluence 

of Ganga, Yamuna and Sarasvatl 
(=TrivenI) 

- , greatness of 1929; procedure 

of pilgrimage to 1929 

- , the area of 1941 

- , Veni or Sitasita Ksetra at 

1944 n.* 

- , Venl-dana at 1944 n. 

Prayers and Ritual 941 
Pregnancy 770 n 30 

- , lords of the months of 856 n 31 

Asterisms classified ibid 
Pretaparvata (a hill of the Dead) 1803 

Pretakuntfa 1821 
Preta-Siia 1817 

Prognostication by Aya (Astro) 858 
n 43 

Prosody, Description of 868 

- , Ganas—defined 868 

- , Matra and Varna Vrttas 868 

- , Names of metres 869 

- , Prastara and its varieties 870 

Prthudaka, a holy place 1966 
Pulastya and Pulaha, hermitage of 
585 

Pumsavana—(Male production rite) 
856 n 29 

- : Rite for the birth, a male 

child 810 
PunqLarikaksa 1821 
Pun<Jarikapur=Pandharpur 2008 
n. 1 

- *= Pandupur=Pandharpur 2024 

n. 

Punishments, principles of 270 n 9 
Punpuna (a tributary of Ganga in 
Patna district) 1821 
Purana, Pancalaksana definition of 
1357 n 1 

Variations between the printed 
Editions and the statement of con¬ 
tents in N P n 2 

- , Priority to 1349 n. 3 

Purana-s, difference in serial order 
1349 n . 2 

- , differing versions of the same 

story in different—1346 n 1 

- as a single text at the source 

1348 n. 1 

-reasons for their differing ver¬ 
sions 1346 

-total number of 1349 n 1 Serial 


order of 1349 n 2; Cause of priority 
in the serial order of 1349 n 3 
Puranas versus Vedas—Superiority of 
the Puranas over the Vedas 1659 nl 
Purana-Sarhhita, a single text 1347 n 1 
Puranas, Agni Purana, an encyclo¬ 
paedia of the mediaeval India 
1371 n. 1 number of verses in 
1371 n. 2 Contents 1371 ff 

- , Bhagavata Purana : Contents 

1362 ff 

- Skandhawise distribution of 

topics 1364 Ten characteristics 
enumerated 1363 n. 1 

- Bhavisya Purana : Contents 

1352, extent and contents discussed 
1374 n. 1 

-Brahma Purana: Contents 1345ff, 

- Brahma-Vaivarta Purana : Con¬ 
tents 1376ff a Vaisnava Purana, 
devoted to the glory of Radha 1376 
n. 1 Number of Verses in 1377 
n. 2 

- Brahmanda Purana : Contents 

1418ff 

- Garugla Purana : Contents 

1413 ff 

- Kurma Purana : Contents 1408ff 

- Liriga Purana : Contents 1379ff 

number of verses controversial 
1380 n. 2 number of verses in 1380 
published editions differ from the 
older version 1380 n. 1 

- Markandeya Purana : Contents 

1368ff 

number of verses 1368 n. 3 

- Matsya Purana : Contents 1410ff 

-Narada Purana, discussion on 

the number of verses 1366, greatness 
of 1539ff importance of the fourth 
pada of 1345 n., its division into 
five parts 1367 n.l 

- Naradiya Purana : Contents 

1366ff 

- Padma Purana : Contents 1352ff 

Omissions in Pd. P as described in 
N. P. 1332 as the source of the 
plot of Kalidasa’s Sakuntala 1353 
n l;in N. P. 1353 n.l 

- Siva or Vayu, which is the Maha 

Purana? 1349 n. 2 

- Skanda Purana : Contents 1384ff 

number of Verses and Chapters 
discussed 1384 n.l 

- Vamana Purana : Contents 

1405ff 

- VarahaPurana: Contents 1382ff 

two recensions—the Northern and 
the Southern 1382 n.l 


Index 


2085 


_ Vayu Purana : Contents 1360ff 

Vayu P. a Saiva Purana 1360 n. 2 

__ Visnu Purana : Contents 1357ff 

The only Purana that conforms to the 
Pahcalaksana definition of a Purana 
1357 Visnu and Visnudharmottara 
as one book 1357 n.2 
Purta-dharma 234 notes 1,2 
Purusartha-s 72n 17,^102, 104-05 
Purusasukta, a Puranic paraphrase of 
207 n 4 

Purusottama, greatness of 1859, 1876ff 
episode of king Indradyumna 1860 
Purusottama, Pancaratra system of 
worship 1894 

Puru§ottama (Jagannatha of Puri) 
greatness of 1850 

Purusottama, Indradyumna dreams 
of ' 1867 io ^ n£r 

Indradyumna’s prayers to 1860rf 
Purusottama, sapphire-made idol of 
1858 

Puru?ottama, Worship of—-according 
to Pancaratra 1860 
Purusottama idols, described 1867 
Purusottama ksetra, fruit of pilgri¬ 
mage to 1860 

- is Jagannatha Puri 1350 n.4 

- or Sriksetra in Puri or Jagan¬ 
natha Puri in Orissa 1350 n 4 
Purusottama mantra, 997 n. 
Purusottama reveals himself to King 
Indradyumna 1871 ff 
Indradyumna’s prayer to 
Puskara 1754 a holy Centre 1922 
greatness of 1353 n 1 
Puskara, Akas'a, a sub-tirtha 2001 

- , lotus, the origin of Brahma 502 

- , near Ajmer (Rajasthan) 1998 

- , Tirthas at 1999 


o. 

Quarters, Conquest of—by Dharman- 
gada 1631 . 

Quarters and their guardian deities 
368 n 16 


Radha, mantra of 1202 
Radha-cult 1909 
Radha and others 1263ff 
Radius=trijya 722 
Ragas, primitive names of 0 U 8 n 
Rahu (eclipse) 1751 
Rain, Prognostication of 85Utt 
Raivata (a mountain) 1796 
-, Story of 473 


Rajagrha 1821 
Rajasuya 73 n 21 

- (sacrifice) 1760 

Raksasa-s, episode of 179 n 4 
Rama, (Bala) an incarnation of Visnu 
1350 n. 2 

- , mantras of 1040-46 

- , seventh incarnation of Visnu 

82 n 8 

- , sixth-syllabled mantra of 1039 

- , story of 1350 

- , worship of 1034ff 

Rama mantra 1022 n. 2 
Rama-Gayatri 1047 
Rama-hrada 1954 n., 1960 
Ramatirtha 1762 
Rama-tirtha at Gaya 1798 
Rantuka, a Yaksa 1958 

- a holy spot 1955 

Rasi-s 854 n 1 

- , Janma—856n 22 

- , male or female 862 n 86 

- Classified into three types ac¬ 
cording to the postures presented 
by the figures of animals 865 n 116 

- distinguished 767 n 6 

-grouped into anga-do$a-s (de¬ 
fects of the body) 86 In 80 

- grouped into ganas 68 In 82 

Rasivarnas 862n 85 
Ratha-yktra, the procession of Jagan¬ 
natha in a chariot 1387 n 2 
Ratnas (gems) nine 12)2 n2 

- , pahea, five jewels 295n 14 

nine jewels ibid 

Rbhu and Nidagha : Dialogue bet¬ 
ween—598 ff 
Rebirth, motif of 1588n 1 

- , courses of 574 n 18 

Regions, ideal—on the body 545n 4 
Religious duties: Samskaras 340ff 

- of the Householder 355ff 

-- of the Forest Hermits 364 

- of a Sannyasin 365 

Renunciation as the best means of 
attaining Mok?a 559n 1 
Restrictions for the conqueror 866 n 
129 

Reva (river) 136n 10 
Rikta days 858n 45 
Rituals, Treatise on 636 
Romaharsana 58 
Rsabha, father of Bharaia 585 
Ijtta versus Satya 1655 nl 
Rudra, the third eye of 134n 4 
Rudras and Saktis 950 
Rudraksa 124n 7 

Rukmahgada, his advice to his son 
Dharmangada 1627ff 







2086 


JSfarada Pur ana 


_ , his firm character 1664 n 1 

-- , Mohini argues with 1647 

- , Son of Rtadhvaja, King of 

Vidisa 1555n 1 

_ } King, Dharmangada the 

prince, dialogue between 1605 

- and Dharmahgada, a dialogue 

between 1577 ff, 1605 

- and Mohini, a dialogue between 

1647ff 

-, Introduction to the story 

of 1554n 1 

- and Vamadeva, a dialogue 

between 1582ff 

-meets Mohini 1588ff 

Rupa (Astro), a unit of measuring 
the potency of planets & houses 
860 n 59 

S 

Sabda brahman, arising out of agamas 
563 

Sad-varga 766n 4; divisions of zodiac 
etc. 86In 68 

- , a note on 862n 95 

Sagara 153 ff ; 140n 27 
Sages of Naimisa forest 57, 58 
Sahasa, Punishment, categories of 
249n 5 

Sahasrarjuna, a King of Haihaya 
dynasty 86n 26 

Sakala, Capital of Madra desa 1600 
Sakti, hymn to 1288 n. 1 
Sakti-s of Visnu 97n 4 
Salagrama 113n 6 

-black piece of stone 235n 6 

Samadhi-s, trances and concentra¬ 
tions 587 

Samavartana, Return from studies 817 

- return to house after finishing 

studies at the teacher’s, 858n 44 
Samharamudra 965 
Samudra manthana, Cuming of 
Nectar 1575n 1 

Samvatsara, Sixty Jovian years 789; 
12 years of a Jovian cycle 789; 
lords of the Jovian cycle 789 

- , worship of 1423 

Sandhi-Euphonic combination 534n 8 
Sandhya, a rite to be performed at 
dawn, midday and dusk 368n 11 
Sandhyavali narrates an episode 1713 
Sankarsana, Krsna’s elder brother 
83n 12 

Sankhamudra 956 n. 1 
Sannyasa and Moksasrama 529 
Sanskrit Grammar in NP 657 
Santanu 1973 


Santi 1552 
Santi-sukta 299 

Sapta-Ganga and Saptadhara 1972 
Sapta-sagarah, seven oceans 179n 2 
Sara, a technical term in Astrology 
722n 56 

Sarabha mantra n. 2 1018 
Sarasvati 68n 6 
Sarasvati (river) 137n 11 

- , a river different from the 

Vedic—1993 

Sarasvati (Maha—) worship of and 
other details 1220 
Sarayu 1762 

Sarayu (river) 138n 18, 1547n 1 

- , Origin of 1762 n. 

Sarva-lagna, rising of the signs 807 
Sarvamangala 1281 
Sarvatobhadra Cakra 294a 
Sata-rudri—a century of Rudra’s 
names 1517nl 

Satatapa, a Smrti-writer 249n 3 . 
Saturn, presence of—in the prohibited 
signs 856n 24 

Satyavati, Visvamitra’s sister (a river) 
1762 

Saudasa, son of Sudas 166ff, 179n 1 
Saukara, a holy centre 1961 

- , -where Hiranyak§a was 

slain by Visnu 1723 n 1 

- , - mod. Soron near Itah 

(U.P.) 

Saunaka 57, 70n 11 
Savitrl 108 names of 1212 

- , the consort of Brahma 2003 

Savitri Panjara, a nyasa of—1210 
Sayani Vrata 1494 n 1 
Sea-s, seven lOOn 12 
Seasons, names of 790 
Sea-water, transformation of—from 
sweetness to saltishness 1902 n. 
due to curse of Radha 1904 f.n. 
Sects: Vaisnava, Saiva, and Sakta 
1578n 1 

Serpent diagram 855n 16 
Serpent-worship, cult of 1523 nl 
Setu, line of rocks jutting out of the 
sea between Ramesvara and Lanka 
greatness of 2035 n.l 
Siddha-natha 1988 

-Matsyendra-natha 986 n.l 

SiddhaSrama 58, 59, 7In 13 
Siddhis" 112 n2 

- , eight 1200 n. 2 

Signs, watery 867 n 131 
Signs of zodiac classified 856n 21 
Signs classified on diverse bases 865n 
117 

Siksa, pronunciation of syllables 632 




Index 


2087 


Siloccaya (a centre) 1763 
Simanta, a rite 340, 346 n 1 
Simantonnayana (parting of the hair) 

856 n 29 

Sin, concept of 248 n 1 

-- 9 Sin versus prayascitta 248 nl 

- , how to avoid 545 n 5 

Sins, a list of 1683 n 1 

- , four types of 1780 

- , mantras for quelling 1488 

- , Mental, Vocal and Bodily 

1485 n 1 

- , types of 255 

- , unredeemable 270 n 8 

Sira, bloodvessels 863 n 97 
Sita (river) 81 n 4 
Siva (a river) 1763 
Siva, eight-syllabled mantra of \66Z 
n. 1 

- , Prasada mantras 1328 

- , Sages* prayers to 1133 

Siva and Visnu, identity between 


270 n 13 ■ 0 

- , as identical 207 notes 1,2 

- , oneness between 1783 

Siva, destroying three demonic cities 
Tripuras and three demons occup¬ 
ying them 865 n 121 
Siva, procedure of worship of—on the 
full moon and the fourteenth days 
of each fortnight 1776 
Sivalinga, worship of 1126 ff 
Siva-mantra 1245 n. 1 
Siva-mantra —namah Sivdya 17bo 
Siva Purana, an Upa Purana(?) 136 nd 
Siva-sakti mantra of 1213 
Siva-Sakti-s, eight 1216 
Sivasaktinyasa 1228 n. 2 
Skanda Purana: 

Akamika Puja 1387 n 2 
Avanti Khancja 1394 n 1 . 

Ayodhya Mahatmya_ 1390 n 1 
Badarikasrama Mahatmya 1388 n 1 
Bhagavata Mahatmya 1389 n 1 
Contents of 1384 
Dcvlpattana 1390 n 2 

Karttika-masa-mahatmya J 388 n z 

Kasi Khand a 1393 n 1, 1394 n 1 
Magha Mahatmya 1389 n 2 
Margasirsa Mahatmya *388 n 3 
Nagara Khanda, topics in 1398 
No. of Verses 1384 n 1 _ 

Older and extant recensions 13yu 


Prabhasa Khand a 1400 n 1 
Prado§a Vrata 1392 n 1 
Puru$ottama K§etra 1387 n 2 
Reva Khanka, omission of, in N. P. 


1398 n 3 


Sayana-Utsava 1387 n 2 
Sivaratri 1392 

Vaisakha Mahatmya 1389 notes, 
2, 3 

Sn&taka 1763 

Solar month 719 n 31 

Somadatta, a Brahmana Ogre 280 nlO 

Somdadvipa 1762 

Somatlrtha 1762 

Soma Sacrifice 294 n 7 forms of—ibid 
Son or Daughter, the eldest 859 n 52 
Soul=Brahma characterized by Cons¬ 
ciousness 53In 12 
Soul, incorporeal 574 n 18 

- , nature of 575 n 18 

- , the way to realize 576 

Sphere, description of 89ff, 97 n 1 
Sphuta-graha=True planets 703ff 
Spiritual matters, narration of 563 
Sraddha, Abhyudayika 340 

- , a rite 370ff, 379 n 1 

Agnau-Karana in 374, 381 n 12 
—Brahmanas as assets to 648 
Decision about Tithis for—372, 

381 n 8 . . 
Disqualification of the invitee 371, 

380 n 4 

Nandi 340 ^ 

Procedure of invitation to 380 n 6 
Qualifications of the Brahmana In¬ 
vitee for 370ff, 380n 3 
Qualities of the Brahmanas to be 
invited at 648fF. 

Restrictions for the invitee 379n 2, 
380n 5 

Times and days for 353n 9 
Tithi-s, Decisions about 382 
Vrddhi 340 

Sraddhas, five types of 245 

- , types of 245 

Srikara mantra 998 
Sudarsana mantra, mantra of Sudar- 
sana 990 


Sudharma, story of 480ff 

Sudra woman, story of 1614 n 1 

Suka, as the knower of Yoga 910; 

his journey to Svetadvipa 910 
Suka, his temptation 873 
_ , son of Vyasa 604; his attain¬ 
ment of enlightenment without his 
worship of Hari, ibid 

- , son of Vyasa, his prayer to 

Visiju 911 ff 

- , - , story of 873ff 

Dialogue between—and Janaka 

880 ■ ^ 
Dialogue between—and his 

father Vyasa 887ff 







2088 


Narada Purtina 


,, Dialogue between—and Sanat 
Kumara 890 

Suka and Tanaka, Dialogue between 
, 880 

Suka and Sanat Kumara, Dialogue 
between 887 

Sukra-mantra, mantra of Venus 989 
Sumati, a King, Legend of 307ff, 
315 nl 

Sun, nectarine juice in 1752 
Surabhi, the mother of cows, history of 
Hari from the mouth of 2063 
Surya mantra, mantra of the Sun-god 
976 

- , method of fixation (nyasa) 

976ff 

Suryodaya Vedha, when a tithi is 
touched by another tithi at sunrise 
1744 

Suta 65 n 1 

Suta and Sages, Dialogue between 57 
Svadu, a river 179 n 3 
Svara-bhakti 608, 627 ff 
Svara-mandala 608 
Svaras, Science of 606ff 

- , Seven 619 n 

Sveta-dvipa 1858 

Sveta-Ganga pool 1889 

Syama and Sabala—two dogs 1799 

T 

Tairo-Virama 634 n 10 
Talajanghas 149 n 5 
Tamraparnl 138 n 17 
Tapta-krcchra, an expiatory rite 240 
Tarabala, strength of the planets 
866 n 130 

Taradi nyasa 1229 n. 1 
Taraka, destruction of—by Skanda 
866 n 122 

Tarpana (of gods, sages and pitrs) 
n. 1764 

- (rites) 84 n 14 

Teeth, brushing of 367 n 7 
Theft 257, 270 n 6 
Theory of momentariness refuted 553 
Time, Calculation of 187 n 4 

- , Concept of 97, 98 notes 8, 9 

- , measure of 122-24 n 4 

Tithi, defined and explained 389, 
1548n 1 

Tithi-s, Discussion on 1548, 1548 ff 

- for observance of fasts 382 

Tithi vrata-s 1422 n 1 
Tonsure (mundana) as the way of 
destroying sins 1932 
Travel (Yatra), inauspicious days for 
839 ff 


effect of retograde planets on 841 
Ayana ibid 

- Bhavas 842 

- Combinations of planets etc. 

843 

- Ras'i-s 842 

- Venus 84 Iff 

Travel (Yatra-Yoga) for the Kine 
839ff 6 

Tree-worship, cult of 1524n 1 

- in pre-Aryan India 1514n2 

Sacred trees, Pippala (As'vattha) 
Vata, Bilva, Tulasi-Asoka 1514 n 2 
Triganga 1971 
Trijiva 720 n 39 
Trika (Astro) 768 n 10 
Tri-madhu—three Vedic verses in 
which the word madhu occurs three 
times 381 n 14 
Trimsamsa (Astro) 860 n 64 

- of a Ras'i 766 n 3 

Trinity, Brahma, Visnu, Mahes'a 57 

- , Concept of 100, 101 n 13 

Tripura Bhairavi 1252ff 
Tripura-daha, destruction of the three 
cities by Siva 862 

Triprasnadhyaya, problems concern¬ 
ing three topics 717 n 1 
Triputi-nirasa, merging of trinity into 
Visnu 84 n 16 

Tri-Suparna, three Anuvakas 381 n 15 
Tri-tirthi (three Tirthas) 1805 
Truth= Brahman, universe sustained 
by 532 

Tryambaka (Siva) in Nasik on the 
Godavari 2004 

Tryambakcsvara, Tandava dance 
2009-10 

- , Veda pada hymn in praise of— 

2011 ff 

Tulasi leaf to be avoided in Sraddha 
354 n 14 

Tulasi leaves, offering of—to Visnu 
1141 

Tulasi or the Basil Plant 124 n 6 
Tungabhadra (river) 137 n 12 
Tvarita 1275 

U 

Uccaihsravas, the celestial horse 1583 
Upa-pataka-s 73 n 19 
Upacara-s Dravidian origin of 1495 
n 1, number of 1495 n 1 
Upacaya )Astro) 861 n 70 
Upagraha-s (Secondary planets) 
their effects 

Upanayana, investiture of sacred 
thread 402 n 7 



Index 


2089 


Upanayana rite 341 
Upapatakas : Minor sins 151 n 11 A 
Usages (sadacara) 334, 338 n 1 
Usages, sanction to 335 338 n 3 
Utkala, a province 1851 
Utpala, a daitya 1844 
Utpata : (Portcntuous phenomena) 
852 ff 

Uttanka, influence of Vedantic ideas 
on 471 n 1 

- , liberation of 465fF 

Uttara-bhaga, comments on 1545 n 1 

V 


Vahni Purana, remarks on 1371 n 3 
Vahnivasini 1273 
Vaidhrti 861 n 77 
Vaidhrli (a yoga) 1759 n. 

Vaikuntha (abode of Visnu) 1789 
Vaikuntha, description of 91 Off 

- , the region of Visnu 135 n 6 

Vaisakha 1758 

Vaisnavi Sakti, the Supreme potency 
of Lord Visnu 97 n 3 
Vaivasvata Yama 1796 
Vajapeya (a Sacrifice) 1794 
Vajapeya Sacrifice 294 n 8 
Vamadeva, a sage different from the 
Vedic seer 1584 n 1 
Vamana, fifth incarnation of Visnu 
82n 10 

Vamana mantra 1022 n 2 
Vamana Purana : Contents of 1405 
— harmonizing Vaisnavism and 
Saivism 1405 n 1 

- No of Verses 1405 n 1 

Varaha, third incarnation of Visnu 
85 n 24 

Varaha mantra 999, 1022 n. 2 
Varaha Purana : Contents of 138ZH 

_ Older Version different from 

the extant version 1382 n 1 

-- 2 Recensions 1382 n 1 

Varahi 1284 

Varana and Asi, their confluence 
with Ganga 1832 
Varanasi 138 n 19 

_1, Confluence of rivers Varana 

and Asi at 1826, also n. 

_ j Glory of Pancan ada at 1841 


_ as the cremation ground 1837 

Varga-s classified according to animals 
863 n 98 

Varga of the village and the resident 
863 n 99 

Vargottamamsas, explained 8bb n U4 

Varna, caste 864 n 84 

Varna= Complexion or colour. It 


represents certain attributes 531 
n 17 

Varnas, conduct of life of the four— 
489 

Varuna (a Tirtha) 1973 
Vasisjha 156, 164, 1638 
Vasisjha and Visvamitra transformed 
in an acquatic bird and a crane 
respectively 1369 n. 1 
Vastulaksana, classification of dwel¬ 
lings 836ff 

Deities of the house 828; Deities 
Classified 838 

- , Construction of houses 832 

Length and Breadth 834 
Testing the ground, 832 
81 division concept 833 
Time for building construction 834 
Varga-cakra to determine auspi¬ 
ciousness 834 

Vasu, on the greatness of Ganga 1747ff 

- , Review of the story of 2061 ff 

His desire to stay in Vrndavana 
2063 

Narada recounts to—the entire 
deeds of Hari 2063 
Vasudeva 66 n 

- meaning of 565 

Vatesa, lord of the Banyan tree 1815 
Vatsyayana, author of Kamasutra 
1650 n 1 

Vayu Purana, belongs to Saiva group 
1360 n 2 

- No. of Verses in Vayu 1360 n3 

- as a Mahapurana 1360 n 3 

- 4 sections of 1361 n 1 

- Contents of 1360 

Vcdamali, anecdote of 445ff 
Vcdangas, ancillaries of the Vedas 606 

- , auxiliary texts 857 

- , six accessories 207 n 6 

Vedas, four, named 606 

- , lords of 857 n 38 

Vedas versus Puranas 1658 n 1 Supe¬ 
riority of the Puranas 1659 n 1 
Vedavyasa 57, 69 n 8 
Vedha-Affliction 861 n 74 
Vedha Cakras, Diagrams Panca-s'alaka 
and Sapta-salaka 859n 54 a 
Vedha-dlksa 1299 n. 1 
Vedic Studies 340 ff 
Vedisls and Vaisnavas, a typical con¬ 
flict 1656 n 1 

Vedopakarma or Upakarma—a nte 
of beginning of Vedic Studies 1532, 
1532 n 1 
Venirajya 1761 

Verses, number in N. P. 1349 n. 1 
Vetravati (river) 138n 17 
Vibhand a ^ a 308 n 2 





2090 


Narada Purana 


Vidala, a daitya 1844 
Vidisa Bhilsa 1571 n 1 
Vijaya 1280 
Vijnana-vada 543 n 10 
Viksepa 720 

Vindhya, a mountain 1760 
Virabhadra, story of 218 n 6 
Viraja (a river) 1909 
Vira Nagara (a city) 598 
Virasana, defined in Sarada Tilaka 1035 
Virocana, father of Bali 1715 n 1, his 
death by Visnu 1719 n 1; a different 
version of his death ibid 

- , Son of Prahlada 181 

Visala= Vaisall 1938 n. 

Visala (a king), episode of 1790 
Visnu, Aditi’s eulogy of 189 ff 

- , Bali’s praise of 197 

- , description of—in Vaikuntha 

911 


- , Eulogy of 75-80 

- , Eulogy of—by Dev as 107 

- , Eulogy of—by Markandeya 

117ff 

- , form of 478 

- , greatness of 458, 473 ff, 480ff 

- , Kasyapa’s Eulogy 194ff 

- , Lord, Vision of 1726 ff 

- , the four-armed lord of Devas 

911 


- , the resident of Svetadvipa 911 

- , Uttanka’s Eulogy 465 

Visnu Gayatri 996 n. 1 
Visnu mantra 1022 n. 2 
Visnu Purana and Visnudharmottara 
Purana—two separate works 1357 
n 2 

- , Contents of 1357 

Visti defined 858 
Visuva days 354 nil 
Visuvad-bha defined 721 
Visuvatkarna 722 n 54 
Visvajit sacrifice 1761 
Visvakarman, Idols of Krsna, Bala- 
rama and Subhadra made by—1876 
Visvamitra, a King 1369 n 1 

- , a Ksatriya attained the status 

of a Brahmana sage 1763 
Visvamitra and Vasisfha curse each 
other 1689 n 2 

Visvedevas, sons of Visva, 10 in num¬ 
ber 1489 n 2 
Vitihotra 474ff, 479 n 2 
Vivahaprasna, solicitation for marri¬ 
age 818 
Viv^ttis 625 n 


Vrata, Vrata-s, Ekadasi, proper tithi 
for observing 1742 

- , Full Moon Day 1537 

- , Holika-worship Ibid. 


- , Laksmi-Narayana 296, 299 nl 

- , Masopavasa (fast for a month^ 

320, 323 n 1 ' 

- , Vijaya Dasami 1486 

- , Worship of Sami, procession 

of elephants, horses, waving of light 
after return from Sami Pujana 
1486 n 1 

- , Worship of Apta tree in Maha¬ 
rashtra ibid 
Arogya-pratipad 1423 
Asoka-Sayana or Asunya-Sayana 
1429 n 1 

Yama-dvitlya 1430 n 1 or Bhratr- 
dvitiya (Bhaiyya-duja) 1430-31 n l 
Krsnajanma-as^mi 1469 n 4, 1472 
n 1, 1475n 1 

Mahas^ami 1470 n 2, 1479 n 1 
Dasaphala 1471 n 1 
Radha 1474 n 1 
Durva 1474 n 2 
Astaka days 1478 n 1 
Sitala 1479n 1 

- Brahma-Kurca—a Vrata of 

Prayascitta 1526 n 1 
Mahasivaratri 1527 n 2 

- Brhad-Gauri 1437 n 1 

Visnu Gauri 1438 n 1 
Kara Gauri 1438 n 2 
Brahma Gauri 1439 n 1 
Saubhagya-Sundari 1439 n 2 
Ganes'a 1440 n 2 
Durva Ganapati 1441 n 1 

- , general rules about observance 

of 1427 Netra— 1428n 1 
Gauri 1432 n 1 
Aksaya Trtlya 1433 

-, Kadali Vrata 1524 n 1 

- , - , procedure of Udya- 

pana 1528n 1 

- , Dasavatara 1485 n 2 

Dasami, ten restraints 1500 n 1 

-, Ganga Daiami 1484 n 2 

- , - , Sarvabhauma 1487 n 1 

- , Dhana-Vrata or Dhanya 

or Dhanya-pratipada Vrat 
Vrata 1426 n 1 

-, Dhanada 1520 n 1 

- , Akhanqla Dvadasi, 1506 n 2 

- , -, Kamadcva 1506 n 1 

- , - , Madana—1501 n 1 

- , - , Govatsa—1503 n 1 

- , - , Nirajana—Santi 1504 

- i - , Sadhya—1505 n 1 

- ? - , glory and efficacy of 

1561 n 1 y 

--Eleven restraints for Dvadasi 

1500 n 1 

-Twelve restraints for Dvadasi 

1500 n 1 





Index 


2091 


— , -- , Name of—Vrata along 

with the lunar fortnight and month 


1491 n 1 

_ ? - , Parivartini 1496 n 1 

_ . y -, procedure of—Vrata 1650 

__, rules of observing 1551 nl 

- , Rupa 1507 n 1 

_, - , Yogini 1494 

-, Ekadasi day, greatness of 1544ff 

_exposition of 1422, 1428, 1431, 

1440, 1449, 1456, 1462, 1469,1480, 
1483, 1491, 1501, 1512, 1521, 1529, 
—exposition of Chs. 110 to 124 

- , Full Moon day, Vata-Savitri 

1529 n 1 

Go-Padma 1530 n 1 

-- , Gauri=Dhun^hi- 

Lalita—or Santi 1448 n 1 
CaturthI—of Gancsa 1449 n l 
Pancami—of Naga or R$i 1450 n 1 

- , Go-tri-ratra 1515 n 1 

- , Haritalika 1435 n 1 

Hasta-Gauri 1436 n 1 
Kotisvara 1436 n 2 
Laksesvari 1436 n 2 

- , Karavira-pratipada-Vrata 

1424 n 1 , 

-, Lalita-Sasthi 1454 n 1, J456 n 1 

Kapila-Sasi'hi 1456 n 1, 1459 n 1 
Campa-Sasthi 1460 n 1 
Varuna Sasthi 1461 n 1 

- , Mauna Vrata 1425 n 2 

Rama NavamI 1480 n l 
Uma 1481 n 1 
Rama Navami 1480 nl 
Uma 1481 n 1 
Kaumari 1481 n 2 
Maha 1481 n 3 

-, Nrsimha-Jayanti 1521 n 1 

- , Rotaka or bilva-rotaka Vrata 

1424 n 3 
Caturdasi 

Pancagni-sadhana—a Rudra Vrata 


1523 n 1 Ananta 


1522 

Pavilraropana 

1523 n 2 . 

- Sravana Sukla Caturthi 1441 n 1 

Bahula dhenuka 1442 n 1 
Siddha Vinayaka 1442 n 2 
Karaka—1444 n l . 

Maha—or Vara Caturthi 1447 n 1 
Sankara—1447 n 2 
Naga 1445 nl _ 

_ , On New Moon Days=Ama 


1537 n 1 0 

- , Prajapatya 1642 n ~ 

- , Rupa 1507 n 1 

Dvadasaditya 1506 
Tri-sprsa 1510 n 1 
Vahjuiika 1510 n 2 


Acala 1468 n 1 
Putra 1468 n 2 
Ganga Saptami 1463 n 1 
Kamala 1463 n 3 
Surya 1465 n l 
Phala 1465 n 2 
Saka 1466 n 2 
Abhaya 1467 n 1 

- , Subhasubha—Nidarsana 1451 

n 1 

Anna-Samrddhi-da 1451 n 2 
R.si-pancami 1453 n 1 
Daurbhagya-samana (associated 
with tree-worship 1514 n 2 

- , - , Tri-ratasoka—a Sau- 

bhagya Vrata 1516 n 1 

--, Trayodasi (thirteenth day of the 

lunar fortnight) Mahamaha Varuni 
1514 n 1 


-, Upanga—Lalita 1454 n 1 

- , Yugadi tithi-s 1433 n 2 

-, of Navami, associated with 

Ananda and Mahananda Nandini 
1483 n 1 

- ,»of the eighth day of the lunar 

fortnight 1469ff 

-, of the eleventh day of the lunar 

fortnight 149 Iff 

_, of the fifth day of the lunar 

fortnight 1449ff 

- , of the first day of the lunar 

fortnight 1422ff 

_ 9 of the fourteenth day of the 

lunar fortnight 1521 ff 

_ ? of the fourth day of the lunar 

fortnight 1440ff 

_ , of the Full Moon and New 

Moon days 1529ff 
_ of the ninth day of the lunar 

fortnight 1480fT . 

_ y of the second day of the lunar 

fortnight 1428ff . 

_ , of the seventh day of the lunar 

fortnight 1462ff . 

_ , of the sixth day of the lunar 

fortnight 1456ff . 

_ , of the tenth day of the lunar 

fortnight 1483ff 

_ s of the third day of the lunar 

fortnight 143 Iff r , 

_ , Sf the thirteenth day of the 

lunar fortnight 1512ff 
_ , of the twelfth day of the lunar 

fortnight 1501 ^ fVl _ 

_ f of Trayodasi, 13th day of the 

lunar fortnight 1512 # 

__ prescribed as Prayascittas 

came to be regarded as holy acts 
of piety 1654 n 1 
Vrddhi-Sraddha 1804 



2092 

Vrndavana 57, 69 n 9 
—1— , glory of 2050ff 

__ y story of Narada who wanted 

to know the secret of love-devotion 
to Krsna 2051 ff also n. 1 
Vyanjana’, Tairo-vyanjana svarita 

634 n 9 

Vyatipata (a Yoga) 1759 n. 

- , the day of the new moon 648 

n 1 

- and Vaidhrta : Malignant situa¬ 
tions of Sun and Moon 714 
Vyuha theory, application of—to 
Rama 2028 n. 1 

- , a variety of 4 Vyuhas 2049 n. 

Vyuhas, four 1860 

W 

Water, efficacy of 254 n 38 
Weight 402 

Widows, restrictions for 1637 

-, tonsure of 1637 n 1 

looked upon as Yati-s ibid 
Widows as Yatis 1682 n 1 
Wine drinking 257, 270 n 5 
Wines, kinds of 1304 n. 1 
Worldly Existence, Series of 412 
Worship, articles of 1767 
Worship of a deity, method 936 n.l 

Y 

Yadava-sthali, site of the fight among 
Yadavas 1993 
Yajna-Purusa 82 n 6 
Yajnamali and Sumall 452 ff 

Significance of the story of 457 n 2 
Yajna-varaha, Concept of 207 n 9 
Yajnopavita—sacred thread 857 n 36 
Yaksini-s 36 names 1294 n. 2 


Narada Purdna 

- , mantras of 1223IT 

Ya^rna, a^twin letter in pronunciation 

- , an appeal 1560ff 

-, approaches Brahma I554ff 

- ’ Brahma’s reply to 1565fT 

- , god of death, Emissaries of 404 

-- , going to the Region of Brahma 

1554ff 

- , his appeal to Brahma 1560 

- , lamentation of 1563ff 

Yama-raja 1799 

Yamas, fourteen 1490, worship of ibid 
Yamuna or Kalindi, a sacred river 
133 n 2 

Yatra cakra, travel diagram 864 n 111 
Yatra-yoga, Omens at march 848 
Years, names of 854 n 5 
Yoga 717 n 4 

-s, enumerated by name 721, 52 

-, a dialogue between Khandikya 

and Kesidhvaja 366 

- , a member of five-membered 

almanac 721 n 52 

- , a period of length 855 n 17 

-, Discourse on 421 ff 

- as the means of liberation 575 

n 18 

- , tlrtha 1973 

- , with eight ancillaries 1750 

Yogini-s 1293 n. 1 
Yojana defined 720 n 38 
Yoni-kuta (Astro) sexual compatibi¬ 
lity 86In 83 
Yonimudra 957 n. 

Yuga-dharmas 335, 338 n 2 
Yugadi days 354 n 12 
Yuga-s 487; theory of 498; efficacy of 
487 ff Gradual decrease of Dharma 
in; Characteristics of respective487; 
Sandhyas and Sandhyamsas 487 





i 




'S 













4 



1PIM1® 





























































