




THE 

NARADA-PURANA 


PART II 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 



Ftrsi Edition: Delhi, 1950 
RepriM: Delhi, 1996 


AUo available at * 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
41 U.A. Bungalow RomI, J«w«har Delhi HOOCT? 

120Royapeuah High Road»Mytapore. Madm 6000D4 
16 Sl MaHc f Road. Bangalore 560 001 
S Camac Sueet, Calcutla 700017 
Ashok Rajpaih. Fatna 800 004 
Oto%vk, Varanaii 221 001 


PRJNraD IN INDIA 


BY JAINENIMIA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS. 
A-4S NARAINA. PHASE I. NEW DELHI 11002S 
AND PUBUSHED BY NARCNDIU PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MCrmAL BANARSIDASS PUBUSIIERS PRIVATE LIMITED. 
BUNGALOW ROAD. DELHI 110007 



CONTENTS 


Chapters Part II Page 

42. Cosmogony : The Origin of the Universe 499 

43. Traditional Duties ofBi'Hhmanas 514 

44. A Discourse on Meditation 534 

45. Exposition of Dharmas leading to Liberation 547 

46. Narration of Spiritual matters 563 

47. Exposition of the way to realize the Soul 576 

48. Story of Bharata 585 

49. Exposition of the Virtuous Path to Liberation 594 

50. Arrangement of notes and syllables 605 

51. Treatise on Rituab 636 

52. Exposition of Grammar 657 

53. Exposition of Nirukta 674 

54. Mathematics and Astronomy 691 

55. Delineation of Horoscopy 723 

56. Natural Astrology 778 

57. Description of Prosody 868 

58< Suka’s Tcmpiaiion 873 

39, Dialogue between .^uka and Janaka 880 

60. Dialogue between Suka and Sanatkmnara 887 

01. Greatness of Nivrtii Dhanna 898 

62, Lxpodtion of Mok^^dharma 907 




SECOND PADA 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

Cosmogony : TTu Origin of tfu Universi^ 

(A Dialogue between Bhrgu and Bharadvjtja) 

Mrada submitUd : 

1. O Brahmana, kindly narrate lo me whence this uni* 
verse comprised of the mobiles and immobiles was created and 
to whom it goes at the time of dissolution. O Sanandana 1 

2. By whom was this world created along with the 
oceans, the sky, the mountains, the clouds, the earth, the fire 
and the wind ? 

3. How were the tar (Elements or living beings) 
created ? How were the different castes divided? What is the 
arrangement for their purity? How do they get impurities ? 
What are their rules regarding Dkarma and Adharmo ? 

4. or what nature is the soul of the living individuals? 
Where do those who die go? May your honour recount every^ 
thing from this world to the other, 

Sanandono repliid 

5. O Narada, listen. I shall tell you this ancient 
mythological anecdote, the scripture narrated by the sage Bhfgu 
to Bharadvaja who enquired of him about this. 

6. On seeing the brilliant great sage Bhrgu, of enormous 
prowess, seated on the top of mount Kailasa, Sage Bharadvaja 
enqi ired of him. 

Bkdradvdja said : 

7. O bestower of honour, how does the individual soul 
continuously transmigrate into the different forms of life 
(existence)? How is its liberation from the cycle of worldly 
existence effected? 



500 


N&rada Purdna 


8. (How is it) O revered s!r> that he who is Lord 
Narayana himself and god Brahma, the self^bom creator, always 
conduct themselves (as if) in the master-servant relationship? 

9. How is it that the controller of univene in whom all 
the mobile and immobile beings enter at the time of 
dissolution (of the universe), is (as a matter of fact) devoid of 
all attributes and untinged (by anything) ? 

10^12a. How and by whom can he who cannot be spe* 
cihcally particularised and reasoned about, be realized? How 
do the Vedas respectfully eulogise this great Atman^ who cannot 
be pursued by K&la (time) and Sakti and whose conduct is 
beyond comprehension? How does the individual soul trans¬ 
cend his Jivatva-^{tht state of being the individual soul) and 
merge unto the Brahmanf O store-house of mercy, I wish to 
hear this. Kindly narrate it to me (in details).** 

12h-13a. When the venerable one was thus asked about 
\w problem by Bharadvaja* the great sage resembling Brahman 
(or god Brahman) thereupon explained everything to him. 

lihrgu replied : 

13b-15* The primeval Lord Visnu who was well known 
to the great sages by (he designation MdnastP is the god 
without the beginning and end, unbeing and immortah He is 
well known as the unmanifest, (permanent, everlasting and 
unchanging. It is from him that the living beings are created. 
Ihcy are born of him and they die in him. That lord at first 
created the principle called Mahat (the great principle). 

16-17. He is the lord that supports the elements. 
(He created what is well known as Ak&ia (ether). From Akdia 
originated the water* and from the water, fire and wind 
were evolved. As a result of the contact of fire and wind, the 
earth was evolved. Thereafter, a brilliant lotus was created 
by the selfborn deity. 

18. From that lotus originated Biahma, the creator 
who is the embodiment of the Vedas. He is well known as 
AkarhkireP (the G>smic Ego), the creator of other elements and 
the soul of them all.^ 



IL42.19-29 


501 


1^22. That highly brilliant one was Brahmi. The five 
elements were the five Dhdius (constituent or ingredients of the 
body). The mountains were his groups of bones (skeletal struc¬ 
ture). the earth was the suet and the flesh. The oceans consti¬ 
tuted hb blood and the firmament his belly. The air (god) 
was his respiration. The Agni (fire) was his brilliance and the 
rivers were his blood vessels. Agni and Soma, the sun 
and the moon were well known as his eyes. The sky is the crown 
of his head; the earth constitutes his feet and the quarters his 
arms.* There is no doubt about this that he is incomprehensible, 
and his nature is inconceivable even by the Siddhas. He is the 
Lord Visriu well known as Ananta (Infinite). 

23. He is stationed in all living beings as their souK He 
cannot be realized by those who are not self-possessed. He is 
the creator of Aharhk&ra which is the cause of origin of all 
elements. Thence out of the elements was evolved the univene. 
And it is this that I have been asked by you. 

Bhdradvdja said : 

24. What are the magnitudes of the sky, the quarters, 
the surface of the earth, and the wind ? Clear this doubt 
precisely. 

Bhrgu said : 

25* Infinite is this beautiful sky inhabited by Siddhas 
and gods. It supports (in its expanse) all the things scattered 
about, but its limits could not be ascertained. 

26-27. Neither the moon nor the sun sees its end although 
they go up and down. Even the gods who are self*refulgent 
like the brilliance of the sun or the fire and whose prowess is 
well known, cannot perceive the end of the finnaraent, as it u 
both inaccessible and infinite, say so, O bestower of respects. 

28. This firmament which is over*crowded higher and 
higher up with highly blazing self-luminous bodies is incompre¬ 
hensible even to gods. 

29. At the extremity of the earth are the oceans. Dark¬ 
ness is remembered as existing at the (other) extremity of the 
oceans. They say that there is water at the end of that dark¬ 
ness and at the end of the water* there is only fire. 



502 


Ndfoda Pur^iui 


30. At the extremity (bottom) o(Ras&tala (the nether¬ 
world) there is water, and at the (lowest) extremity of water, 
there are lordly serpents. At its end, there is ether again and 
at the end of the ether, there is water again. 

31. Ending with this limit of water is the magnitude of 
the lord which is more incomprehensible than that of fire, wind 
and water even to Devai. 

32. The colours or nature of the fire, wind, and the 
surface of the earth are like those of die firmament. But they are 
distinguished, when the reality is viewed* or realized. 

33. The sages read about it in the varioiu scriptures as 
the magnitude of the three worlds and of the ocean, as has 
been laid down therein. 

34. But who can tell the magnitude of what is invisible 
and what cannot be approached, and when the movement of 
Siddhas and Devas is restricted. 

35-36. Therefore, the designation Ananta (connoting the 
un^accounfability) of the immeasurable infinity (viz. Vispu) 
has become famous. When the divine form of the noble-souled 
M&nasa (god Vis^u) who is so according to his designation 
(Ananta), decreases or increases again, who ebe is able to know 
it? If there be any other, he must be of Hb nature. 

37. Thereafter from the Pufkara (the lotus) was created 
the embodied omniscient lord Brahma Who is Dharma in¬ 
carnate, the first and the foremost Prajapati (Lord of Creation). 

Bhdradvdja said : 

38. My doubt is that if god Brahma b born of a lotus, 
the lotus becomes the elder (of the two). But your holiness 
stated that god Brahma was the first-born (in the whole of 
creation). 

Bhfgu said : 

3^40a. In order to offer a seat unto the physical form 
of Manasa (Visnu) that attained the state ofBrahma the earth 
b called Padma (Lotus). The pericarp of that lotus is the Meru 
whkh b as lofty as the sky. 

40b. This god Brahmk, occupying a seat in its middle, 
creates peoples and the universe. 



II.42.4J-50 


503 


BhdradvSja satd ; 

41. () excellent Brahinana, kindly explain how lord 
Brahma seated in the middle of the Mem, creates dilTerent 
kinds of subjects outside the mount Meru. 


Bhrgu said : 

42. Manasa mentally** created the different subjects. In 
order tu maintain and protect the living beings, water was creat- 
ed at the outset. 

43. Water which is vital to all living beings was created 
at Brst. It is the very life of all beings and subjects grow and 
multiply thereby. 

44. If they are abandoned by it, they perish* The whole 
universe is surrounded by it. The earth, the mountains, the 
clouds and all other embodied beings^everything should be 
known as Varuija (presided over by Varut^a, the deity of waten) 
The waters uphold and support everything. 

Bhdradvdja said : 

45. How WAS. water produced? How wereAgni (fire) and 
Marut (wind) created ? How was the earth created? My 
great doubt is in this respect. 

Bkrgu said : 

46. O Brihmana^ in a former Kalpa of Brahma,** in 
the assembly of Brahmaiiical sages, some nobic-souled (sages) 
had a doubt about the origin of the world. 

47. Vying with one another, those Brahmanas adopted 
silence and set meditating. They were motionless and they 
forsook all food. Thus they remained for a hundred divine 
years. 

48. A speech originating from the Brahman {or words 
sacred as those of the Vedas) reached the ear« of all. A divine 
speech came out of the atmosphere. 

49. Formerly, the infinite firmament became still and 
unruffled like a huge mountain. As the sun, the moon and the 
wind were lost, it appeared as if it was sleeping.** 

50. From that originated water, like a thicker daricnesi 



504 Nitrada PurS^ 

from darkness. From the overflowing froth and foam of the 
water, the wind rose up. 

5U52. Just as an abode^’ (or rather an empty vessel) 
without any outlet appears silent but when filled with water 
the wind makes it full of sound, so also, when the extremity of 
the firmament is continuously restrained by water, the roaring 
wind pierces through the surface of the sea and rises up.'^ 

53. The wind originating from the over*flowing froth of 
the ocean moves amongst those. After reaching the place of the 
iky it does not calm down. 

54. In the struggle between wind and water, Are of a 
mighty fire of great brilliance blazed up dispelling all darkness 
from the sky. 

55. The fire in collaboration with the wind raises water 
to the sky, where it assumes the form of clouds due to the 
contact with fire and wind. 

56. As it goes up the sky, another part of this (i.e. water) 
that stays behind due to sliminess solidifies into the earth. 

57. This earth should be known as the source of origin 
of tastes, smells, sliminess as well as of living beings. It is 
from the earth (hat everything is delivered out.^^ 

Bfidradvdja jaid : 

% 

58. (Defective) The five^* subtle, Dkdtus (properties of 
the five elements) which the lofd created (are theGu^as). 
These worlds are surrounded by what are termed as Maha- 
bhutas (great elements). 

59. When the highly intelligent deity created thousands 
of bhdlas (living beings), how does bhUiaiva (the state of being 
an element) is begotten in them specifically afterwards (in 
their post^creation stage).^’ 

60. (Defective)^* Innumerable/immeasurable are the 
great elements* (?). (From them) living beings are created* 
Hence the term *‘great element’* {makdbhUia) is suitably appli¬ 
cable to them. 

61. Our body is the aggregate of five elements 

since our (activity) is Viyu (the wind), the cavity ii 


*M4hi||Aiii k prob. a mkpriai vide Note 18, p. 511. 



11-42.62-71 


505 


Akiia (ether), the heal is Agni (fire) the liquid portion is 
Salila (water) and the mass is Prthivl. 

62. Hence, the mobile and immobile living beings do 
consist of these five elements. The ears* nose, taste, touch and 
vision are termed Indriyas (sense-organs). 

Bh&radv&ja said ! 

63. If (you say) that the mobile and iinniobiie 
beings consist of five elements (I object to it) since in the body 
of the immobile beings^ the five Dhatus (Primary elements) 
are not seen. 

64. The five Dkdtus arc not perceived in the body of tlie 
trees, which are devoid of heal and activity and which are 
actually solid in form. 

65. They do not hear, do not see, they are not cognisant 
of smell and taste nor do they perceive touch. How can ilicy 
consist of the five Dhdtus (elementary ingredients?). 

66. There is no BhautAa feature (the state of being 
evolved out of the elements) in the trees due to iheir not being 
a liquid, not being a fire» not being the earth and not being 
the wind, not being dkdia (the sky) as the sky is comprehen¬ 
sible and immeasurable. 

Bhrgu uplud : 

67. There is no doubt at all that though the trees are of 
solid nature there is ether in them. (Hence, the perpetual out¬ 
come of fruits and flowers from them comes to pass). 

68. Due to heal the leaf withers; the bark, the fruits and 
flowers too wither and decompose. Hence, there is the (sensa¬ 
tion of) touch in them. 

69. The fruits and flowers become shattered due to the 
loud report of thunder and the (roaring] sounds uf wind and 
fire. The sound is heard through the cars. Hence, trees do hear. 

70. The creeper twines round the tree or spreads all 
round. The path cannot remain invisible. Hence trees can see. 

71. Through merits and demerits and through scents 
and diflerent kinds of incense, trees that arc not aflected by 
sicknCH, blossom.^^ Hence, trees do smell. 



S06 


Ndrada Purina 


72. Since there is perception of happiness and misery, 
Since the tree if lopped off grows again, I sec a soul in the 
trees. I'hcy arc not insentient. 

73. (Defective) Hence, it takes up water; through fire 
and wind it consumes the food; as the food undergoes metabol¬ 
ism the growth of the tree takes place. 

74. The five (clemeius) are present in the body 

of all mobile beings. 'Fhey act in diverse ways on the body 
whereby the body functions. 

7r)» The skill, the flesh, the bones, the marrow and the 
lifUi [Dhdlu )—the sinews—these constitute the earth element 
in the body. 

76. The Tejas element (energy) is the body, (the 
gastric) fire anger and the eyes as well as the body tempera¬ 
ture. These five constitute the lire element in the body (the 
embodied being) which are created by the (element called) 
fire. 

77. The five ether elements (i.c. the spaces) in the body 
of living beings arc—the ears, the nostrils, the mouth, the 
lieart and the belly. 

78. Water elements always present in the bodies of the 
living beings are five, viz.—the phlegm, the bile, the sweat, the 
fat and the blood. 

79-80. Five types of (organic elemental winds envelop 
(he embodied being. It is through the Prdna that the living 
being delights (others)*®* (?). The Vyana is diffused through¬ 
out the body. The Apana blows downwards. Samana is stationed 
in the cardiac region. Through the Udana the living beii^ 
breathes and through all the five types it speaks. 

81, The embodied being perceives the quality of smell 
from the earthly element and the taste from the water element 
in hbn. I shall recount in detail the quality of smell. 

82*83. The smell is of nine varieties*^—the agreeable, 
the disagieeable, the sweet one, the ptmgent one, that which 
spreads wide, that which is harmonious and compact. That 
which is bland and mild, that which is dreamy and sulliedi that 

* Probably a misprint for about or respires, vide Mhk. 

S^li 184.24. 



n.42.84-96 


507 


which is manifestly calm. Such is the smell that pertains to the 
earth element. The embodied being sees the splendour through 
the eyes and perceives touch through the wind element. 

84. The sound, the touchy the colour and the taste also 
are remembered as qualities (of water). I shall recount to you 
the knowledge of taste (i.e. the details of quality of taste). 
Listen even as I recount it^ 

85. 86a The taMeha.s been mentioned to be manifold by 
the sages of renowned souls. Sweet, saline, bitter, astringent, 
sour and pungent. Thus, the six types of taste are rcmembeied 
to be pertaining to the water element. 

66b*89a. I'he fiery element is said to be possessing thn*e 
qualities, viz., the sound, the touch and the colour. The licry 
element perceives the colours and colours are said to be mani- 
r<ild (All ty{>es of lea lures are included in tlie word colour* ~ 
JiQpa), The RQpas of the hcry element are sixteen (?), viz. 
short, long, stout, symmetrical, atomic, circular, white, black, 
red, blue, yellow, pink, hard, smooth, delicate, slimy, .soft and 
rough. 

89b^91. The ether has only one quality, viz. the sound- 

I shall tell you the diverse extension (varieties) of the sound 
— fi^abha, Gdndhara^ Madhyama, Dhaivata^ Tahcavia 
and v\The quality of the ether (viz. sound) is thus said 
to be of seven types. 

92-93a. Thanks to its power, sound is present every* 
where.Yet it manifests itself in various kinds of drums such 
as drums, keule*drunis and Mrdanga and the conch, cloiuls 
and the chariot. Thus the sound originating from the ether is 
of various kinds. 

93b*95. The special quality pertaining to Viyu is the 
quality of touch. But the quality of touch is remembered (stated 
traditionally) to be of various kinds. The special quality per* 
taining to the wind is of eleven varieties, viz. hot, cool, pleas- 
ing and painful; soft, clearly manifest touch, the rough touch, 
the smooth touch, the slimy touch, the light touch and the 
heavy touch, ^dyu has two Gunas, viz. the sound and the 
touch. 

96. (Defective)^ They say that the sound has been 
originated from the ether along with qualities of Vayu unobs* 



508 


Ndrada Purina 


tructed. Whether perceived or not, its movement h 

uneven’* (zigzag or irregular). 

%• The Dkilus arc alwayi developed further by these 
Dhilus. The fire, the water and the wind—all these are always 
alert in the embodied beings. 

98-99. They arc the root cause of the body. They stay 
enveloping the Pri^as.^^ When the powerful (PrJtw) functions 
depending on the element called tlie earth, the Agni (fire 
element) rests on the top of the head and protects the body. 
Staying either in the cerebrum or in the fire, the Prana 
functions. 

100* 101 a. That creature is the Atman of all living beings. 
It is the eternal Purusa. It is the mind, the intellect, the ego, 
the living beings and the object of the .senses. Thus everywhere 
it is being protected’’ by the Pranas. 

I01b*102. From behind it is enabled to attain its respec¬ 
tive movement, by the vital air called Samina. The ApSna 
functions after resorting to the fire-element at the root of the 
bladder and the rectum where it makes the urine and the faecal 
matter flow out. 

103. Experts in anatomical (spiritual) knowledge call 
that (particular organic wind) the Udina which though single 
functions in three (spheres) viz. in exertions, in activities and 
in restraint. 

104. The (vital) wind that abides in all the joints in 
the human bodies is called Vyana. 

105 The fire that is diffused in the arms” is urged by 
Samina, It functions by creating the Rasas (lymphatic juices or 
secretions) and the many Do$as (disorders in the three bodily 
humours) and functions. 

106. In the middle of Prif^a and Apina the (gastric) fire 

attains its stable position and urged by and Apina^ it 

digests well. 

107. (Defective) The digestive-system (?) extends from 
the mouth to the Piju (Anus) which is otherwise called 
Gudi (rectum). Hence, all the lymphatic vessels of the embodied 
beings produce Reias” (semen virile). 

108. When the organic wind called a combined derange¬ 
ment of the humours” (causing fever) takes place, the heat 



II.42.109-I13 


509 


should be known as (gastric) fire. It digests the food of the 
embodied beings. 

109. The Pfdf^a that carries the force and heat of the fire 
goes down to the end of the anus and is obstructed at the 
extremity of the rectum. It comes up once again and casts the 
fire upwards. 

no. The abdomen is beneath the umbilical region and 
the Amdiayc (the receptacle of the raw or uncooked matter the 
upper part of the belly) is remembered to be above it. All the 
Prdnuis are stationed at the root of (pekvdia^) the umbilicus 
of the body. 

111. The ^d4is (tubular vessels) proceed from the 
heart and go everywhere—^to thesides, above and below. Urged 
by the ten Prdtuias they carry the nutritive juicy elements** (to 
all parts of the body). 

112. The path of the Yogas is also this. Thereby the 
people attain that highest region. The self-possessed men of 
equanimity overcoming strain^ keep the Atman at the head 
(in the Sahasrdra Lotus) 

113. When the PraQa and Apana of the embodied beings 
function thus, Agni (fiery element) is generated and kindled as 
through in (or under) a cooking pot** (?)« 



CHAPTER FORTYTWO 


1. The NP three theories of the evolution of the Universe: (1) 
'Thr Popular Puraf>ic Trinity Theory* wherein god BrehmA is regarded ai 
the creator of the Universe (Supra 3.3-4) (2) *The Bgkta-Sfthkhya theory* in 
which the Pard SekH (Supreme Potency) of Mah&vifpu is credited with the 
creation. Hut the process of evolutiofi is that of S&hkbyas. (3) The Third 
theory which may be called 'the Uirgu Theory of creation* is discussed in 
this chapter. The main feature is the special type of evolution proposed 
herein which is briefly as follows ; 

Mdnasa (Vifnu)—(the ether)—water—fire—wind—-rafth. 

The NP has not only borrowed this theory from the Mbh. chs. 

132-185 but has incorporated Vrtbatim the verses in these chapters. This shows 
the compilatory nature of the NP. 

2. This corresponds to Bhffma UoAca in the Mth. Ukid) v. 5. The rest 
of the text is a copy of the AfM. 

3. Minasa—NK (Nllakantha) the com. on the Mkh. explains by quoting 
a 8ruti text which states : 

**Out of Asai was evo]vc<l Maucs which created Prajlpati. the progenitor 
of all beings; alternately, whatever is, exists in mind**. Hence Mdnasa is the 
name given to the cause of the origin of the Universe. But the adjectives used 
in vv 13b-15 show that M&nasa is identical with the BnUiman or MahAvitpu, 
NK shows how each of the adjectives is supported in the Upaniiads. 

4. The evolution mentioned here is diflerent from that of the Sihkhyas. 
NK is hard put to it to explain this deviation. He slates that the usual 
evolution—the sky—wind—fire—water—earth are implied here : 

He slates: 

Akdidd abhatxid ojri \tyddipd\ha’4cramo na vivakfituk kiniu dkdtdd vfyuki 

fdyoroQHiftt agurrdpeh, adbhyalt ptikwl iti Jrcuta rua 
NK further explains that the names of the elemenu (wind, etc.) indicate 
their subtle forms (loaiadtraf) before these elements were grossly divided. 
(Tatra fdyvddusabdaih sparia^tanmdttam rQpa~tanmdtrom gandfuhlaftmdtrarh ca 
sdkfmam opakelkfta-bhiBajdtam uejaU. 

5. The 8rutis record that as soon as Brahmi was bom he uttered the 
words am He'* (iSk'Aam). Hence, be is called Akam or AharkkiBra. 

6. Sarva-hh&UttmabkiUakTt : Cod Brahma is the soul embodying all hk&tas 
(sarva*bhAidtman) as well at the creator of those hhiiUs (hh6ta*k^). As NK 
puts it : SarvahhAtiui slkula^piyadddimit udAtmA iarfhartrah sa £djau bkiUakfc 
fuiurpidka^SkuUgrima^rraffiaitt remdia/t. 

7. Tlie concept of the deity as the embodiment of the universe which 
is detailed here is an echo of the Aftm^uks C/p, 11.1.4 where the deity is 



Notts 


511 


called and itiil ibe lirobt of bu body are uud to have 

been coniiituted by the sun, the moon, the quarters, etc. 

8. This repetition of water indicates the Lord who b the embodiment of 
water and he U unending^NK. 

9. T4</{ia*d0ri«id/»NK lakes (khid^cnU) (a) tattvo^dAriendt meaning 
iht Mfltdi arc distinguished Mran^A of true knowledge’*. He who has 
reaiiaeU Reality (Td/tre) can reaUae the non^duality^the identity of the soul 
with the Universe. 

10. By the Bat of his will of Sakk^pdd ioAs^t jamahi/tAaiUi, quoting 

such Iruti passages, NK states that His Will is enough for creation, no other 
materia) is necessary. 

11. At the beginning of the Kalpa in Urahniu's r^ion—NK. 

12. NK quotes NihdtA'^dhumdrkti^ etc.. {Svt. U{>a 2*11) for comparison. 

13. hhnwtha in the NP is probably a mistake fur khijonA in thr Mbh. 
{ihid) vii. It b reasonable ai>d within the eaperiencc of all that nn empty 
vessel (iA 4 /ded;when (tiled with water make< sound, while *'aji abode without 
an outlet'* b strange; to with bhdjoufi as the emendation, the translation is 
*'Just as an empty vessel without any aperture appears void of sound, but 
when with water, atr comes in and creates a sound." 

14 . Totha sM<i^sa/ftruddht»gh9favAn^ 

This (v. 52) alio means : ''Similarly when the infinite sky (void space) 
becAme full oC water, and the wind penetrating through the ocean arose 
with a roar.” 

15. NK concludes that jiist as the creation of the Universe is mental 
( not real) in the case of god Manasa, similarly we should also realize it to be 
unreal like a dream {/isffuidddinifn apt ijam stffih stapfidvadt etc.}. 

16. rak^ya *'to be protected” ; r% not a satisfactory reading in this coAlat. 
Mhh. .fdflin84-l reads *‘Brahma” which su|^ies the subject to asrjaf in 
die text). 

17. Ihe plain question U ; why MnMhhilas (grrat elements) are 
also called SAtlter (whidi ii normally applied to creatures of different catego- 
rics. 

16. V. 60 in the NP appears dcfeclive due to the words amiUni 
mahdef^ni in 60a. The original Mhh. (s^id) verse 3a which is quoted 
in the NP reads: 

afnitdndrk mahdSahdn fdnit khiilini iombhaiNim 

The epithet mahi U given to all things vdsich belong to the category 
of'immeasurables* or innumerables. 

19. V.17 may alternately be translated thus: 

In consequence of smell (pleasant or unpleaian*—good or bad) and due 
to the perfumes of different kinds of incenses, trees recover their strength and 
blossom forth. 

20. The Mbh reads Pranty^te for FrtttoyaU of the NP. NK interprets: 
It b the vital breath called Prdfta which enables a living being to move 
about; the vital breath named Vydna gives him strength for exertions. 



512 


Ndrada PurH^a 


21. NK has given instances with a slightly diflerent interpretation. 
1'hu8 nirhMi overpowering the smell of other things as the gum of Asafoelida 
iiserl in articles of food. 

SamkAia-^ A composite niiaiure of many scents. 

Snigdha^ fit one given out by boiled butter (when transformed into 
ghee). 

Rukfa — Dry as of mustard <m1. 

22. Aikafytfua-^ Due toils quality of being all-pervasfve like the Supreme 
Being — NK. 

23. The NP V. 92 combines from (he Mbh. vv. 40b, 41a, and omitting 
V. 41C, accepts v. 42a for 93a. 

24. The text of v. 96 is defective as it cumUna Mbh (iktd) vv. 42b and 
43a and NP V.97 combines Mbh. w. 43b and 44a. Reconstructed according 
to the Mhh. the verses sliould be translated as follows: 9€b*97a. The 
sound (which is (he propeuy of AkAh nr space) is not heard, when dilferent 
kinds of touch are inchaotive. The elements or constituents which mix up 
with other c<m$iituenti In the body increase in strength- 

U iAbd^dyutpa^ii dhdicifc dhdtubhih pr4prRdr(ya//j 

dpydy^nU ddita Arabkyd iathv^rdhysnU / J^K. 

25. The reading uifamd accepted by the NP is from the Bengali 

Mss of the Mbli. NK speciftcally slates g^tif Ui atmia-pS^kas tu 

prdmddikah. This reading shows Chat the author of the NP. copies a Ms. 
hailing from Bengal or he belonged to that part of the country and accepted 
the reatling from the MS of (he Mbh. used in that part. 

26. Here ends ch. 184 of the Saoti of the Mbh. the next ch. {185} of 
the Mhh. is borrowed in the NP. w. 2b onwards. 

27. The Mbh. Adnti l85.5a (whi^ u the same ms NP v. lOla) reads 
parUAfyat€ and NK interprets; The Frdti^ is the creature, the Supreme 
soul, the eternal Pun/fc^ the mind...object of the sense. Thus the living 
being is made to move about by Prd^a in every respect/* 

28. In etc. of the NP. bdht is mesAingless as the vital air 

called doe:; not limit its activity to arms only, but coven the whole 

body, and secondly, the plural No. bdhusu implies more than two arms 
which means Sfimdna Vdyit does not functioD in two-anned beings. The Mbh. 
reading for bdhufu is better. The mistake is repeated in v. 105 b 

where NP reads rasdn bdkufU ca where the pr^>ef reading should be dhdiu^ 
ea as the breath samdna operates on all dhdita (cointiluents of the body) and 
not merely on (inore chan two) hands. 

29. R9fa\ in NP v.l27 is obviously a blunder. For marls irrelevant in 
the chanrrl that extends from the mouth to the anus. That reading rendered 
the verse defective. The Mbh. (iM) v. 107 which ii borrowed by the NP 
reads Sfotastnd means **From this main channel many subsidiary channels 
or spread out (like branches) all over the budy.“ 



Notes 


513 


NK. ukes Srotai iS '^the pjus^e of the viiaJ wind'* and its branches as 

Ne4u, 

30. NK interprett : Asa result of the rapid confluence of the (fise) 
vital airs flowing: tbrougtk these arteries, the heat called gastric Are is generated 
and it causes digestion. 

31. This shows that the NP. anticipated Harvey in physiology. 

32. The gist of NK's long caplaxsatjori: In all the physical and mental 

functions of the body, etc. are the instruttiental cause. When 

charactet'ised by breath-control is practised, the eternal Brahman 

reveals itself resplendent. In the final aoalysis what remains it the Brahman. 



CHAPTER FORTYTHREE^ 


Thi TfaiiiioMl Dutits of Brdhmanas 


Bhdradvdja said: 

1. If the wind b the lord of the Pranas and it is the 
wind alone that functions, breathes and speaks, there is no 
purpose served by the Jiva, (the individual soul is superfluous). 

2. If the heat belongs to the fire, (the clement called 
the Fia*), if it b perceived through fire and if the fiery clement 
digests (food, etc.) it, the Jiva, is futile. 

3. When a creature dies, the so-called individual soul is 
not perceived leavir^. Only the wind leaves him off and the 
heat is extinguished. 

4. If however, the individual soul is identical with Asu* 
(i. c. Prana, the vital wind) and if it has contact with the wind, 
it may be seen on a part with the zone of the wind along with 
the groups of Manila. 

5. Or if the contact be with it (the wind) and if it 
perbhes thereby like a pot of water due to its being released 
(separated) from a great ocean.^ 

6. If anyone pours water into the well or places the 
lamp into the fire, it perishes immediately. Similarly, the 
individual soul too perishes instantaneously.^ 

7-8. The body consists of the five elements and (they say 
that) it is in this that the soul lives. Therefore, if one of the 
elements perishes all the others also must undoubtedly perbh. 
If food ( and beverages) are not taken in, the watery element 
perbhes. The wind element perishes by means of the restraint 
of the breath. The (gastric) fire perishes by abstaining from 
taking food and if anything is taken to purge the belly.^ 

9. Through sickness, wounds and similar distress 
the earth element also gets shattered. If anyone of these 
elements is afflicted, the whole mass of the elements perishes. 

10. If that ( body constituted of five elements) perishes, 
what is it that the individual soul pursues? What is it that 



n.43.11-20 


515 


the individual soul feeU afflicted?* What does it hear or speak? 

11. ^*When I am in the other world this cow will 
redeem me.*' A person thinks like this, offers the gift of a cow 
and then dies. But whom is it that the cow will redeem ? 

12. When the cow, the giver (of that cow) and the 
acceptor^all these are dissolved here in this world, simul¬ 
taneously, whence can there be the reunion of all of them ? 

13. Whence can these be enlivened again—he who is 
swallowed up by birds, he who falls down from the top of a 
mountain and he who is consumed by hre ? 

14* If the root of a tree is cut, it does not grow again. 
When a man is alive* all his parts function. But how will 
the dead come back again ? 

15. All the individual souls had been created formerly 
and they revolve again and again. The dead ones perish even 
as the seeds perish one after the other.^ 

16. O Brahma^a, this is the doubt that surges in my 
heart. O omniscient one, clarify it since I depend upon you 
(and have approached you for this). 

SfiTKtndana said: 

17. O excellent sage, Bhrgu the son of Brahma who 
was asked thus by him spoke again to clear his doubts. 

Bhrgu said: 

18. When the individual is killed or dies himself the 
Prdnas cease to exist.* The living being ( i*e. his soul) 
transmigrates to another body and thb body decays and 
becomes shattered. 

19. The Jxva is not dependent on the body. It does not 
perish when the body perishes. Just as the fire is seen (to be 
present) even after the sacrificial twigs are completely burned. 

Bhdradvdja said: 

20. (You say) that when they (the sacrificial twigs) 
perish the fire docs not perish. But after the fuel has been used 
up the fire is not verily seen. 


•NP **afnic(ed’'but Mbh.‘'Does it know** XII 10*186. 



516 


Ndrada Purdna 


21. Hence, I understand tKat if fire is extinguished 
without further addition of fuel, it definitely perishes since, 
where it goes is not known. There is no proof of its existence. 

Phrgu ^aid: 

22-25. ( You say as follows;—) After the twigs have 

been used up the fire is not seen. I understand that the 
tranquil fire without fuel does perish since where it goes is not 
known. There is no proof of its existence. (Yet understand 
this.) Just as the fire is not perceived after the consumption 
of fuel as it has vanished into the ether, and so b without 
any base and as it is difficult to be perceived, so also, when 
the body is forsaken xh^Jioa remains like the ether (invisible). 
Since it is very subtle it does not perbh,* undoubtedly in the 
same way as the fire. The fiery element sustains the PrdM. 
May that be undentood as the Jiva. 

26*27. The (gastric) fire that b sustained by the wind 
(i.c. the body temperature b sustained by respiration) perishes 
when the breath is curbed. When the fire of the physical body 
perishes the insentient body falls down and merges into the 
earth. Indeed, the ultimate goal of the mobile and immobile 
beings is the earth. 

28-29. The wind follows (or merges into) the ether; 
the fiery element too follows it. Since all the three constitute 
one unit the set of two (viz. the earth and water) is esta* 
blished on the earth. Where there is the ether, the wind is 
present too. The fire is present where there is the wind. These 
must be known to be without fomts but the embodied beings 
have forms. 

Bhdradvdja said: 

30. O sinless one, if the fire, the wind, the earth, the 
ether and the water are present in the embodied beings, what 
are the characteristics of the Jiva. Kindly explain this to me. 

31. 1 wish to understand of what nature b the Jiva in 
the bodies of living beings which arc constituted by a set of 
five things viz. the elements) and take delight in five things 
(c.g. laite, smell, etc.) and have five cognitive senses. 



11.43.32-42 


517 


32. The body is a mass of flesh and bloody fat, bones 
and sinews. When it is shattered and split the Jiva is not 
perceived. 

33. If the body is without a Jiva but it contains only 
the five elements, who experiences the pain in the course of 
mental and physical distress? 

34. O sage, by means of his pair of ears, the Jiva hears 
what is uttered, but when the mind is preoccupied he does 
not hear it. Hence, the Jiva is futile. 

33. What should be seen, everyone sees with the eyes 
in collaboration with the mind. When the mind is agitated, 
the eye does not perceive though it may look at things. 

36i He does not see, or smell or heari or speak or know 
the touch when he (the agent called Jiva) is under the 
influence of slumber. 

37. Who is it that is delighted? Who is infuriated? Who 
bewails ? Who is alarmed ? Who shuns ? Who wishes ? Who 
meditates? Who is malicious ? Who reads or utters words? 

Bhrgu replied: 

38. The body holds one chat is common to the five. It 
is the i4n/arJ/man^^ (the inner immanent soul). It is he who 
perceives the odour* taste* sound* touch, form and the 
(attributes). 

39. The Antardtman is present throughout the body* in 
the body consisting of five elemenu; it perceives the flve Gt^fas, 
it is this that experiences pleasure and pain always. Separated 
from it the body does not understand anything. 

40. When there is no perception of colour, no touch and 
no heat in the Are within the body, the fire is tranquil* When 
the bodily tire (temperature) is cooled down, (the body) dies 
by being forsaken hy Jiva (who does not die). 

41. The whole of this (universej (?) is full of water; 
it is the wuter that is the physical body of the embodied being. 
There the Atman is Brahmd in all the living beings. He is the 
creator of the worlds. He is called Mdnasa}^ 

42. That which rests in the physical body like the 
waterdrop on the lotus-leaf is the Atman, Know that the 
Atman is conducive to the welfare of all worlds. 



518 


Ndrada Purdm 


43« Know him as the indwelling soul {K^etrajna)^ the 
eternal well-wisher of the worlds. Know that the Cunas 
(attrilmtes) of the Jiva are SattvCy Rajas and Tamas, 

44. Some say that insentience^* is the attribute of the 
Jiva, But it is active and it activates everything. Those who 
know the k^etra (the physical body) say that the Supreme 
^tman has set the seven worlds in motion 

45. When the physical body is changed, there is no 
destruction of the Jioa. O sage, those who have not under¬ 
stood this, call this as untrue. The moves about in the world 
(only) after being covered by the l)ody.*^ And its change of 
body lakes place due to its fifth stage (death). (The other 
four being infancy> childhood, youth and old age]. 

46. Thus hidden in ail the living beings, the Atman 
always moves about. It is perceived through the subtle and 
excellent intellect** by the seers of the truth. 

47. (Defective) The wj<w person continuously practising 
Toi^a in the initial and final watches of the night and with his 
soul sanctified by assimilating pure fo<»d realizes the Supreme 
soul within his own soul. 

48. By dint of the serenity and composure of the mind, 
and by giving up both auspicious and inauspicious KamanSy 
one should stabilise oneself in the Atman and be delighted in 
the mind. He shall thereafter attain infinite bliss. 

49. The mental fire in the bodies is called the Jiva (in 
the bodies). In the matter of decision regarding Bhutdtmany 
the creation of the lord of subjects** is as follows: 

50. At the beginning (of creation) it was the Brahmanas 
alone that Brakmd the Prajapati created. They were evolved out 
of his own brilliance. Their lustre was like that of the Sun and 
fire. 

51. Thereafter the Lord created the following things as 
conducive to the attainment of heaven, viz. truthfulness Dhama 
(virtue), the eternal Brahman (i. e. the Vedas) ^ the conventional 
duties and purity both physical and mental. 

52-53a. (Defective) Devas, Danavas, Oandharvas, 
Daityas Asuras and the great serpents, Yaksas, Raksasas, 
N&gas, Pisacas and human beings (were created). The 



11.43.53-60 


519 


human beings (were classified} into Bralunanas, Ksatriyas, 
Vaiiyas and 6udras.^* 

Bh^radvlija soid'. 

53b-54. (You say) that one V^rnc^'* (caste) in the four¬ 
fold division of men is different from the other. What is the 
criterion thereof? Sweat, urine» faecal matter, phlegm, bile and 
blood circulate within everyone. Then on what basis is the 
caste divided? 

55. Among both the mobile and immobile beings 
there arc innumerable groups and classes. Among these different 
Vandas how is a particular Varna arrived at? 

Bhrgu said : 

56. Originally, there was no distinction among the people. 
The whole universe formerly created by Brahfn& was Brahma- 
nical by nature. Though originally created as equals by Brahma, 
it was as a result of theiriTennw (acts) that people got divided 
into different castes. 

57. Some of those Brahmanas became fond of erotic 
enjoyments. They were furious by temperament. They were 
violent and zealous. They liked risky adventures. They forsook 
their original duties (of Brahmanas), became redin complexion 
(i. e. full of Rajo-guna) and attained K^atrija^^kood. 

58. Those Brahmanas, who maintairjed themselves by 
means of agriculture and lived by tending and rearing 
up cattle and did not practise original duties as Brahmanas 
(grew) yellow (a mixture of rajas and lamas) and became 
Vaiiyas. 

59. Those Brahmanas who were engrossed in violence 
and untruthfulness, greedy and maintained themselves by means 
of all types of jobs (even forbidden to Brahmanas) and were 
thus fallen from purity of conduct became dark (full of 
Tamogw^a) and degenerated to the status of Sudras. 

60. Thus the (original) Brahroaijas affected adversely by 
these activities were changed into other castes. The power of 
austerities of those Brahmanas who maintained their prescribed 
religious rituals and duties, does iiot perish. 



320 


Nitraia 


61*62a. Thm are many subdivisions ofBrahmanas in 
the diBercnt places, but aU of them observe holy virtues, rites 
and restraints. They perpetually retain the Brahman (i. e. they 
study the Vedas regularly). Brahman (i.e. Vedas) had already 
been created formerly. Those who know them understand 
(everything else). 

62b*c. There are many types of Pifacas, Raksasas, Pretas 
and Mleccha (outcaste) tribes. The creation by (Brahma's) 
mind is verily intent on the religious rituals and duties.^* 


Bhdradvdja said: 

63. O excellent Brihmana, how does one become a 
Brahmana or a Ksatriya? O Brahmanical sage, how does one 
become a Vaiiya or a Sudra? O excellent onr among the 
fluent speakers, please explain it unto me. 

fihrgu said: 

64. One who is as follows is called a Brahmana. He 
should have been consecrated duly by means of post-natal 
purificatory rites and other holy rites as well and should him¬ 
self be pure. He must possess the learning (recitation, etc.) of 
the Vedas. He must strictly adhere to the religious duties and 
rites prescribed for Brahmai>as.’* 

65. He must closely follow the rules of cleanliness bolh 
mental and physical and pure conduct. He must have soundly 
studied the diflerent lores. He must be fond of his preceptors 
and elders. He must perpetually observe the holy vows and 
rites. He must be devoted to truthfulness. Such a person is 
verily called a Brahmai;ia. 

66. He in whom these qualities are seen is remembered 
as a BrahmaM, viz. Truthfulness, charitable gifts, non malicious* 
ness (absence of wickedness), kindness, mercy, sympathy and 
austerity. 

67. One who is as follows, is called a K»triya. He 
practises the duties assigned to a K^triya, i.e. the military 



11.43.68-75 


52i 


profession). He practises studying the Vedas He must be 
interested in giving religious gifts and collecting taxes.* 

68. Derivation of the word Vaiiya is as follows: — 
vifati diu Hi Vaiiyak."^ One who enters (worldly transac¬ 
tions) immediately is called a Vaiiya. Through the animals he 
is interested in taking to agricultural activities. He loves to 
donate charitable gifts and is pure. He is endowed with the 
study and the learning of the Vedas. 

69. One who is always habituated to all kinds of diet, 
one who regularly performs all odd jobs, is impure, one who 
has forsaken the study of the Vedas and one who has no 
conventional duty is remembered as a 6udra. 

70. If a (born) Sudra possesses all good characteris¬ 
tics and a (born) Brahmana does not possess the same that 
$udra is no longer a Sudra and that Brahmana is no longer a 
Brahmapa. 

71. By every possible means restraint be put on covetous¬ 
ness and anger. This as well as self-comrol is the holiest of all 
wisdom. 

72. Those two (covetousneu and anger) attempt to 
destroy welfare. They must be avoided by all means. One shall 
save one’s prosperity and glory from perpetual anger;*' one 
shall save one's austerity (power of penance) from malice. 

73. One should save one*s learning from (the feeling of 
both] honour and dishonour and one should save oneself from 
erron and mistakes. 

74. O Brahmana, he is a real renouncer and intelligent 
man, he whose every religious enterprise (e.g. sacrifice) is 
unfettered by longing expectations and he who has dedicated 
every thing (in his possession) to Tydga (renunciation for the 
sake of othen). 

73. One should refrain from injuring or doing violence 
to all living beings; he should be friendly unto all. Renouncing 
all possessions and monetary gifts he should subdue his sense- 
organs inteliigently. 

*ln my (Veok. Edt.) text, the reading is *One who Ukei to 

give charitable giTcs but not accepting ibem from othen* (bui collecting iaxe« 
from subjects). 



322 


N/irada Purdi^a 


76*78. One shall abide by that which causes no sorrow,^* 
one that will afford him freedom from fear here and hereafter. 
The (Brahmana) should be perpetually engaged in austerities> 
selfH:ontroh restraint over the mind. He should be desirous of 
conquering what is not conquered. One should remain unattacli* 
ed to worldly affairs. What can be perceived by means of the 
sense organs is Vyokia (the manifest). That which is beyond the 
scope of the sense organs, and which can be grasped by inference 
from its symptoms and characteristic features should be known 
as Avyakta (unmanifest). If there is a nuclear conviction of 
reality one should continue to ponder more and more. When 
one is (thoroughly) convinced (about the truth)” he should 
steady the mind therein. 

79. The mind shall be controlled through the Prit^a 
(Breath-control) and the should be concentrated in the 
Brahman. One attains Atrrdna (extinction as a prelude to salva¬ 
tion) through Nirveda (complete detachment). One should not 
be worried or think of anything else. 

80-8Ia. O Brahmana, it is verily by dispassion (and 
renunciation) that one gets (real) happiness. One should always 
be (striving) for purity and should be endowed with the norm 
of the conduct of the good. 

81b*82a. Highest compassion for all beings—all these 
constitute the characterbtic of twice-boms.” He (a twice-born} 
should observe Truthfulness as a sacred vow and should practise 
Penance, (mental and physical) purity. It is the truth that 
creates the subjects. The whole world is sustained by Truth. 
One goes to heaven only by truthfulness.*^ 

82b-83. Falsehood is the feature of darkness; one is led 
downwards through darkness. Those who have been caught 
hold of by darkness, those who have been enveloped by dark¬ 
ness do not see the brilliant light (of heaven). They say that 
Naraka (hell) is darkoeu itself; it cannot be brilliant with 
light. 

84. Both Safya (truth) and Artfta (falsehood) is attained 
by the people roaming over the Earth. Even in that case, the 
predilection in the world should be thus towards Truth and 
hkthood. 



11.43.85-94 


523 


85-86. Light and dai^ncss indicate Dharma and Adharma 
as also happiness and misery. Wbe» forcsighted (>er5ons who 
observe what is created in the world affected by miseries 
and pleasures both physical and mental but both originating 
from ov leading up to Asukha (i. e. unhappiness), do not 
become deluded. A clever man should (therefore) endeavour to 
get liberated from misery.*® 

87^88. Both here and hereafter pleasure is non-permanent. 
Just as the light of the moon eclipsed by Rahu becomes faded 
and dim, so also the happiness of living )>eings, oppressed by 
darkness, perishes. 

89. Happiness is said to be of two kinds, viz. the physi¬ 
cal and the mental. Here, in this world verily all actions in 
regard to any object are said to be pursued for the sake of 
happiness. As to the other world there is nothing better than 
Apavarga (salvation]. That alone is to be desired. It is a desir¬ 
able quality. Its origin is caused by the endeavour for the 
same through virtuous activities. All the activities are aimed 
at the acquisition of happiness which is its purpose. 

Bhdradvdja said : 

89. It has been said by you that pleasures have the 
greatest status. 

90. We do not accept this. Nor is it so in the case of 
sages who establish themselves in the Supreme. 

91. This desirable special quality cannot be attained. 
They do not practise this. It is reported that Lord Brahma, the 
creator of the three worlds, stands alone in austerity. He is a 
celibate. He does not entangle himself in erotic pleasure* 

92. Moreover, Xx>rd Viivesvara, husband of Uma, 
controlled Kama who attacked him by reducing him to bodi¬ 
lessness. 

93-94 Hence, this is not accepted by noble-souled ones.*^ 
Nor am I convinced of this by you. It has been staled by you 
that women constitute the highest, ultimate happiness.** It is 
only a popular saying in the worid. There are two types of 


524 Ndtada Pur^a 

benefit (or result). Happiness results from good deeds and 
misery otherwise. 

Bkrgu said : 

95. Here it is being (thus) explained. Darkness (Tamo- 
guna) has manifested itself from Anrta (falsehood). Those who 
are prevailed upon by darkness pursue only Adharma 
and not Dhama. Those who have been affected by anger, 
covetousness, delusion, violence, falsehood and similar vicious 
things do not attain happiness either in this world or in the 
other one. They are shattered and scattered through various 
kinds of sickness, pain and oppressions. They are afflicted by 
various distressing features such as capital punishment, imprison* 
tnent and tortures; they are overwhelmed by the distress and 
strain of hunger, thint and tedium; they are subjected to vari¬ 
ous miseries of physical strain due to rain, gusts of wind, 
oppressing heat and biting cold; they are afflicted by various 
mental miseries caused by the death of or separation from kins¬ 
men or the destruction of wealth; they are also dejected due to 
other causes .^ucb as old age, death, etc. 

96. In the heaven there is neither physical nor mental 
pain; there is no old age or sin; it is always pleasure alone 
there; but here (in this world) both pleasure and pain are 
experienced. 

97. They say that there is only misery in the hell, that 
the highest region (of the Lord) has pure happiness. The earth 
is the mother of all living beings; women are also of tlie same 
nature. 

98*99. The male L« lord of the progeny (begetter). 
They know that the semen virile is of the fiery element. Hence, 
he is the creator of the worlds of Dharma, of good conduct, 
of well-performed penance, of self-study (of the Vedas) and 
of the pcrformani:e of Homa. The sin is subdued through the 
sacrificial rites. There is excellent tranquility in the self-study 
of the Vedas. 

too. They say that enjoyment of pleasures is due to 
charitable gifts; and that one shall attain heavenly pleasures 
through penance. They say that Ddna (charitable gift ) is of 



II.43J01-106 


525 


(wo types; that for the purpose of benefit here and that for the 
purpose of benefit in the other world. 

101. Whatever i% given to the good men is conducive to 
the pleasures in the other world; whatever is given as charitable 
gift to bad men is conducive to the pleasures in this world only. 

The benefit enjoyed (from charitable gifts) is in accordance 
with charitable gift ofiPered. 

Bh^radvdja e n^uired : 

102. What is performance of holy rites ? Who perforins 
them? What are the characteristics of Dharma ? Of Itow ntany 
types is Dharma? It behoves you to explain it» 

Bhrgu said : 

103« The acquisition of the benefit of heavenly pleasures 
is only unto those learned men who are engrossed in carrying 
out their prescribed religious duties. He who is otherwise 
becomes deluded. 

Bhdradvdja submitted: 

104. It behoves you to explain to me here the respective 
conventional duties of the four stages of life ordained formerly 
by Brahmanical sages.^ 

Bhrgu said: 

105. Four Ahamas (stages of life) have been specified 
for the preservation of Dharma^ even at the very outset, by 
Lord Brahma who used to carry out what is beneficial to 
the worlds 

106. They mention that the residence in the house of 
the preceptor is the first Ahama. The boy in this stage of life, 
properly controls his self by means of purificatory rites, conse- 
cratory rites, observances and holy vows. He performs the wor* 
ship of the sun, the fire and the deities during the two Sandhyds 
(The Dawn and Dusk). He eschews all lethargy. Me purifies 
his inner soul by means of obeisance to the preceptor, perform¬ 
ance oithe Vedic Studies and listening to (good ducourees). 



526 


M^ada Purdf^a 


He takes his holy ablution thrice every day. He regularly practi¬ 
ses celibacy, maintenance of holy sacrificial fires, service to the 
preceptor, begging for alms, etc.; he dedicates the alms so col¬ 
lected (to his teacher) and other activities to the inner soul. He 
abides by the words of the preceptor. He obediently carries 
out the beliests of the preceptor. (He does not say anything 
against the preceptor.) He should be devoted to the study of the 
Vedas which he acquires, thanks to the grace of his preceptor. 
In this connection there is a Verse> 

107. If any Brahmana propitiates the preceptor and 
acquires the Vedas, he attains the benefit of residence in the 
heaven (and heavenly pleasures). All his mental desires will 
be accomplished. 

They say that the second ^frama is Gdrhastfya (house- 
holdership]. 

106. VVe shall elucidate the characteristics of the con¬ 
ventional duties followed by the good of that period. The 
Airama of (he householder is laid down in regard to those who 
practise good conduct, who have performed Samdvartana rites 
(conclusion ofstudy and returned home) and who seek the bene¬ 
fits of joint-performance of holy rites. 

109. In this stage (the aim) is the acquisition of Dhnrma, 
wealth and love. In view of the acquisition of the Trivarga (i.e. 
the above-mentioned three aims) he should earn wealth through 
non-despicable means. A householder should lead his particular 
stage of life by means of wealth earned by any of these means. 
He may earn wealth as a result of his pre-eminence achieved 
through recitation of the Vedas. Or he may earn wealth by 
means of any method open to a Brahminical sage. He may 
take wealth from the sea. He may take wealth acquired by 
good luck or by practice of observances. 

110. They cite this stage as the root (support) of all 
stages (of life). The residents of the abode of the preceptor (Le. 
Brahmapas of religious students), Parivrajakas (i.e. Recluses 
and others such as those who observe the performance of holy 
rites and vows are also benefited through the ho use-holders 
through the alms given or oblations shared*^^ 

lit. The householders render service to ti\t Vdnaprasikas 
(the forest-dwelling hermits) also generally by supplying them 



II.43.112-118 


527 


the articles ((hey require). Hence, these good men generally 
travel over the earth with the intention of visiting holy centres 
and sacred rivers. They continuctheir Sodihydya {self sitxdy) 
While travelling, they take with them the wholesome cooked 
food they may require on the way. 

112. The householders greet and welcome them. With¬ 
out envy or jealousy they speak to them welcoming words. 
They offer them good scats and beds. They are hospitable to 
them and give them food to eat and render other good 
services. 

113. In this context there is a verse. If any guest be¬ 
comes disappointed and returns from anyone's house, he gives 
the house-owner all the sins and takes away his merits. 

114. Through the performance of sacrifices and other 
rites (by a householder) the deities are pleased; the Pitrs are 
pleased by the oblations and libations offered; the sages are pleas¬ 
ed, thanks to the repeated recitations, listening and memorising 
of the Vidyd (Vedic passages, etc.) and god Prajapati U pleased, 
thanks to the procreation of children. 

115-116. In this context there are two verses. (Defective) 
(The Householders) entertain affection to all living beings 
like the ears and the speech unto the Vayu” (.^). The following 
are despicable (in a householder): Harassing (others), obstruct¬ 
ing (others), using harsh words, disrespecting people, arrogance 
and e,gotism. The following is a penance common to all 
Alramas, viz. nonviolence, truthfulness and absence of anger. 

117 Again in the householder's life, one has the good 
fortune of having garlands, ornaments, good robes, oil bath, 
enjoyment, etc. every day; they can witness dances, they can 
hear and enjoy songs and instrumental music; they can have 
many things pleasing to the ears and cooling to the eyes; they 
can see beautiful women, they can enjoy the five varieties of 
focxl-stufTs, VIZ. Bhakfja (that which is chewed and taken in), 
Bhojya (that which is swallowed), (lambatives), Peya 

(beverages) and Co^ya (articles of food squeezed and taken). 

118. The householders can have the satisfaction of play¬ 
ing about as they please; they can attain erotic pleasures. He 
who can perpetually accomplish Trivargas (three aims in 



526 


J^drada Purd^a 


life) in the Airama of a householder experiences all pleasures 
here and attains the goal of the eiegent and virtuous men." 

1I9» If a householder maintains himself by gleaning, if 
he is engaged in performing hb duties and if he has eschewed 
all enterprises leading to erotic pleasures^it is not difficult for 
him to attain heaven. 

120. The V&napTfisthas too (Forest-dwelling hermits) 
pursue their virtuous activities. They visit holy centres^ sacred 
rivers and cascades of water. In the forest full of deer, boars, 
buffaloes, tigers and wild elephants, they perform their austeri¬ 
ties. They move about in those forests. 

121-122. They have eschewed all dress and raiments, 
foodstuffs and mode of behaviour (suited to their former village 
life); their diet is confined to the medicinal herbs, fruits, roots 
and leaves; their food-intake is limited and restricted and con¬ 
sists of various products of the forest. They seat themselves on 
bare ground. They lie down on the earth, stone, sand, gravels 
or ashes; they cover their nakedness by means of Kuia grass, 
hides or bark garments; they grow their hair, beard and mous* 
taches as well as their nails; they take their ablutions (regu¬ 
larly) at the specified time; At the time prescribed for the 
performance of Homa they offer dry oblations; they take rest 
after sweeping the earlier offerings of sacrificial twigs, Kusa 
grass, flowers, etc; their skins are cracked everywhere due to the 
exposure to chill or hot winds; their blood and flesh are dried 
up due to the performance of diverse vowed observances, Yogic 
activities" and they appear to have only skin and bones, yet 
they keep up their fortitude. By means of their inherent strength 
they uphold their bodies. 

122. He who regularly maintains these rites ordained by 
the Brahmintcal sages shall, like fire, burn all his defects and 
conquer all invincible worlds. 

123. I shall reiterate the conventional prescribed duties 
of the Parivrdjakas (recluses). They eschew the sacrificial Arcs. 
They leave oflT wealth, properly, wives and all attachment to 
worldly affairs. They take off their affectionate ties and renounce 
(everything) and become recluses. They view a lump of clay or 
a piece of gold or a stone equally; their atteution is nut diverted 
to those who are engaged in realising the three fold aims cl' life. 



11 . 43 . 124-127 


529 


!24. They observe enemies, friends and neutrals equally 
and impartially; they refrain from injuring either physi* 
cally or mentally or verbally any type of living being vrhether 
an immobile, or a mammal, or a bird or a sweat-born 
insect; they do not have any fixed abode; they move about on 
the mountains, river banks, shades of trees and temples; they 
may go to cities or villages for temporary stay;** they never 
indulge in violence, anger, pride, greed, delusion, miserliness, 
arn^ancc, slandering or false prestige. 

In this context there arc three verses : 

125-127. The contemplative sage (muni) who moves 
about as a muni (silent recluse) after granting freedom from fear 
to all living beings need not be afraid of any living being at 
any place* The recluse performs the Agnihotra in his own 
body; it is through his mouth that he consigns the Havi^- 
offerings obtained through begging for alms to propitiate the 
bodily fire. The Brahmana attains the other worlds through 
the fire of the funeral pyre. He who performs the duties of the 
Mok^idSrama {S^nnjtdsa) as mentioned, should remain pure and 
keep his intellect properly conceived. As a fire that has no 
supply of fuel becomes calm, that Brahmana goes to the 
Brahmaloka. 



CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 


1. Chapter 43 in the NP ia composed of the text of chi. 1B6, 187, 188, 
189, 190, J91 axul 192 of Mbh. Santi Parva. As all the veries in these 
<*hapters are incorporated «n bio< in the NP, when the text of the NP becomes 
unintelligible the Mbh. text is referred to and the reading in the Mbh. is 
suggested as the probable eniendatioo. When NK differs his intfrpretation 
ia also recorded. 

2. Vasu in the NP seems to be a misprint for V^u in the original (Mbh. 

1&6.4). The verse then mearts: If life is composed of mere air and if it 

ends by the departure of the wind from the body, it will then mix up with 
another part of ( the outer) atmosphere and would be visible like a whirl* 
wind (vdtyhcakraoat —NK). 

3. The verse is obscure even if w. 5 & 6 are taken together. NK how¬ 
ever, treats them separately. 

According to NK, v. 5 anticipates and replies the Digambara Jaina objec¬ 
tion that the Jl90 is always associated with eight types of Karmans and Is 
never seen separate or independently distinct from (hem. NK is obviously 
not correct in limiting the doctrine to the 

Digaxnbaras only as the Svetkmbaras (in fact all Jainas) hold it. NK reads 
SarhfUfo yadi idts/ie instead of NP's yadi pA tma (which is a bit obscure) 
The translation : '‘If the J^/^e^the individual soul—be in contact with the 
uucmbiage (of karmam) dominated by the wind-element and if the Jfra be 
different from that assemblage, when the assemblage (ofil:«nnani} is destroyed 
like a vessel of water from which the dead«wcight of stona is jettisoned 
it becomes free and floats in the sea.** 

Jainas cMUpare the soul covered with K&rmic matter to a gourd plastered 
with clay, due to the weight of which it sinks down in water. But when the 
clay is washed off, the gourd naturally and automatically comes up and 
floats. So does the Jfpa, free from Karmans, goes straight up to Mokso. The 
J^fe^gourd analogy of Jainas is better than the above Mbh. analogy. 

4. Bh&radvija, as ^ Puroo’-pakfin, raises another objection. If as you say, 
ytva (individual soul) be a portion of the BraAmon, the Jiva gets extinguished 
in the Brahmen, just as water poured into a well or a lamp (after beii^ 
extinguished) becomes one with fire (SnAghAta-n4U brahmMargal<isya jivasya 
suarSpa^ndJah NK). 

5. Mbh. (ibid) \B6,B rtndt nn/yait kaflha-K/udAt kJwh for ko^fhabhaddrtham 
of the NP. The Mbh. implies disapppcarance of the element of space (kham) 
if excretions stop. 

6. For JMnya^ praoarUinU, Mbh. (ihid) v. 14 reads bljdnyasya pravarinnit 
'*ll is seeds which put forth sprouts.** 

7. For the NP. MUi; (tlid) v. 15 reads PrevertaU "seeds 



Notts 


531 


come forth from leeds". NK. cvplaini: Semen vifile is the seed of the 
body And not *'the unseen*' or Kama. 

Here endsch. 186 from the Mbh. 

8. For no prSa^k sen/t jt9a\ya of the NF v. 18, Mbh. ch. 187.1 
reads ae pra^So stijtoasyax It means: there is no destruction of the Individual 
soul and of whatever he has given (as gift) or of other acts. 

9. For na na^yatt sutOktmataOt^ Mbh. (risd) v. 6 reads na grhyaU (the 
soul) cannot be seen (or inferred). 

10. NK explains that It Is the mind that Is the *seer' or *expcrieneer*< 
When the mind is associated with senie-orgam, one csn see etc., but when, 
as in sleep or the SamSdhi state, the mind is dissociated with the body, one 
does not see, etc. 

11. According to NK 4ib means : In those waters, It is the soul which 
manifests Itself in the mind. That soul is god Drahml^, the creator of the 
world, who abides in all things. 

IZ The grots mii«pfint in theNP <u*tana for Saetteaa in the Mbh. {ihid) 
V. 26 makes the verse selfcontradictory. The verse so emended meant: 
they (the knowers of Reality) say that the soul It characterlted by 
eonidousnest and existi with the attribute of life, [yfoaenaa^ via. the body, 
sense-organ and the mind^NK) 

19, d'hdniariiah : Better : All that the Jiva does, is going from one body 
to another. 

14. Viz. the realization of one's identification with the 

15. Or: The JtM is the element of fiery effulgence that abides in the 
mind. It is from the Lord that all thb creation has come forth. This li the 
conclusion to be deduced after investigation into the origin of the soul and 
creatures. 

Here ends ch. 187 of the Mbk. Stnli. 

16. V.59a reads : 

BrShmatfdh Kfotriyd VaiSydh aiitas tathd 

The line is defective as the first three words are in the nom. case (which 
Is an enumeration of Var^ or castes in continuation of the previous verse). 
And those words In the nom. case cannot be connected with astUts 

ialhO. Nor can these words be related %vltb 39b which Is an independent 
speech of Bh5radv&ja. This Is due to Use mis-quotalior. in the NP of the Mbh. 
itnii 188.4-5 which are as follows : 

Brdhmaftih Kfoilriyd Vai^p Sodrdt ra difija^tatterna I 
y edny bhiUasaAghdnOih oaf^ts Ulii 4ipi nimame / / 

Br/dtmaftdftim sito Kfaltr^ftin tu tMtah / 

VaiSydndrk pUako raroah Svdrtttm asita% tathd // 

Tlie NP quoted the 1st three words from 4a of the Mbh. and the last three 
words from 5b of the Mbh and composed its v. 53a. Hence the defcctiveneis. 

The NP abounds in such misquoutioni to the despair of the translators 
who merely depend on the text of the NP as It is* 

17i NK explains that the word Fanta which means complexion or colour 
here represents cerum attributes {aanma Jdtyd sitrikatvddi bhidraU). 



532 


Nirada Purdi^a 


18. This verse combines 18a and 20b from the Mbli. {iM) cb. 188. NK 
interpreis 20b (i.e. 62b and c in the NP): The osbcr creation is like the 
luperimpojitlon of (he iUuiioQ of a s«peai on a string and hence is called 
mental (inAMsi)- NK. takes dhetfina in the sense ofJega. The mental creation 
rests upon Tegs. 

Here ends chapter 188 in the Mbh. SAtui. 

19. The duties of Erihmai> 2 < are the everyday performance of ablution, 
S^ndhyAi (twilight-prayer), jepa, Uoma (tire worship), worship ot deities, per* 
formance of Vaisvadeva and hospitality—NK. 

20. One who earns reputation by tatile^rearing, agriculture, commerce 
—NK. 

21. nityvh kr^dhAt Uon^ the Mbh. is lietter, '*one should always protect 
from anger,*' etc. 

22. NKt takes asoCem sthAnatn as tite soul and interprets **One should 
be absorbed in the meditation of the AimM*' 

23. VisTcmbha-^ that which can be relied on such as Uic words of the 
spiritual preceptor. 

24. Here ends ch. l89oftiie Mbh. vaati. 

25. The original {Mbit. ^Anu. cb. 190) v.l is 4 general iiaiement: 
Truth is the Brahman. Truth it the Penance. The whole universe is upheld 
and sustained by Truth. It is through Truth (fulness) that one goes to 
heaven. 

26. V. 85 in tlie NP ti Mbh. (ibid) v. 4b and 6a and v. 66 it Mbb. v. 6b 
and 7a. 

27. V. 93 in the NP is obscure : I'he Mbh. original is tnsmdd briimo na lu 
mahAlmabhir nyam prdti^thfh nn toefAm tdvad pUiffo gu^A-triUso Ui f BhAradvaja 
objects: Hence we afHrm that happiness » not acceptable to highsouled 
people. Nor does it appear to be a high attribute of the soul. 

28. The text of the NP: bhu»4tA ^uKhAndm patamAb itfiya(i is 

strange as Bhigu in his speech made no reference to women as the ultimate 
happiness. The Mbh. original is : bhafiavotA iuktafk sukhannaparam astiti I *{l 
cannot believe in) what your worship stated, vis. (here is nothing higher 
than happiness.’ 

29. Here (at the end of v.96). ch. 190 in the Mbh. fdAti ends. The NP, 
ho%vever, combines Mbh. .Ctnii 191. lb and 2a in one verse* vi^, 99 and this 
odd combination of Mbh. 2b and 3a into verse 100 etc. is carried on in 
the NP. I have, however, followed the text of the NP in translation. 

30. The reading brohmgrfi vUiUAm pard, though a faithful copy of the 
Mbh. (i^id) V. 7 is contradicted by Bh(gu*s reply : puipam toa bhofiavatA 
BrahmojfA and Nol biahm^figA. Tlie ori^nat reading in (be Mbh. v. 7 should 
have been Brahma^ pihiUm in view of consistency. That god Brahmi is the 
original Law-giver or ordaiiier of order b known to all. 

31. bhikf^b^ii^itfhtfibhAtAh : NK explains : bhikfd (almi^giving) is lo 
4iithist bali b the food offered on the ground, and S4divibhAga u the division 
of one’s property among one’s sons. 



NoUs 


533 


32. The obscurity in the meAning of these verses is due to the 
misprints in the text of the NP. The transietion is an attempt to interpret 
rationally the printed text of the NP. Tlie original of the NP verse in Mbh. 
( ibid) V. 14 b as follows : 

vdUahdt sarvabhuitbf^ Irotra-sitkhd zifoh j 

p4rUdpopaghHaSc4 pgnfyark dtrd garhuam // 

person following Crkaslha‘dharma should speak to all creatures words full 
of afTeecion and agreeable to the ears. It u censurable to give pain or inflict 
humiliation or mortification and harsh words.*' 

33. Here ends eh. 191 of the Mbh. 

34. NK explains aiyume—vowed observance such as sit ling with fire on 

four sides under tfie tun (paAcignisidhana), activities such as 

pilgrimage to ucred places. 

35. The NP has omitted the restriction on the duration of a stay in a 

town or a village. The Mbh. limits it to Ave nights in a 

big locality and one night in a village. 



CHAPTER FORTYPOUR 


A Discpursg an Majifation 


BhdraJa^'a said:^ 

L A world other than this is reported only, but is not 
perceived. I wish to know about it. It behoves your worship to 
recount it.* 

Bhffujaid : 

2. On the northern side of the Himavan which is holy 
and endowed with all good qualities, there is a region which is 
holy, lovable and conducive to welfare. It is called the other 
world.* 

3. There men do not commit sinful activities; they are 
pure and absolutely devoid of impurities. They have eschewed 
greed and delusion. They are perfectly harmless. 

4* It IS a land on a par with the heaven; all suspicious 
qualities are said to be present therein. Death occurs at the 
proper time; ailments do not touch (any one). 

5. No one is covetous of other men's wives. The people 
are devoted to their own wives. No other man is ever killed 
there. No one is arrogant of his possessions. 

6. There is no Adharma (sin), at all. Their knowledge 
being difinite, no doubt arises (in any one). The benefit of 
whatever is done is directly obtained there. 

7. Some of the men here are endowed with vehicles, seats 
and (plenty) to eat. They live in palatial houses. They are 
surrounded by all desirable things. They are bedecked in gold 
ornaments. 

8. In regard to some (it must be confessed that) they 

anyhow manage to remain alive. With great deal of hard 
labour, they retain their (vital breath).* 

9. Here (in this world) some men are devoted to Dharma, 
and some men are absorbed in roguery. Some men are happy 
while some are miserable; some are ind^ent and others are 
affluent* 



11.44.10-21 


535 


10. (In this world) there is hard labour> fear» strain, 
delusion and severe hunger. Here covetousness is seen and a 
passion that deludes all ignorant people. 

I U12. The intelligent man who knows this» is not con¬ 
taminated by sin.* The penance of those dwindles—those who 
resort to deceipt, fraud» stealthy censuring, envioiisness, obstruct- 
ir^ othen, violence, back*biling and falsehood. 

13. If a teamed man were to pursue these, his penance 
never increases. Here the anxiety over pious and impious rites 
is of many kinds. 

14. This is the KamabhSmi (land of Kamens or holy 
rites). After performing suspicious and inauspicious acts here 
one attains corresponding results* viz. auspiciotis results due to 
auspicious activities and inauspicious results, otherwise. 

15. Formerly, Prajapati, Devas and the groups of sages 
had performed /Vy^ojand penances (here). Becoming purified 
(by the sacrificial acts and penances) they had attained Brahma* 
loka, 

16-17. The northern section of the earth is the most 
auspicious and (he holiest. The men who perform meritorius 
rites and feci regard for Yoga* are born here. Others are born 
in the species of animals and brutes, and when their span of 
life is exhausted, they get lost on the earth. 

18. Those who are eagerly intent on devouring each other, 
those who are endowed with greed and delusion, move about 
(or are born) only here. They do not go to the northern 
quarter. 

19. The learned men who worship their preceptors, 
those who strictly adhere to the vow of cel^cy, do understand 
the path duly of all the worlds. 

20. Thus the Dharma formulated by Brahma (or pro¬ 
claimed in the Veda) has been succinctly recounted by me. He 
who understands Dharma (righteousness) and Adharma of the 
world, is intelligent. 

Bhdradvdja submiUiJ 

21. What is called Adi^Atm (knowledge, etc, regarding 
the soul) ? Of what nature is it and which is laid down by 



536 


Ndrada Pur^a 


^^dstras for every person. Elucidate to me, O sage (one whose 
richness is penance) xhAX Adf^dtma precisely (lit. as it actually 
is). 

Bhfgu explained : 

22. O Brahmana sage, I shall explain what you ask 
about, namely the Adhydtma, It is conducive to happiness and 
welfare, O dear one. 

23. Everything including the (knowledge about) creation 
and dissolution has been pointed out by preceptors. On know¬ 
ing this, the man attains pleasure and happiness, even in this 
world. 

24-26a. He will gain the benefit. It is conducive to the 
welfare of all living beings. The Mahd BhQtai (elements) 
are the earth, wind, ether, water and the fifth one, fire. 
They are the source of the origin of and the ultimate 
place of dissolution of all living beings. They dissolve themselves 
unto him wherefrom they had been created. Just as the waves 
originate from and merge into the ocean, so also the living 
beings originate from the elements and merge into them.^ 

26b-28a. Just as the tortoise spreads out and withdraws 
its limbs so also the BhUidtman (the Soul of all living beings or 
the creator) creates and withdraws the living beings or elements 
unto himself. The creator has made only five great elements 
for the constitution of) all living beings. But the individual 
soul does not see it, in proper perspective. 

28b-30. The sound, ears and cavities in the body^ 
these three have originated from etlier. It is remembered 
that the three, viz. touch, Ceffd (movement of the limbs) 
and the skin—arc born of Kdyu (the wind element). 
Colour, eyes, and cooking (i.c. digestive process) — these 
constitute the tliree attributes of the fiery element. The 
tastes, moisture and the tongue —these three are remembered 
as the attributes of water element. That which is to be 
smelt (scents, etc.), the nose and the physical body—these 
three are the attributes of earth* 

31-34* The Makd BhQioi are only five* The mind is said 



11 . 44 . 35-41 


537 


to be the 3ixth. O resident of the Land of Bharata*, the sense- 
organs and the Manas (mind) have (thus) been known. The 
seventh, they say, is Buddki (intellect). The K^strajha (the indivi¬ 
dual Soul) is the eight. The ear is (created) for the purpose 
of hearing; the skin is for (the purpose of) touching; the tongue 
is for perceiving the taste and the nose is for perceiving smell. 
The mind creates doubu, the intellect decides; ihtKftttajila is 
stationed like a witness. All that is above the soles of two 
feet, all that is behind and above are seen by him (the soul). 

35. Know that the entire imervening space has been 
pervaded wholly by the omnipresent lord * All the sense organs 
(mind and intelligence) have to be known (thus) by men in 
their entirety. 

36a. The three BhdoaK (states) or Gunas, via., Tamas, Rnjn^ 
and Sattva are dependent thereon (on the mind, etc.). 

36b-37a. After understanding the intellect as well as the 
advent and departure of the living beings one slowly attains 
excellent tranquillity. 

3 7b-38a. The Bnidhi is quelled through the dunes and 
the Indriyas (sense-organs) through the intellect. The elements 
have the mind as constituting their sixth (member). If the 
Buddhi is absent how can there be Gunas^^^ 

38b-39a< In this way the entire creation* (he mobile and 
immobile, is permeated by it. It (the creation) is born out 
of it and gets dissolved in it. Hence, it Ls so specified (in 
‘^dstras), 

39b-40. That through which one sees is the eye; that 
which hears Ls called (the car); they call what smells 

the Ghrdna (nose); one perceives taste through the torgue; one 
touches with the skin and l^ls the touch. That which is called 
the Buddhi undergoes modification at once. 

41. When something is sought (by the Buddhi), it be¬ 
comes the mind—The bciscs on which Buddhi rests are five, each 


* The NP adopted the Mbh. v. 12 along with the epithet of 

Yudhiithira, vis. BhSrata. Bharadvtja was not a deicendant Ckf Bharata. 
Hence, this interpretation here, irucead of the usual *'0 Scion of Bharata* 
intended m v. 12 of the Ml^. 



538 Ndrada Purina 

functioning difTerently. (They arc called Indriyas^ the invisible 
principle Buddhi rests on them). 

42. The Buddhi stationed in a person (as its basis) 
spreads over (is concerned witli) the three Bhdvas viz. SaUva^ 
Rajas znd Tamas. 

43. Sometimes it attains pleasure; sometimes it expe* 
riences sorrow and sometimes it feels neither happiness nor 
misery. 

44. Thus the Buddhi occupies the three states (viz. the 

attributes) in the minds of men. Though identical with the 
lih&vas^ it sometimes transcends the three through Yoga. 

45. (Defective) Just as the ocean that is the lord of 
I he rivers transgresses its boundary with its waves. 

45b*4()a. That which transcends the three 

or stages exists in the mind in a pure subtle state of existence 
(like the smell of garlic to the pot after washing ^NK), The 
attribute rajas that propels them to action, soon pursues it. At 
time it makes all the senses function.^^ 

47. Sattva is p\easuie;Rajas is sorrow and Tamas is anger. 
Whatever state of mind there is in the world gets merged in one 
of these three. 

46. Thus all the emotional conceptions and feelings of 
Buddhi (intellect) have been explained to you. All the sense 
organs must be conquered by intelligent men. 

49. Three types of sensations (Intelligence ?) are seen in 
all living beings, viz. that originating through Sativay that 
which depends on rajas and on tamas for the origin. 

50-5la. The attribute of Sattoa produces happiness, of 
Rajas brings misery. When these two get up mixed with TamaSi 
then neither pleasure nor sorrow is produced (but it creates 
delusion. 

51b-52a. If anything appeals to you and is pleasing 
physically and mentally, it shall be said that the Satlvika emo¬ 
tion is present. 

52b-53a. If anything provokes misery and is displeasing 
to the soul, O excellent sage, know tltac Rajas has begun to 
function. 

53b-54a. If anything is deluding and confounding and 



II.44,54-64 


539 


the object is not clear, is incomprehensible and is difficult to be 
conceived, undentand it to be Tomas. 

54b*55a. Ecstatic delight, pleasure, bliss, happiness and 
tranquillity of the mind—If these arc present to a certain extent 
(though rarely) they are called Sdtttfika attributes. 

55b-56a. Dissatisfaction, distress, sorrow, greediness and 
impatience—these are the symptoms of the Rajas Gu^a. These 
arc seen clfectcd by the body.** 

5€b*57a. Dishonour, delusion, blunder, sleeping and 
lassitude—these various Tamo’Gwjas are present in men to a 
certain extent. 

57b^58a. The mind is defective;** it wanders along many 
ways, is of the nature of seeking and entertaining doubts, if 
such mind is under one’s control, one is happy here and here* 
after. 

d8b«59a. Though both Sattoa (Gu^a) and the K^elrajHa 
(the individual soul) are subtle**, the difference between them 
is that one (Intelligence) creates gunor, while the other (the 
soul) does not. 

59b*60. Just as Maiaka (gnats) md Udumbara {ti fig) 
may be seen united with each other. Though united, they are 
distinct from each other, so also the Gunas and the K^etrajda are 
by nature separate entities but they are seen united with one 
another. 

6N62a. Just as the (ish and water are separate entities, 
but are found to be in the state of union, the same is the state 
with reference to the Intelligence and the Soul. The attributes 
do not comprehend the Atman, but he knows the attributes 
(Gunas) thoroughly. The Atman who is the witness of the Gunas, 
regards them all as proceeding from himself. 

62b*63a. Functioning through (five) senses**, (the mind 
the sixth) and Intelligence as the seventh—all of which are 
(by themselves) inactive and without any consciousness, the 
Atman discovers the objects (around it) like a (covered) lamp 
showing ail objects by radiating rays through the apertures 
(in its cover). 

63b-64. The Sattva (Intelligence) creates the Gunas 
while the soul {Ksitrajna) is a (mere) witness. That is the 



540 


Ndrada Purina 


certain relation between Saitoa and Kfelrajfla (from times 
immemorial)* Neither Satipa nor KsetrojH^ have any support or 
refuge. 

65*66a. The Intelligence (Satlva) creates the mind but 
never the Guf^as, When he (Atman) properly controls their 
reins by means of the mind, then his soul becomes revealed 
(within himself) ,like a lamp burning within a pitcher. 

66b-67a. The sage who eschews Prikrta (ordinary) rites 
or acts and who is always delighted within his own Atman 
becomes the soul of all living beings. He attains the excellent 
goal. 

67b*68a. Just as an acquaiic bird does not get wet (or is 
not besmeared or aflTectcd) with water, similarly, a person who 
is firm in (spiritual) wisdom, (and is free from any hallucina- 
lion) moves about in living beings (without being attached to 
and affected by them.) 

68b*69a. With the help of one's judgement and knowledge, 
one should behave in this world in this way, without bewailing 
or without being elated, but bo equanimous and devoid of 
(even a trace) of jealousy. 

69b-70a. A person who lives in hU real state of being 
the Atman, always creates the Gunas even as a spider creating 
iu threads. The Gurtas should be understood as the threads 
(emitted by the spider). 

70b-72a. Some opine that (he attributes (Gunas) with 
regard to such men are not lost while some others say that they 
are lost. The first depend upon the Srults (Prat)^aAsa the direct 
proof) which are not contradicting while the others—who 
advocate the loss, depend on Smrtis. Pondering over both these 
one should decide for one's self which is correct. 

72b* 73a. In this way the hard insoluble knot in the heart 
which causes anxiety should be removed and one should dwell 
in happiness. With all uncS doubts resolved one need not feel 
sorrow. 

73b*74a. Just as men smeared with dust (or mud) obtains 
success (become pure) after plunging into full stream of water, 
similarly, men of dirty and unclean*heart$ attain success by 
getting perfect knowledge. 



II.44.74b-82 


541 


74b-75. A person who sees only the other bank of a 
great river is tormented till he reaches the other side (mere 
sight of the other bank is not enough). But in the case of the 
knower of Reality, the mere knowledge of the Truth makes 
him happy. Penons who in their hearts realise that the soul is 
untouched by worldly objects (and b one) get that excellent 
knowledge. 

76. Thus a man who realizes the advent and the depar¬ 
ture of the living beings, ponders upon it slowly by means of his 
intellect and attains peace and tranquillity. 

77. He who has understood the destructibility of the 
threefold goals {Dharma, Arfhc and K{ima) of life and investigat¬ 
ing them (and following Yoga) mentally, discards them, becomes 
the real seer of Reality! (And having obtained bliss through 
sclf-rea1izauon)» he becomes disinterested. 

78. By persons who are not <eif-possessed, the soul is 
impossible to be realized through senses which are partially 
employed on diverse objects and which arc very difHcult to 
obtain'^ (to control—Mbh.). 

79. After knowing this, one shall become enlightened. 
What else is the characteristic of an enlightened one ? Indeed 
after realising it, learned men consider thcjnselves contented. 

80. To the knower (of quality) what appears extremely 
frightful, to the unenlightened (e.g. the fear of a serpent which 
is really a rope) inspires no fear at all. There is no better state 
than Mok^a (emancipation from Sarfisdra) to anyone. If there 
be superiority in qualities (in such persons), some dilTerence 
in the gradation in reality may be seen, say the learned. 

81. If a man performs holy rites without any speciHc aim 
or desire (in return) that act burns down what acts have been 
performed (by him) earlier. (Past acts being burnt down and 
present acts being desircicss do not bring about undesirable 
results. But if such a knower continues to act how can these acts 
bring about Mok^di) 

82. People of their own accord produce the world (they 
live in) and the duration of (their) life (in it). The above arc 
(automatically) created while he is doing an act* Please see 
that even if he is ever subjected to a frightful state, he does not 
bewail the good actions.^* 



542 


XHrada PutSm 


BfUtradoUja said\ 

83. Please explain the path of meditatbn unto me for 
the achievement of that region on knowing which, O Brah- 
mana, a man is relieved from three types of distresses. 

Bhrgu said: 

84. O BrShmana sage! I shall recount to you the four 
types of Jndnayoga (the path of knowledge), on realising 
which, great sages attain eternal Siddhi. 

85. The great sages who are experts in Yoga and are 
gratified with their perfect knowledge and have fixed their hearts 
on Liberation from Sardsira^ perform their Yogic meditation on 
proper lines. 

86. Being freed from the blemishes of the worldly exis* 
tence, they are liberated. With their liability to get a further 
birth being eliminated, they stabilise themselves in the pristine 
Souhscate. 

87. (Defective) They are free from mutually clashing 
pairs such as pleasure, pain, always established in the Sattva 
Guna; cheyare liberated and (hey do not possess anything, They 
cultivate detachment that does not obstruct^* and that is condu* 
cive to mental tranquility. 

88. There, the sage should keep his extremely tormented 
and agitated mind concentrated by means of meditation. With¬ 
drawing within him (as if in a lump) all his sense-organs, the 
sage should be seated (motion-less) like a log of wood. 

89. He should not perceive any sound through his ears, 
nor feel any touch by means of bis skin; he should not perceive 
any colour or feature through the eyes; nor should he have the 
taste of anything through his tongue. 

90. Being immersed in meditation, the knower of reality 
should eschew all tilings to be smelt. Tlic energetic Yogin does 
not covet these (five types of) objects which excite the senses. 

91. Then the clever (devotee) shall withdraw into his 
mind the PaMcavarga (the group of five senses). He shall then 
enter into meditation (stabilising) erring mind aiongwith the 
five sense organs. 



11.44.92-103 


543 


92. The mind is a wanderer (in objects of senses, etc.) It 
consists of five gates (the cognitive senses). It is both powerful 
and weak*^> the wise Yogin should quickly*^ fbc his mind into 
the path of meditation first, making it independent of any 
refuge. 

93. At this time he should ^collect’ the sense organs 
and the mind into one lump (and direct them to the path of 
meditation). Thus the first path of meditation has been explained 
by me. 

94. The mind which is the sixth cftga of the when 
thus controlled, will throb like the streak of lightening in the 
clouds extending as far as the ocean.’^ 

93. Just as a drop of water on the leaf (of a lotus) is 
very restless and moves alt round, so also his mind moves about 
in the path of meditation. 

96. For a moment the mind is a little attentive and 
becomes steady in path of meditation. Then it wanders into 
the path of the wind. The restless mind becomes flighty like 
the wind. 

97. A person who knows the path of meditation should 
not be discouraged, should not mind the troubles undergone, 
should give up lethargy and malice and should again establish 
his mind in meditation. 

98. Pondering, reflection, and disc rim ination** are 
produced in order (in the meditating Yogi). This is the first 
meditation of the sage endowed with trance. 

99. If he is mentally distressed, he should console himself. 
The sage should not feel despondent. He should seek what is 
beneficial to himself. 

100. A heap of dust, ashes or cowdung cannot be formed 
into a saturated paste by sprinkling with water all of a sudden. 

101. It should be gradually made into paste, some part 
remaining dry in the beginning but later on made smooth. 
Thus everything will become drenched completely in the end. 

102. In the same manner one must make the group of 
sense Of^ans calm and tranquil. They must be withdrawn 
gradually. Then they will be subdued perfectly. 

103. O leading sage ! By stabilising one’s mind and 


544 


J^drada Purdt^a 


live senses in the path of meditation first, a Yc^! is able to 
subdue them completely by steadfast (practice in) Yoga. 

104. Neither through manly effort nor through divine 
providence shall he attain that happiness which he attains by 
restraining the self (in Yoga). 

105. Endowed with that bliss, he will find pleasure in 
the process of meditation. Thus the Vogins attain the blissful 
salvation (lit. with no ailments). 

Sanandana said: 

106. O Brahmana, thus instructed by Bhrgu, the valorous 
Bharadvaja» the extremely virtuous soul, was surprised. He 
wonhipped Bhigu. 

107. O learned one, thus the creation of the universe 
has been narrated unto you entirely. O excessively intelligent 
one, what else do you wish to hear? 



CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 


K This IS verse 7 m the Mbh, S4miL ch. 192. 

2. After a long discusuon» NK. tries to show that this verse is an 
enquiry to show the path to Ood-realizattoo {iruH-yvkUbf^rk jmto*pi paramdtma 
na sdkfl krijaU iti tdt^sikfdtkkropdy^ bruhUi pfdrihitch 

3. NK treats tlie whole cliapter as a eonlinuous metaphor of a spiritual 
nature. Vy&u (and here Narada) describes an ideal place on this earth as 
the *next'or 'excellent* world (pnrahkab)- But NK diBers. Heinterpreu: 
After the realization of the soul (aliere) near the Himllayas i.e. Meru (which 
stands for the nose) there is the excellent world just in the middle of the 
eyebrows, etc. NK cites a quotation from mdntra-JAUrd to * prove* the 
identification of the nose and mount Meru, called also the Himalayas. 

fuma^rfipc bhnw madhjn mtrus tiffhati parvaldk / 
tdsyihhiic \nakl pdtipi 11 

The Mbh. however, describes an ideal region on the earth. Hence, we 
have followed the plain meaning of these verses and nnt the esoteric 
significance of each point, as is done artificially by NK. 

4. It is better to Interpret as follows: In that region, some (ascetics) 
eat abstemiously Just enough to keep themselves alive, while others with a 
great efibri practise Frd^ydma. 

5. V. 11 a is actually v. 16b in cb. 192 of the Mhh» Sdrui. This appean 
unconnected with J lb and is obscure. But v. 16a and b in the Mbh. (t^i^) 
clarifies it. That verse in the Mbh. means : (16a) Here various opinions 
prevail and are advocated by persons who did meritorious or sinful acts 
(lObssUa of NP). The intelligent mao who knows all those opinions of 
both kinds (virtuous and sinful) is not contaminated by sin. 

6. Sntkiram techand—yoge ddaram fcehanti prSpnwanti —NK. 

Here ends ch. 192 in the Mbh. SMi. 

7. The NP omitted ch. 193 and here cb. 194 from the .fdnti Pervan 
(Mbh). is incorporated. 

8. As usual, the printed Sk. text of the NP has separated in the original 
ihkas of the Mbh. in the unnatural way. Here v. 4 in the Mbh. {ihU) 194, 
consists of 3 lines. But the NP combined 4a and 4b into v. 23 and 4c and 
5a of the Mbh. is given as v. 24. In this way the lines of the original JUkds 
in the Mbh. are found disarranged in the NP, in this chapter. 

9. NK. explains : Tbb whole body right from the soles of the feet, 
what is above and beneath the body and what is within and outside the 
body— all this is completely pervaded by him. Such is his omnipresence. 

10. These are obscure venu'S in spite o( (or because of ?) NK long 
comm. It appean that he supports V((ftlnavida. He means to say that 
DothiDg exists except as it exits in *ldcw*. AAer using the arguments of the 
Advaita school, he sums up : **Id the absence of SiuUfn (Intelligence), 



546 


Ndfada Puflina 


boeh the cause and products of Buddhi arc destroyed. Hence the term 
implies attribuics like eic.» mind, tense^orfans alon; with their 

objects, 

11. V.45 appears defective as 45a is to be connected with 44b of 
which it is the illustration. The original Mbh. verse 24 is thus distributed 
over the two NP verses. The simile H unusual as the ocean according to 
poets, never crosses iu boundary (though facts diifer). 

12. V. 45b and 46a form one verse (via Mbh. ihid.25)» Hence these lines 
arc translated as forming one 

13. For diha^hitMilt of the NP> Mbh. (iM) v. 95 reads 
(These are seen) with or without adequate causes for producing them. 

14. For the obscure of the NP, Mbh. (iM) v. 37 reads dQragam. 

NK interprets: (the mind) which is attached to things which are very 
difficult to obtain {dUragem) and which is capable of extending to a number 
of objects simultaneously (hAhudhd^fdmi), 

15* Tasya in the NP renders this sen tenet predicateless. For 
Mbh. (itud) V. 38 reads paJya. Thus the translation : ‘Notice the difference 
between Sattva {(ntelligence '^kuddhi^sattpom NK). 

16. Two printing mistakes in the NP, sit. indriycstu for indriyau tu and 
pradfpavin for pradipaoai render this verse obscure. I have accepted the 
correct readings from the Mbh. (tKd) v. 42 and translated accordingly. 

17. For durpgpefu of the NP, Mbh. {thid) v. 58 reads durvdryaih ‘difficult 
to control* I have followed NP. 

IB. The verse has become obscure in the NP due to faulty mixture of 
w. 62 and 63 and misprints. The Mbh. reads: 

Lakam iluram asSyaU jow ia^ taj janayatiha sarvatah 
Laka Atura^Jandn viriaaSathi tat tadaoa bahu patya Soaatah 
tatra pafya kttSal^ aSocato yt vidus tad ubkayam pad^m taidm 
As NK explains : People reproach {as^yaU) persons afflicted (with evil 
passipns) which drive them to births of diverse kinds. Notice clearly how 
such afflicted persons suffer from loss of possession and those real learned 
persons who remain unaffected with grief. Those who know the gradual 
and instantaneous types of liberation, are the really wise ones.' 

Here ends ch. 194 in the Mkh, Sgati. 

19. The reading asadgdnya-vidkiSni is obscure. The Mbh. reading [idnii 
195.4) is osaAyAi^^vit^dini is better. It means, they (live) in places 
detached from their relatives (wives, children, etc.) and where no disputant 
lives**. 

20. Mbh. {ibid) 9: aaldcaUm 'constant in pursuing unstable objects (of 
senses)’. 

21. Mbh. (t^id) reads maHa*iUara and means ; ‘The yogin, m the cavity 
of his heart fixes etc. 

22. Mbh. (t3id) 11 reads iaaud-3AfMe, 'eipHcious*. 

23. VUirat Vitarka and Viaaka are the different stages in the progress of 
Yoga. NK quotes from various works on Yoga In his long comm, to 
substantiate this. 



CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 


Exf^siiionof Dharmas leaiUng io Liberntion 

Sutd said: 

1. O Brahmanas! On hearing the words of Sanandana. 
based on the DharmtiK leading to Liberation. Narada who had 
understood the principles again asked him about matters 
spiritual. 

Wrada said: 

2. O highly blessed one! The treatise on salvation 
CKpatiaird upon by you, has been heard by me. Even after 
hearing it repeatedly, 1 am not fully satisfied. 

3. O omniscient sage, please recount to me the Mok^a^ 
dharma (virtuous path leading to salvation) based on sai (the 
Rcalii>), whereby the creature is liberated from the bondage of 
N esc i enc e ( avidyd ). 

Sanandana said:^ 

4. In this context, they cite the ancient mythological 
anecdote that narrates how Janaka, the Lord of Mithila, attained 
salvation. 

5. There was a king of Mithila called janadeva, in the 
Janaka dynasty. He was ever engrossed in reHecting upon the 
courses of conduct which would lead to the attainment of the 
Brahman which is super«^physicai and hence bodiless.* 

6. Many preceptors propagating heresy and usual dwel¬ 
lers in cemeteries used to live in his house.** They being 


* Ah the Comm, explains : 

Urdhoc^deham aSarlram Brahma, tat^propsi^kdrartam aurdhva-dihikdndm 

** The text of the NP. h corrupt *: It runs : 

tarye Stnaidnam diSryd wsah satatam Qfht I 
The original text in the Mbh. Sind.ch. 21S.4 from which the passage in 
the NP. is borrowed is as under : 

tasya sm4 Satam d^ityd Manit saiala/H gfht 
*A hundred preceptors always used to live in his palace* 



548 


}lAraia Purikna 


propagators of heretic doctrines advised him on different 
courses of religious duties 

7. Basing himself on the study of the Vedas, he was not 
properly satisfied with the speculations of his preceptors regard¬ 
ing the nature of thesouKandin their doctrine of extinction 
(of the soul) after the dissolution of the body or of its rebirth 
after death. 

8. On one occasion, a great sage called PaAca-iikha,^ 
a son (disciple) of thesage Kapila, arrived at Mithila during 
the course of his wandering all over the earth. 

9. He had a thorotigh mastery over (lit. completed) the 
interpretation ofSistras. He was an adept in arriving at a 
conclusion in the perfect knowledge of the principles of all 
Dharmas regarding renunciation. He was above Dr^andiias (mut* 
ually clashing opposites like pleasure and pain). All his doubts 
were resolved. 

10. They call him one of those sages who among men 
have finished their desires.* He sought eagerly and intensively 
after (he very rare highest eternal bliss. 

11. I think that the great sage whom the followers of the 
Sankhya school call the greatest sage {partmar$i) Kapila, the 
Prajapati (Lord of all creatures) himself, reveals (everything) 
through that form (of Paftca-iikha).* 

12. He was the foremost among the disciples of Asuri 
whom they call ‘long-lived’ {cirajtvin). It \vas he who perform¬ 
ed a holy sacrifice (of long duration—satra) for a thousand 
years in Paiica-srotas*^ (a land of five rivers?) 

13 He came to PaUca^srotas and proclaimed to the huge 
assembly of the followers of Kapila, the real nature of the un¬ 
manifest abiding iu the Puru^. 

14. Asuri^ who possessed (was proficient in sacrificial 


* The reading in ihe NP is kiinAd awitOiH which is derective. The 
chapter is bodily taken from A/M. ch. 218 where the original reading 

(in Sinii 218.8) is KcindnAottcm — **One who is not afiected by 
desires.*’ 

** SShkhyas use this term to imply ‘the mind' which ii said to have hvt* 
currents. Thus this line may mean *‘He performed on the oicntal plajie u 
sacrihee (i.e. meditation) that lasted f<^ one thousand yean." 



II.45.15-2! 


549 


mantras ( isfimantre^ *) and had visualized his person dska* 
dariana**) and realised through a great deal of penance the 
distinction between Ks^lra (the body) and KfetrajHa (the 
individual soul abiding in the body). 

15» In that assembly of ascetics, Asuri expounded that 
which is called the Eternal-Immutable, one*syllablcd Brahman 
(Om) which appears in diverse forms. 

16*-! 7. PaPicasikha was his disciple. He was nurtured 
by a woman with her breast milk. There was a certain 
Brahmapa house*wife called Kapili who adopted him as her 
son, and he used to suck her breasts. Hence, he came to be 
known asKapileya (theson of Kapili). Thereafter, he attained 
the perfect and 6xed buddhi (understanding in the Brahman). 

18. It was the venerable Lordt himself who narrated 
to me the circumstances which led to (PaAcasikha's) birth (adop¬ 
tion as a son of Kapila) and his designation Kapileya. HU 
omniscience, however, was excellent and unsurpassed. 

19. O sage! Janaka, the knower of Dfinrmai, accompani¬ 
ed by his ministers, knew him (PaAcasikha) to be spiritually 
wise. Having come there, PaAcaiikha deluded and confused the 
hundred preceptors of Janaka by means of his logical 
reasoning. 

20. Janaka became exceedingly attracted and attached 
to the school of thought of PaAcaiikha^. Abandoning his 
hundred teachers, he (Janaka) followed closely behind him 
(PaAcaiikha). 

21. To him (Janaka) who, according to prescription of 
religious duty, bowed down (to express his being PaAcasikhaU 


* The original in Mbh^ ibid. 13 » ifla-satretia stimsiddho "one who has 
accomplished the desired sacrificial session.** 

** This is an obvious misprint for dm^darJaneh in the original Mbh. 
text. !t means 'one who has visualized God or attained divine vision.* The 
NP. reading dtha^darintuib Is meaningless. 

t The Mbh. comm. Nllakaniha (NL) guesses it to be either Markantjeya 
or Sanatkumara. 

} Mbh, gives for NP. KapiUtdHHdariannm. According to 

Mbh. the verse means: By the intelligence and the school of thought of 
Kkpileya, Janaka became 



550 


Ndrada Purdru 


disciple), he expounded the highly auspicious (philosophy) 
which is called S&hkhya and which leads to the Supreme 
Liberation from Saihsara. 

22. After expatiating on the sorrows attending upon 
birth, he set forth the sorrows in the performance of religious 
acts. After recounting the miseries inherent in Karmarty he ex¬ 
plained the sorrows of all the states of life. 

23. He lectured upon Delusion for the sake of which 
there is contact with Dkarma (and the religious acts prescribed 
by it) and the fruition of those acts—Delusion which h 
unreliable, destructible, unsteady and evanescent. 

24. The PQrvcpakftn or tiu ohjtcior may argiut'. When the 
destruction of body is seen and is the direct evidence 
witnessed by all people in tlie world, he who, out of 
his faith in the Sankhya scriptures, argues that some* 
thing called the soul ts distinct from the body and survives 
the death of the body, is automatically defeated in his 
arguments. 

25. The disputants maintain that the sours death, or 
that which is called death is the extinction of the soul. Pain, 
old age and disease constitute the partial death of the soul. He 
who considers out of delusion that the soul being distinct 
from the body survives the death of the body holds an opinion 
which is unreasonable and untenable. 

26. If that which is non«extstent in the world is r^arded 
as existent, it may be argued that the king who is regarded so, 
should never be subject to old age or death. 

27. When the problem is about the very existence of an 
object (lit. whether an object is or is not in existence) and 
when that whose existence is predicated, presents dark charac¬ 
teristic (asaitlak^na*) [or *the indications of non-existence’ 
(asatilak$ane) as the Mbh reads] (under these circumstances) 
on what basis should people depend in deciding the affairs of 
life. 


* The Mbh. reads ^ <uUok 40 o$ verse 26) for atiu-takrw of the NP. 
lo the NP. palpably a teribal error, at asaii and ante in the Devan^gari 
icript are easily confuted. 



I1.45.2d*30 


551 


28. Direct proof is the root (basis) of inference and 
scriptures* {Kft^aitihyayorapi)* The scriptures are contradict* 
able by direct evidence pratyakfina*^). As to inference, its 
value as evidence is negligible. 

29. Everywhere, in every topic, do not depend, simply 

on inference. There exists no entity called Jiva other than outside 
this bodyt according to the view of the (sceptics). 

30. * The potentiality to produce leaves, fruits, roots, 
bark, etc. lies in the (small) seed of a banyan tree {va(a^ 
kanfkiydm). SubsUnces, the nature of which is different from 
that of the causes which produce them, are seen in the follow* 
ing:) Milk and butter are produced from the grass and water 
consumed by a cow. DiiTerent kinds of substances when decom* 
posed for some period in water sometimes produce alcoholic 
substances whoiie (inebriating) nature is quite different from that 
of those substances which produced the spirituous liquor {ghfta- 
pdkddhiudsanam ). In the same way from the semen (vital seed) is 
produced the body, its attributes alongwith intelligence, consci* 
ousness, mind and other possessions. Two pieces of wood pro* 
duce fire by attrition. The SQryakdnta stone produces fire 
when it comes in contact with the rays of the sun. 


• The NP. reads : 

prat^kfom hf<tay^r mu/oift kfUinta 

The \Cbh. (iiid verse 27) reads: 

Krtd/Uaiiihjayorapi 1 have accepted it in translation. 

** The NP. reads : Frat^kfo hjfdgamo ^hinnah which means ^'Direct 
Scriptural evidence is shattered or contradicted** 1 preferred the Mbh reading 
Prafyakft^diono bhinnah and translated it as above. 

t The second line of tins verse in the NP. u as follows : 

cnyo JfMti iarfrcsjta ndsHkiitkfh iWt siitah 

The Mbh. (ibid v. 28b} reads : fiinjn jiMfi iartr^jo ndstikM^ matt sthiiab. 
The omission of rtd of adn^p in NP. attributes a totally different and 
contradictory view to the atheists. Hence t preferred the original reading in 
the Mbh. viz. ndnyt, 

t As this verse is the same as MM. {ikid, v. 29), I have followed the 
commentate NiJakaotba, as it is nothing but a series of keywords of different 
arguments which are grammatically looee. An explanatory translation is 
neceuary in such cases. Hence the above transladon. 



552 


N&rada Purd/M 


Any piece of metal made red-hot in fire, when immersed in 
water, evaporates that water (ambu^^hakfanam). Just as a 
load^stonc moves iron, the mind controls the sense-organs. 

31. * The J^dsiikas are wrong for the disappearance 
of only the vital airs or animating force upon the physical 
body becoming lifeless and not the simultaneous disappear* 
ance of the body along with the departure or disappearance 
of the vital force, is the proof of the fact that the body and 
the soul are not identical but the soul and the body are distinct 
and different, and that the soul survives the body. As the 
dead body is seen even after the disappearance of the animating 
force, death means the departure from the physical body of 
something that is different from the body. The prayer (for 
getting something) to deities by those who deny the separate 
existence of the soul is another sound argument for, if deities 
who do not have gross material bodies can exist, why cannot 
the soul exist apart from and without the physical body ? 
Another argument against the identity of the body and the 
soul: If one dies--the very occurrence of death would be an 
automatic end of all Karmans which cannot be accepted as 
there would be an end of inequalities in the world which is 
not the case. 

32. Now the causes that have been mentioned and those 
that have material bodies, cannot be the causes of the non¬ 
material soul and his non-material accompaniment like percep¬ 
tion, memory, etc. For the physical objects cannot by them¬ 
selves be the causes for the creation of non-physical objects. 
(The causal relation of immaterial objects being produced 
by material objects is incomprehensible.) 

33-34^.** Some say that there is rebirth and that it is 

* The verse as printed in the NP. yidds little sense due to corrupt 
readings. The Mbh. verse (t^af) v. 31 is as follows : 

putibhult'fyAjrai caiva divaiadhyupayStenam / 
mfU kantu^nwittU ca pTumi^an Ui nifeayaff // 

The verse in the NP. h : 

pTiid-bhiita-pTiyai eaSM dnAta hyt^ydcdnarn / 

cc pram^j^am in' nUccy^!^ // 

I have tranilatcd the Mbh. vene the corrupt form of which is in the NP. 

** The verse consult of 32a and 34b in the Mbh. but the sentence 
is completed by adding 34b in the Mbb. (which is 34a in the NP.). 



IL45.34a-38a 


553 


caused by Nescience, Karmans and strong desire or avidity. They 
(i.e. the Buddhists) maintain that when one mortal body U 
being destroyed, another immediately grows up from it. But, 
when it is consumed by the (ire of knowledge the destruction 
of exbtence takes place. 

34b*36a. Ir may be asked when the being that is thus 
born is a different one in respect of form, nature, birth, 
purposes connected with virtue, vice, etc., why should it then 
be regarded to have any identity with the being that existed ? 
And if the being that is thus reborn be really different from 
what it was in the previous birth, what liking or satisfaction 
can a person have by acquisition of knowledge, learning and 
the power of asceticism, if all the acts performed by one are 
to be transferred for the accruing of benefit to another penon* 
(in the next stage of life or existence, without the performer 
being the enjoyer or the beneficiary of the fruits of chose acts.) 

36b-37a. Even in this very birth, here, one may be 
forced to be miserable by the acts committed by another 
in some previous life or may become happy after being 
miserable. But proper conclusion should be drawn about ‘the 
unseen* by observing what factually happens in this world.** 

37b*33a. Just as upon the death of the body caused by 
heavy bludgeoning with pestles, a second body would not 
arise from the body that is deprived of life, it is totally a vain 
(false) knowledge, f if the very loss of the previous conscious* 
ness be regarded as the cause of the production of the second 
knowledge, for the end of the previous consciousne.s,<; cannot 


* Sdmdnyat praUpedy^U in the NP. makcii little sense. The reading in 
the Af(6A. [ibid) v. 36 is jonam anyai pralip^dyaU clearly siato the Buddhistic 
position to which objectioos are raised. 

** In this world we see that one is not aBected by the good or evil 
acts of another. This direct evidence is enough to disprove the uncertainty 
of the doctrine of **the unseen" viz. whether the acts of Mr. X in 
the previous life can affect Mr. Y In the subsequent life when tliere is 
no identity between Mr. X of the previous birth and Mr. Y of the present 
birth. 

Thus the Buddhist theory of momentarinefts stands refuted. 

t Mbh. {ibid) v. 38 reads PrtheijMdnam 



554 


Narada Ptsrdna 


act as the cause of a second consciousnes.s arising out of the 
very end of the first. 

33b*39a. A^ain the Buddhist doctrine of Xirv&na or 
Sattvn^saAksaya or extinction of life is open to the objection 
that J^irvdna will become a rocurring phenomena like that of 
seasons or the year or the Yyga (lit. the Kali age), or heat or 
cold or disagreeable or agreeable objecU. The Buddhist J^firvdna 
will not become an end of the cycle of births and deaths— 
the final emancipation from Sorhfdra like Mok\a in Brahmanical 
scriptures. 

39b'4<)a. If in order to avoid these objections, the 
opponents {.€' the Buddhists advance the tlieory that the soul 
is permanent hut every moment each new consciousness 
attaches itself to it we say: Just as the supports of a home 
get weakened in course of time leading to the total collapse 
of the structun^, the permanent substance (the soul as posited 
by the opponents) by being overcome with old age and with 
death that results in destruction, will in course of time itself be 
weakened and destroyed, rhe soul according to Brahmanism 
is attributeless and hence immutable and eternal. But the 
Buddhist alllnnauce of atlributes to the soul implies auto¬ 
matically its dc>tractibility, and the permanence of the soul 
becomes untenable. 

40b-4ta. All the constituents of the body such as the 
senses, the mind.* the vital air, bloody flesh, bones become 
destroyed one after another, each of these entering its own 
substance {dhdtu) or productive cause. 

41b.42a. Here is the criticism of the Vcd’intic concept 
of the soul. If the soul be the basis of consciousness, under¬ 
standing and other attributes and yet is unconnected with 
any of these then all that is done in the world will be meaning¬ 
less, esp>eciaUy the fruition of charity and other religious acts 
and all the injunctions of^rutis prescribing these acts and all 
actions pertaining to the conduct of the world will have no 
meaning, (as the soul being aloof and unconnected with 


* S&Akhyts believe in the destruction of iJie mind—N1—(NUakaotba— 
Che commentator on the Mith, 



IL45.42b-48 


555 


understanding or mind, there is none to enjoy the fruits of 
meritorious acts and Vedic rites. 

42b*43a. In this way many plausible hypotheses or 
speculations arise in the mind. But no criterion is seen to 
decide whether this particular view is right, while that specu- 
lation is not. 

43b-44a. While reHcciing on the pros and cons of 
these views, particular persons follow properly and closely 
particular views. The intelligence of these is settled and 
established on some like a tree and ultimately is lost therein. 

441>45. In this way, all creatures become miserable by 
actions good or evil. It is only the Vedas which bring them 
back to the right way, like conductors of elephants guiding 
their elephants. 

46. *Many emaciated (weak*kneed) persons lick at 
(or wish for) objects which are full of happiness. But they are 
made to suffer a much larger lot of miseries. Being forced to 
and therefore having given up their coveted happiness (lit. 
piece of meat), they submit themselves to the power of death. 

47. What is the use of relatives, friends, wives and 
property (possessions) to one who is definitely doomed to die 
and whose life is unsteady and momentary, and who, having 
abandoned all these in a moment, leaves this world never to 
return ? 

48. The elements, viz. the earth, the ether, water, Hre 
and even wind always protect and nourish the body. How 
can one cherish any affinity to this body when one observes 


* A comparison between ihc NP. and shows how tlic text of the 

NPi is Incorrect and why one has to refer to the Mbh. 

46a ofNP. reads : 

arth^fiu tathd hanii sufMt’skimicd 
lihdiUa tU hanH bakaoopaiufkd^ f 
Mbh. {ibid) 46a reads : 

arthdths idihi'iydnU^ttikhiodh^^B 
lipMia 4k hdka94 vUufkdh i 



556 


NOrada Purina 


and reflects on this? There cannot be any pleasure with 
this body which is subject to destruction. 

49. Havini; listened to these words of Paflea^ikha 
which (being based on the Vedas were free from confusion and 
deception and which were not connected with delusion as they 
did not extol Karmakdnda)^ supremely salutary and dealing 
with the soub king Janaka was wondentruck and proposed 
to confront him with an argument {PQrva Pakfa^Hl*) 

Janaka submitted **: 

50. Venerable Sir» if, after departing from this body 
nobody is capable of re taming any consciousness or knowledge— 
if this be the case—what is the use of knowledge or ignorance ? 
(We neither gain anything by possessing knowledge nor are 
we the loosers by being ignorant. 

51. Look here, O excellent Brahmai^a, if everything is 
to end up in nothingness, if that be the nature of Liberation 
what avail are the observances of Tama, Niyama, etc. 
What special distinction is there in the fruits achieved by a 
careful or a careless person? 

52* If Liberation means dissociation with pleasure-giving 
persons or objects like celestial damsels, or association 
with objects of destructible nature like life in heaven, what is 
the motivation for men to perlbrm religious action or why 
after beginning the performance of an action, should men con¬ 
tinue for attaining the desired goal. 

Sanandana said:^ 

53. Reassuring with paciheatory words the king whose 
intelligence^ was enveloped with ignorance, bewildered, 


* Here endj cUspter 216 in the Mbk. SOfUiparvan. 

** Here Mbh. Sinti ch. 219 begiiu. In the NP. this being a continua¬ 
tion of 1.45, the Introduetory verse of Bhl^raa is omitted. NP. L45.50 
correipouds to Mbh. [ibid) v. 2. 

t In the Mbh. Sinti 219, Bhiima speaks tbit verse (no. 5). 

X MatUehatram in NP, but praH-Mama of the Mbb. ii better. 



11.45.54-61 


557 


mistaken and overanxious to know the truth, omniscient 
Paftcaiikha spoke to him. 

Pancaukha said: 

54-56a* In this Mok^a (Liberation) stage there is no 
extinction. Nor is that any kind of existence easily conceivable. 
What we see here is an aggregate of body, senses and mind. 
The constituents of this aggregate exist independently, control 
mutually and thus go on functioning. 

56b-57a. The ether, wind, heat (6re), water and the 
earth—the aggregate of these five makes up tlte body, but ilie 
body is not one homogeneous (whole or element) • 

57b-58. Sentience or intelligence, gastric heat and the 
vital breaths*^these three arc called the aggregate of the 
organs of action. The elTecis of intelligence, viz. the sense- 
organs, the objects of senses, such as sight, sound, etc., the 
inherent power which makes them the sense-potencies or facul¬ 
ties whereby the senses perceive these objects, the mind, the 
eifecLS of wind, viz., the vital breaths called Prdm, Apdtia^ etc. 
and the effects of gastric heat, viz., juices and humoui's generat¬ 
ed in the digestive system—all these emanate from the above- 
mentioned three organs oi actions. 

59. Hearing, couch, taste (tongue), sight (eyes) and 
scent—these are the 6ve senses which inherit their attributes 
from the mind which also is their cause.** 

60. The mind which is the reflection or attribute of 
Cil has three states^pleasure, pain and absence of both pleasure 
and pain. 

6lt Sound, touch and form—these three form the bases 


* The divuion of the lines of these venei corresponds to the original 
verses in the Mfih. as the Mbh. verses give a complete sentence per verse. 

** The reading in the Mbh. CUta^paroarh gold gusUtfi / is better than 
Ciita-purvam^gamd gu^fi in the NP. As Nl. explains: Cittam purvak4ra$am yasy^ 
fiha^gaaasya tarn eiitepurve^ cittcmMrotpadak4im pfiptaff^ gu^^i&ryo^ 

MuUft / 

t The text of this NP verK is confusing : 

Sahdals sparici ca rupcih <a mOrtya r tha m M U trayeft / 

4U hyOmra^dl p«/Ua fa4-guad jfidnanddk^ II 



538 J^drada Purdna 

of objects which they inhere. These five (?) good attributes 
last till death, for the achievement of knowledge. 

62. Upon them^the senses—depends the accomplish¬ 
ment of fruits or the successful completion of Kamans which 
lead to heaven > as also the determination of the truth or 
essence of all the principles or the topics of spiritual enquiry. 
They (wise sages) affirm that the ascertainment of the truth is 
the highest (most potent) seed of Liberation as it leads to 

and that Intelligence (bitddhi) leads to emancipation and 
as such it is called avyaya —indestructible and to Brahman and 
hence due to its power to lead to the Brahman which 
is maAjt-great and omnipotent, the Intelligence is called 
Mahat*. 

63. To a person who looks upon this aggregate of attri¬ 
butes viz. the physical body, senses and their objects as the 
Atman (soul), there is unending misery as a result of incorrect 
knowledge and this misery never subsides. 

64. Sorrow requires some basis or foundation to affect. 
What basis is there for misery or sorrow to affect those persons 
who consider worldly objects including their body as non-soul 
and are unattached to them, feeling that they (those objects) 
are neither *me* nor *inme’. Hence they never suffer any 
misery or sorrow. 

65. For this a wise (honourable) person should listen to 
the excellent treatise on renunciation. When it is expounded, 
it will be conducive for your emancipation from Saihsara. 

66. Renunciation of all act«—<ven of those prescribed in 
Sdslrast is enjoined for persons seeking Mokfa, Those who 
have been taught and disciplined in the wrong way (by here¬ 
tics) have always to bear a heavy burden of sorrows. 

67. Vedic sacrifices and rites are advised, for the 
renunciation of wealth. Vratas —(religious observances and vows) 


It means that so long as we live alt tboe faculties are the cause leading to 
knowledge. 

* kuddhir tti m«k 4 §dafPdtf errerem cdhsji / mahad 

kftJma tat-pradatodt / 



n.45.67-73 


559 


are meant for the renunciation of enjoyments and pleasures. 
Performance of penance is laid down for the renunciation of 
pleasures. Toga is advised for the renunciation of everything 
and that is the ultimate limit of renunciation. 

68. The path of Yoga which will be enunciated now to 
you is the only one path shown by the learned for the 
renunciation of everything, in order to banish all miseries and 
sorrows.* But otherwise distress and sorrow is the lot of those 
who go astray from this path. 

69. Having spoken of the five cognitive senses with the 
mind as the sixth—and all of which on the mental plane I shall 
now tell you the five conative organs for action with physical 
strength as the sixth. 

70. The two hands should be known as organs of action 
and the feet as the organ of locomotion. The sexual organ is 
meant both for pleasure and continuance of the race. The anvis 
is the oc^an for discharging faeces, excrements, etc. from the 
body. 

71. The organ of speech is for the expression of particular 
sounds. The learned know that the mind is thus equipped with 
these five conative organs In this manner one should cast off 
the mind, with intelligence (thus when the mind is shed off 
automatically, the conative organs are cast off or controlled, 
and by ^casting off’ the Intelligence, its products, viz. cognitive 
senses are done away with). 

72. In the act of audition three facton cause it, viz. the 
organ (ears), words or sound, and the mind. Similarly, three 
such factors exist in the perception of touch, of form, that of 
taste and of smell. 

73. In this manner the five triads i,e. fifteen attributes 
(gurias) are essential for the above-mentioned hvt kinds of 
perceptions. In consequence of these a person becomes aware 
of these triads (viz, particular organ, its function and the 
attending mind) about these perceptions. 


* Nl. quotes Bhalla-viiikhim in support : 

lydga ova hi iatvofOm atUmotn / 

Renunciaijon is the best means for all to attaia Mok^o. 



560 


N&r<ida Purdi^it 


4 

74. With reference to the perceptions of the mind— 
there are three categories pertaining to gunas viz. Sdttvika^ Rdjesa 
and TSmasa, Three categories of consciousness arc running 
through them comprising everything — emotions, passions, 
fcelirigSi etc.). 

75. Rapturous delight, love, joy, happiness, tranquillity 
of the mind arising otit of some raiue or resulting from no 
apparent cause (due to gaining desired object or through 
renunciation these are ihc Sdttvika attributes of the mind. 

76. Discontent, distress, sorrow, greed and noii-for 
bearance whether due to some cause or without any cause— 
these are the indications of the attribute called Rajas, 

77. Thoughtlessness, delusion, hcedlessness, dreaminess 
and drowsiness (caused by anything) - these arc the various 
Tdmasa attributes.* 

78* A person who knows this understanding (knowledge) 
which leads to Liberation from Sarhsdra and vvlio carefully seeks 
to realise the Aimofty is never soiled by undesirable fruits of 
karmajis just as a leaf of lotus.** 

79« When a person becomes liberated from the various 
kinds of strong bonds pertaining to one's children (subjects in 
the case of kings) as well as pertaining to gods, and when the 
person gives up (the sense of) pleasure and pain, he becomes 
emancipated and attains the highest end, becoming bereft of 
external signs (such as five vital breatlis, mind, intelligence, 
etc. 

80-8la. By undersiandii^ the implication of authorit¬ 
ative prescriptions of the Vedas and by practising the auspicious 
acts and virtues enjoined in the Veda and Agamas, a person, 
transcending the fear of old age and death, lies at ease. When 
both merits and sins are shed off and fruits accruing therefrom 
to the body {tanoh) are destroyed, such persons being 


* Here endi the 20th verse from the Mbh. Santi 219. NP. 76 ff. 
correspond to vv. 44 of the Mbh. (ibid) Ch. 219. 

** VUarffi'a in NP. is a misprint for in the Mbh. ibid 44 as 

'poison* is meaningless in the context. 



II.45.81b-87 


561 


unattached at first resort to the Saguna Btohman that is in the space 
of one's heart and (hen visualize the ^irguna Urahman. 

8Ib«82a. Just as a spider* residing in his web made of 
threads woven by itself» becomes free by cessation of weaving 
out the thread, the same way a person who is released from 
Sarhsdra sheds oft all miseries and they (the miseries) arc 
shattered down and destroyed like a dump or sod of earth 
dashing against a rocky mountain (odri)**. 

82b-83a. Just as the Ruru (a species of deer) casting off 
its old horns or a serpent casting off its slough, slips away 
without being noticed, similarly, a liberated person casts offhU 
sorrow, 

83b-84. Just as a bird, leaving off a tree [drumarfi'^) 
tailing into the water flies up to a safer place, in the same 
manner this person gives up toys and sorrows and becoming 
liberated and dissociated frsm his subtle bodies, attains to the 
highest region (viz. \foha)> 

85. Having listened to the dbcoursc full of nectarine 
words delivered by PaAca^ikha litmsclf the king Janadeva 
carefully pondered upon every point contained therein and 
ascertained the truth in it. Casting off his sorrow he lived 
joyfully merged in the supreme bliss. 

86. It is reported that beholding his capital city enveloped 
in fire, it was exclaimed by the king of Mithila hunself: 

this burning city, nothing of miw is burning.**^ 

87. O great sage ! He who reads ihb exposition on the 
ascertainment of (the means to) Mok^a and continuously 
ponders over it, is not affected by calamities and sorrows and 
becomes emancipated as did the king of Mithila, after this 
meeting with Paftcasikha. 


* The analogy of a tilk«worni is better. 

** odV/A in tfie NP U a printing mistake for adritn as oJi is mraningless in 
Uiat context. 

t maUywh jvoihA vc* pyudah petanUmj 

in (he NP. makes little sense. **How can a fish falling into (he water" ii to 
be connected with the bird. The hfbli. (IMd) v. 83b givm ilrma/k instead 
of 



CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 


1. From Ihu follows tht extract compiled from Mbh. Sdnii 2\B. 2ff. 
Instead otBhlfma uodcd from the Mbb. here u SaMndona uvdca. 

2. Paflca*^ikha—An ancieni teacher of the Sinkhya school. He 
belonged to Parisara Gotra {Mbh. xu. 320.24). As a child he was breasl-fed 
by Kapilk and hence was probably called KapiJcya. Hr was tfie disciple of 
Xsuri. He lived in Parca-Srotas where he performed a sacrifice for 1000 
years and came to be known as Paiica*Sikhu. He vbited the court of Jan aka 
where he defeated the heretic teachers and king Janaka into a polemic 
contest. King Janaka respected him as fail preceptor (Mbh, 

3. Being the disciple of Kaptla^t disciple Asuri, he was comparable lo 
Kapila (Nl*) * 

4. Asuri—The disciple of Kapila, the founder of the Sahkliya scht'ol 
of thought (Bh. P.I.3>10). 

5. This saying Is attributed to Janaka (when his capita) Mithili was 
sliowntohave caught fire) both in the PMi Canon and Svetambara Jain 
(Ardha M^gadhl) Canon, cf. mihiUt dajjham4$it ria m$ drtjjhai kith ca po in 
the Uttarddhyayana sutra and 

milhildya daf^^amAndya, nn ma kilUi adaitvathn in the Mahdjanaka jdlako 

V. 249. 



CHAPTER FORTYSIX 

The Narratiim of Spiritual matUrs 

Suta said : 

1. O Brahmanas^ on hearing that excellent spiritual 
discourse, the liberaNminded N&rada delightedly asked 
Sanandana again. 

Ndrada said : 

2. O sage, O storehouse of mercy! I seek refuge in you. 
To me kindly relate those things whereby one may not 
experience the three types of distress such as the Adhyntmika 
Adhidaivika, etc. 

Sanandana said^^ 

3. O learned one, three types of miseries occur to oui' 
born here. They occur in the womb or in the course of the 
process of being bom or in the old age. 

4. The panacea (for all worldly ills) is the ultimatr 
attainment of the lord, characterised by the state of happiness 
unexcelled in bliss. 

5. Hence, effort to attain it (viz. God-realization) must 
be made by learned men. O great sage, the cause of attaining 
it is said to be both knowledge and activity. 

6. Knowledge is said to be of two kinds: that which 

arises out of the Vedic texts and that which arises from discri¬ 
mination. The ^ahdabrahman is that which arises out of the 
Agamas. The great Supreme is that which arises out of 

discrimination between Reality and illusion. 

7. The excellent sage Manu too, after remem bciing the 
meaning of the Vedas says thus: May that be heard even as 
I recount it in an easily understandable manner. 

8. **Two Srahmans are to be understood, viz., the 


VV.)-30 of ibis chapter are incorporated from VP. VI. Sd47. 



564 


Narada Purdna 


.^abdabrahnan and the Supreme Brahman. One who is an adept in 
the Sabdabrahman understands the great Brahman.”^ 

0. The Atharvana Veda* also says—*‘Two Vidydi arc to 
be known’*. The greatest Fi^ is the attainment of the Imperish¬ 
able [Brahman). 'Fhc other one is tltc lore of the ^gveda^ etc. 

10»11. Verily, wise sages sec him who is unmanifest, 
iinageing, devoid of longing, birthlcss and undianging; who 
cannot be specihcaily pointed out, who Is formless, devoid of 
hands and feer, powerful and omnipresent, eternal, causeless but 
the source of origin of living beings, who is pervaded and who 
pervades everything else. 

12. That is thethe greatest abode. It must be 
meditated upon by those who seek salvation. It is the subtle 
one mentioned by the Vcdic texts—the greatest region of Visnu, 

13. That same form of the greatest Atman is expressed by 
the word nhagavat. The word fihagnvat connotes it. It is 
so indicated in regard to the imperishable Atman. 

14. Tliat whereby the reality of what has been thus des¬ 
cribed is factually realized, is the real perfect knowledge. 
The other consists of the Trinity of Vedas. 

15. O Brahmana, though the Bra/man is beyond the 
ken of iSobdn^ (sounds and words) (he word Bhagavat is used 
formally in order to honour or to adore the same. 

16. O holy lord, the word Bhagaval connotes the pure 
and Supreme Brahman called also Mahavibhuti (One endowed 
with the highest Potency) and is the cause of all causes. 

16A.* The syllable bhn^has two meanings (1) that 
which is to be known and (2) the knower**. O sage, similarly 
the syllable ga means the creator, the father of the Agamas, 

17. Six things are indicated by the term Bhag viz: 
perfect prosperity and glory, prowess renown, splendour, 
perfect knowledge and detachment. 

18. In the Bhdtdlmnn wliicli Is the soul of all, all the living 

* Wrongly numbered 16 In the text. 

•• VP. VI. 5.73 reads : ^mbharuti /athd hhart^. The syllable Bha 
implies the cherisher and supporter of the universe. This reading is belter 
the syllable *Bha' (ace. to VP.) is common to both the ;vords : SambhartA 
and Bharta. 



11.46.19-28 


563 


beings reside. Hence, the meaning of the word ‘va’ is il)c 
unchanging lord who abides in all living beings. 

19. Thus O excellent one, the great word r>h<ignvlin 
belongs to Vasudeva who is the greatest lirnhm(U}. It docs not 
refer to anyone else. 

20. As a technical phrase the word indicates an object 
of worship. This word indicates Visudeva without being 
used in a secondary sense. When referring to other ohjeris the 
word is used in a secondary sense.^ 

21. He who knot\*s the origin, dissolution, the advent as 
well as the departure of the living beings and also he who 
knows ViiyH and Avidy^^ should Ik expressed by the term D/mgavdn. 

22« Knowledge, power, strength, prosperity, virility and 
splendour, the entirely of all these arc expressed by the word 
J^hngrtvat. Only the despicable qualities^ are excluded. 

28. All the living beings reside in the great ^tmnn. 'l1ie 
lord ts remembered as Vasndeva, because he abides iu the 
Ji/iilfds. 

24. Formerly when requested, Kclidhvn ja loM 
Kha^^ikya of the Janaka dynasty.^ He factually explained 
the meaning of the epithet Vasudeva, the Infinite. 

25. He lives in the BkStasand xheBhStas live in him. He 
is the creator and the protector of all worlds. Henrr, ^^^su• 
deva is a lord—the Governor. 

26. O sage, he transcends the Prakrti of all living beings, 
the aberrations and tlie faults such as the Guttas, etc. He goes 
beyond all coverings. He is the Atman of all, the spare between 
the worlds is occupied by him. 

27. He is endowed with all auspicious qualities and is of 
the nature of good qualities. {Defective).^ He eschews the 
creation of the BhRias over-whelmed by too much of misery; he 
assumes a splendid form voluntarily In accordance with his Will. 
He achieves the welfare of the entire universe. 

28. He is one sole repository of splendour, strength, 
prosperity, great enlightenment, virility and other qualities. 
He is greater than the greatest. In the lord of the finite and the 
infinite beings, there are no (such imperfections of Avidya such 
as distress and others. 



566 


N^rada PurUna 


29. He is the lord called Parameivara, He is of the form 

of Vyasti and (the Microcosm and Macrocosm); he is 

both of the unmanifest and manifest forms; he is the overlord of 
all, the knower of the entire creation, and he is omnipotent. 

30. That whereby he is known is free of defects;* it is 
an extremely pure form devoid of impurities. It is seen and 
understood. That is the perfect knowledge, anything other than 
this is said to be AjUdna (Ignorance). 

31. * That Purusoltama is seen by means oiSvddhydya 
(study of the Vedas) and Sathynrrut (self-control i.e. Yoga), either 
of them being the cause of attaining him, is called BT<thma. 

32. One should practise Yoga after Svftdhytya; and one 
should commit to memory the prescribed Vedic texts after 
through Yoga.* The great Atman is revealed through the 
accomplishment otSv^dhydya and Yoga. 

33. Sv&!hydya is the eye for visualising him. The other 
eye is Yoga. (The Lord) who is Brahman cannot be seen through 
the physical eye. 

Ndrada said: 

34. O Holy lord, I wish to know that Yoga. Kindly 
elucidate that after knowing which I would be able to see the 
Supreme Ruler, the support ofalU 

Sanandana said: 

35. I shall expound that Yoga, in the same manner as 
Keiidhvaja formerly explained it to the noble-souled Khandikya 
of Janaka race. 

Ndrada said:^^ 

36. O holy lord, who was Khandikya? Who was Keii- 
dhvaja? How did it happen that they had a dialogue in relation 
to Yoga. 

Sanandana said: 

37. Dharmadhvaja of Janaka family was the father. His 
son was Amitadhvaja. Krtadhvaja was his brother who was a 
king who always took delight in spiritual topics. 

* VV. 31 g of the NP. are the came as VP. V!. Ch. 6. 



n.46.37a.52a 


567 


37a*. The blessed twice*bom Kesidhvaja was the son of 
Kftadhvaja. The son of Amitadhvaja was named Khandikya of 
the Janaka dynasty. 

38< Khat^dikya who followed the path of action, was 
banished from his kingdom, accompanied by his preceptor and 
the ministers. He had limited resources only* 

39. After being exiled from the kingdom, he wandered, 
through the impassable forests. He (Keitdhvaja) performed 
many Tajflas and resorted to Jndna also. 

40*42. By resorting to the lore about Brahman, he wished 
to cross the ocean of death. O foremost one among the knowers 
of Yoga, once as he was performing a sacrifice, a fierce tiger 
killed his cow in the lonely forest. On knowing that the cow^^ 
was killed by a tiger, he asked the sacrificial priests about the 
atonement: ''What shall be done in this context?'’ They replied 
—''We do not know. MayKalens be consulted." 

43. O Narada, on being asked by him, Kaseru said—''O 
leading king I I do not know it. Please refer to Sunaka. He will 
know it, i.e. must be knowing it. 

44-45. He went and asked him. O sage, he told the 
king,—"Neither Kaseru, nor I, nor anyone in the world now knows 
it. Only your enemy Khandikya who was defeated by you, 
knows it. O sage, he said, "I shall go to tny enemy in order to 
consult him." 

46-48. If he kills me, the benefit of the Tcjna becomes 
already acquired by . it.** !f m being asked, my enemy 
explains the atonement, O excellent sage, the Yoga will be 
unaffected." Saying thus, the king, clad in deer skin, rode in 
the chariot and went to the forest where Khandikya the king 
was present. On seeing his enemy coming, Khapdikya said 
with his eyes reddened with anger. He kept his bow fully 
drawn. 

Kh^4ikya said : 

49-52a. O, will you kill us with the deerskin for youi 
coat of mail? You seem to know (i.e. think) "No one will 


* Wrongly numbertU 37 in the printed text. 



568 


N&rada 


strike me since I wear deer skin.** O fool, tell me. Is there no 
deerskin on the back of the deer? I thought that sharp and 
fierce arrows discharged on them would be futile. 1 will now 
kill you. You will not be allowed to go alive. O evil-minded 
one, you arc a desperado; my enemy who has taken away my 
kingdom- 
Kiiiih\>aja said : 

Khaodikya, it is with a view to clear a doubt that I 
liavc come to you, and not to kill you. Considering this, leave 
off either your anger or the arrow.** 

52b-33. Thereafter, he (Khandikya) discussed the 
matter in private with his ministers and his preceptors and 
priests. Khi^idikya, the highly intelligent one, consulted every¬ 
one* The ministers advised him—^^This enemy who has come 
under our control must be killed. If he is killed the entire 
earth will be under your control.** Khaodikya replied to all of 
them— ‘‘Undoubtedly it is so. 

56. If he is killed the entire earth will be under my 
control. But the conquest of the other world will be his, while 
the whole of the earth may be mine. 

57. If I don't kill him, the conquest of the other world 
is mine without the earth. The conquest of the other world 
lasts till infinity, while the conquest of the earth is of a short 
duration. 

58. Hence, I will not kill him. I will tell him what he 
asks.*’ Then tChandikya Janaka approached his enemy and 
said :— 

59. *‘Wiialevcr you have to ask me (freely) ask me. I 
shall tell you.*’ Then, O sage, he told him about the slaughter 
of his sacrificial cow. 

60. Then he asked him about the expiatory observance 
ui this Vrata. O sage, he duly explained everything to 
Kesidhvaja. 

61-62. All the expiatory rites ordained in the context 
were explained by him. After understanding the mactei', and 
being permitted by the nobie-souled one be went back to the 
sacridcial ground and performed the rites duly. After comp¬ 
leting the sacrifice duly he took his ceremonial ablution 
{Avabhftho), 



lL46.63-74b 


569 


63-65a. Becoming contented, the king began to think— 

the sacrificial priests have been worshipped. All the mem- 
bers of the sacrificial assembly have been honoured. All the 
suppliants have been duly provided with the desired objects by 
me. Whatever was worth doing in this world has been perform¬ 
ed by me. How is it that I feel in my mind as though some 
religious duty has not been finished? 

SSb-GSa. While pondering over thus^ the king remem¬ 
bered—” O, the requisite fees due to the preceptor have not 
been given to Khandikya by me/* 

66b*67a. The king thereupon got into hh chariot again 
and went to the impassable forest region where Khaodikya the 
devotee of Svayambhu, was staying. 

67b-68a. On seeing him coming again, Khan^ikya took 
up his weapon. He stood ready with the intention to kill him. 
The king Kesidhvaja then told him. 

68b-70. Khat^dikya, do not be angry. I have not 
come here to do any harm to you; know that I have come to 
requite my preceptor. In accordance with your instruction the 
sacrifice has been duly performed by me. I wish to give you 
the Gurudakfii?d (Preceptor’s fees). Please choose it and 
tell me. 

On being thus reqiiested« the king again consulted his 
ministers. 

71. *‘He is desirous of paying the fees of the preceptor. 

What shall be requested by me?** The ministers said to 
him— may be requested for the gift of the entire 

kingdom”. 

72. King Khandikya laughed and said— *^The kingdom 
is being begged by contented people^’ whose soldiers have not 
undergone any stress or strain! 

73-74a. The kingdom of the earth is of a short duratioti. 
How can it be requested for by people like me.'* This is it. 
You people are such advisors as advocate selfish interest. What 
is the truth underlying this? You arc not clever enough to 
know 

74b. After saying this he went up near the king Kesidlh 
vaja and said**** you certainly give the preceptor’s fees?*’ 
When he said *Of course*, Kha^dikya spoke to him. 



570 


Mdrada Purdf^a 


76-77a. ‘‘You arc truly an expert in the perfect know¬ 
ledge of spiritual matters. If the preceptor's fee is proposed 
to be given to me by you, kindly explain to me that holy rile 
which is capable of subduing the distress/’^* 

KeSidhvcja said : 

77b-78a. Why was my thornless kingdom not requested 
for by you? There is nothing more pleasing to Ksatriyas than 
the acquisition of a kingdom. 

Kkdndikya said : 

76b. O Kestdhvaja, you undersund, why it (kingdom) 
lias not been requested for by me ? 

79-81. Learned men do not yearn much for the entire 
kingdom. It is the duty of the Ksatriyas to protect the subjects. 
Those who are inimical to their own kingdom are to be killed 
in an honest straightforward war. h was my fault, since I had 
been weak. There was no harm done by you. This Avidya will 
only be conducive to bondage though devoid of a direct 
onslaught. If I were to crave for the kingdom it is a desire for 
further births and their enjoyment. 

82. Begging and importunity may not be defective in 
the case of others, They follow only Dharma. It is the con¬ 
sidered opinion of good (wise) persons that begging is not 
conducive to the religious duties (binding on) Ksattriyas. 

63-84a. Hence, the kingdom that belongs to you and is 
embedded in Avidya, is not requested for. Even the learned men 
whose minds are drawn towards Mamaiva (sense of possession) 
yearn for a kingdom. Those who are inebriated due to the 
great intoxicating beverage of Ahammdna (egotistic self-esteem) 
(crave for kingdom) but not people like me. 

Kelidhvaja said : 

64b-85. By means of Vidya, I am desirous of crossing 
(surmounting) death. I rule the kingdom and perform 
various sacrifices. By enjoyment of pleasures, the merit dwindles 
dowDr but fortunately your mind b richly endowed with the 
discriminating faculty. 



II.46.86-97a 


571 


86. Listen^ O delighter of thejanaka family, to the 
form or nature of Avtdya. It is the misapprehension of the soul 
in objects which are not the soul. It is the mistaking of one's 
own what is not one's own. 

07. Thb u the seed, the outcome of the tree of Nescience 
stationed in two types.In the physical body consisting of 
the fine elements the embodied being is enveloped in delusory 
darkness.*’ 

88-89. The man of crooked intellect has the deep convic* 
tion of T am this*, with regard to rlic body severally 
composed of the five elements, viz. Ivther, wind, fire, water 
and earth. Who will entertain the false conception that the 
body which is not the soul, is the soul? The objects of enjoy¬ 
ment such as the house, the held* etc. have indeed to be enjoyed 
through the body.*^ 

90. Though the Atman is not the body, even the 
intelligent man thinks *This is mine*. It is thus that he feels in 
regard to sons and grandsons procreated by that body. 

91. Even the learned man feels the sense of owner¬ 
ship in regard to the body which is non*Atman. Every man 
performs every action lor the enjoyment of the body. 

92*93a. When the body itself is something other than 
the man, it is always interested in binding him. Just as the 
house made of the earth ( a mud-house) is scrubbed, cleaned, 
and plastered with water and mud, similarly the physical body 
consisting of earth and other elements is maintained with 
smearing, etc. with mud and water. 

93b'94a. If the body that consists of fivefold means of 
enjoyment is developed by the same fivefold means of enjoy¬ 
ment, what is it that the man can be proud of ? 

94b-96a. The individual soul goes tlirougli the path of 
worldly existence in the course of many thousands of births. 
He is enveloped by the dust of Vdsands, impressions of actions 
and experiences. He attains delusion and exhaustion. Q gentle 
one, when the dust particles are washed off by means cf 
hot water of perfect knowledge, the delusory exhaustion of the 
wayfarer in the path of worldly existence is subdued. 

96b*97a. When delusion and exhaustion are sub¬ 
dued, the man's inner sense organ, the heart becomes clear* 



572 N&rada Butrina 

Getting a support that cannot be excelled by anything else, he 
attains the highest bliss of Salvation. 

97b*98a. The ^iman is of the nature of bliss. It is of tlie 
nature of perfect knowledge. It is free from impurities. Misery, 
ignorance and attributes that are their off^shoots belong to 
Prokrii and not to the Atman. 

9Bb. Although water has no direct contact with hre, it 
has the indirect contact through the pot. 

99-100. Just as a wise person carries on his functions of 
uttering sound, etc., similarly the Aimany polluted with ego, etc. 
due to his contact with Pr^rU resoru to dharmas (attributes) 
connected with Ptakrii. When he sheds olf the ego, he is 
immutable and changeless. The seed (root*cause) of Avidyd 
has thus been narrated to you by me. 

101. There is nothing other than Yoga that is destruc¬ 
tive of miseries. 



CHAPTER FORTYSiX 


1. Vv. 3*30 are a quotation from VP. Vl.5.5]*&7. 

2. ThougJi both VP. (ibid) v. 64 and NP. attribute this verse to Manu» 

it it not found in the extant Mdnusmrti. It is a quotation from Up. 

VI. 22. Tht Brahman has two aspects : verbal and Real or Spiritual and for 
the realization of the latter, the mastery over the former Is necessary. 

3. This is a quotation from the Muniaka Up. 1.4.5. The Muv^4^ka 
belongs to the AV. and hence the quotation is called Atharvatii ifulu 

4. Id other words, the term Bhagavat which is the general denuiniiiaiKin 
of an adorable oiyect is not used with reference to the Supreme in general 
but as a special significance. But when the term is UKd with reference to 
any other person or thing, It is used m die customary general meaning. 

5. The three gugas and their cousequent Khiaj (miseries) which 
deserve to be eschewed are not found tn Bhdgavaia. 

6. Pur the genealogy and mutual relationship of Kesidbvaja and 
Khittdiltya viiii w. 3749 below. 

7. The venc in the NP. contains defective wording. The original vcisc 
in the VP. (i4id) 84 is as follows : 

Sama4td^kalj^a*ga^lmaka*i9U 

Ma-4akti^Ui4t/fta^kk 

He is one with and of the nature of all auspicious attibutes. He has permeated 
all created beings with but a small portico of His Power. 

8. Instead of the confusing reading: sa Jnd^Uyrna oflheNP. VP. 

(ibid) V. 87 reads fives better meaning at follows : 

That whereby, the flawless, pure, Supreme, unsullied (by the contact of 
Prakrti) and one (undivided) Brahman b properly known, revealed or 
realised is the real knowledge. What is other than this is ignorance. 

liere ends chapter 5 of VP. VI. 

9. Both the study of the Vedas and practice of Yoga arc essential for 
God-realization. When a person is weary of the one, he should pursue Uic 
other. But the dictum in Yoga is that one should perform (muttering 
the name of God or (Afanifa) when tired of meditation and uite^mu ; 

japcichidntah puaar 
dhpdndc chrdntah ptmarj^iH 

10. lu VP.VI.6.G, it is Maiueya yabo speaks this verse and the reply 
of Parifara in VP. VL6.7 ff, is the same as given here by Sanandana in vv. 
37 ff. These names do not occur in the Jaaaka dynasty in VP.1V.5 but are 
recorded by Bh.P.IX. 13.19-21. 

n Forlai^ dhmvn of the NP. dktrma-d/iitwm iu the VP. (iWd) v. 13 
U betwr, as It ii not any cow but the cow related to the sacrifice whose 

death needed atonement. 



574 Nirada Purina 

12. Frdfita tva jajMi ii ohactire gnmmMtitkWy, VP (ilfid) 18 prapta 

tva is clear. Hence adopted in the translation. 

13. VP. (ihid) 45 reads instead of in the NP. that 

makes the clause form a part of the ministerial advice that the kingdom is 
obtained without mtUUr)r engagement. 

14. Another interpretation : **Thiss you arc the people who tender 
advice in concerns of this worldly life. But you are not competent enough to 
advise on matters relating to the higher (spiritual) objects. 

15. Here ends ch. 6 in VP. VI. Vv. 77 ft. of the NP. constitute VP. 
VI. ch. 7. 

16. NP. V. 86b-87a constitutes VP. (ibid) v. 11 and the meaning 
becomes more consistent and clear as follow*! : '*The erroneous notion to 
regard what is not self as the self and the notioti in regarding what is not 
One's own as one's own, constitutes the double seed of the tree of NcKience. 

17. Though this ch. in the NP. is taken from the VP. VI, the lining of 
the verses is different from the text of the VP. Thus VV. 88b and 89a 
constitute verse No IS in the VP VI. 6 and when these are taken together as 
in the VP, the meaning is changed. Thus 88b-S9a means : ''Who will look 
upon the body as the soul when the soul abides indistinctly (apart) from 
the five elements constituting the body." 

18. The lines of verses in the NP are re-arranged according to the VP. 
VI. 7 and briefly translated for the sake of comparison and noting the 
difference in the interpretation due to the changes in the lines of the VP. in 
the text of the NP. 

(NP. VV. 89b*90a) What man of understanding would attribute to 
the incorporeal soul the enjoyments of the body like lands, houses, etc. and 
would call them his own ? 

90b^la. What learned person will entertain the idea of property, 
in sons and grandsons bom of the body, when the body itself ceases to 
be the self. 

91b*92a« It is for the enjoyment of the body that a nian performs an 
act and to obtain its fruits in the next body. But that again results in the 
perpeluaiion of die bondage of the body (bodily existence]. 

d2b*93a. Just as a house of clay is plasted with clay and water, so 
the body which is composed of the earth, is sustained by the earth 
(i e. food grown of die earth) and water. 

93b-94a. The physical body which is constituted of five elements is 
nourished by things which are also made of those very elements. Under 
the circumstances, what did the soul enjoy ? 

94b-95a. Wandering tlirough the path of Sarhsira for thousands of 
births, thesoul enveloped in the dust (particles) of desires, attains nothing 
but exhaustion in the form of detuiion. 

95b«96a. When that dust is washed olT by the hot water of real 
knowledge, the exhaustion of delusion of the traveller of Sams&ra si 
removed. 



Notts 


575 


96b-97a. When the fatigue caused by infatuation is relieved and 
the person gets internal peace, be attains the supreme salvation which 
is unparallelled and undisturbed. 

97b-96a. Thereat nature of the soul b pure, constituted of bliss 
and knowledge. The attributes such as pain» ignorance and impurity 
belong 10 and not to the Atman, 

96b-100a. Tiie water and 6re do not come in contact but when the 
water b placed above the hre in a pot, it bubbles and manifests the 
properties of hre. Similarly, the soul though absolutely distinct from the 
Prakfti and its attributes, and uncorrupted, assumes the attributes of the 
gross nature, when the soul in association with Prakrti gels polluted by 
egotbm and other properties. 

lOOb-IOl. The seed of ignorance b as deKribed by me. There is no 
panacea on these worldly miseries except the practice of Voga. 



CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 


Exposilion of tht wdy to roalizi the soul 
Sanavdann said : 

1. On hearing these words of Ke^idhvaja that consisted 
of an estimate of spiritual topics and that was like nertor, 
Khandikya spoke again, urging him. 

KMttdikyn said 

2. O highly blessed one, O the most excellent one 
among the knowers of Yoga, recount details of Yoga. In 
this dynasty of Nimi, you alone are the person vs^lio have 
understood the topics in the Yogas«^sirn. 

Ke^dhvaja said : 

3. O Khandikya, even os I recount, may the naiure of 
the Yoga be heard. A sage who is establislicd in Yoga, 
docs not fall off after attaining merger into the Brahman. 

4. Mind alone is the cause of bondage uiid liberation 
of men. When addicted to the sensual objcri i, ii is the 
cause of bondage. When it is devoid of objects, it is the cause 
of liberation. 

f>. A wise man possessing discriminative knowledge, 
should withdraw the mind from the seme^objecis and tlirougli 
it for the sake ofsialvation meditate on the Brahman* the greatest 
Isvara. 

6. By means of the power of the Atman he sliould make 
the mind that is prone to aberration,* meditate on the Brahman 
by infusing it with the nature of Atman, even as a magnet docs 
it to piece of iron. 

7. The special movement of the mind that depends on 
the efforts of self is to conjoin to the Brahman and such 
union with the Brahman is called Yc^a. 

8. This includes the holy rites with special and peculiar 
characteristics. He who possesses Yoga is Yogin. He is called a 
iXfumuk^u (one desirous of liberation). 



JI.47.9-19 


577 


9. At the outset, the Yogin who practises Yoga is called 
Tunjamdna. He who is called Vinifpannasamddhi (ofaccomplished 
meditation) is one, who has attained the greatest Brahman, 

10. If due to defects and obstacles his mind is not^ 
defiled, the former one attains salvation, thanks to the repeated 
practice in the course of many other births. 

n. The latter one who is caMtd VinispannasamAdhi (i.e. 
the knower of Brahman.) attains salvation in the very same 
l)irih. The Yogin attains everything ere long after burning the 
Karmans through the fire of Yoga. 

12*14. A Yogin shall practise hve Tamax (restraints) and 
five J^ijiamas (observances): (Celibacy, non-violence, truthful¬ 
ness, non-stealing and non*acceptance of monetary gifts (tliese 
are the Ta7nas). Svidhj/dya (self-study of the Vedas), •'^'anca (puri¬ 
ficatory rites), Santos^ (contentment) Tapas (penance) and 
concentration of the mind on the great .liman. He must keep 
his mind devoid of huts. Thus the five Tatnox and the five 
.Viyamas have been recounted. If people practise these wiili 
specific desires, they yield special benefits; if people practise 
thr.se witliout desires they yield salvation. 

15. Thus the ascetic should practise the good postures, 
(like Hhaclrasana). He must be endowed with good qualities. 
He must pcrforni the Y'oga with what arc called Vmas and 
jYvyamas. 

16. If v\hat are called Prdnas (vital airs) are restrained 
by practice, it should be known as Prdn^dma. It has two sub¬ 
divisions: the Sabija (with seed) and the Abfja (without seed). 

17. When the two vital Airs —Prdna and over¬ 

power each other (arc merged together), by regulating them 
both by proper means, that is the third {variety of brcalii- 
control, viz., Kumbkaka). 

18. O lord of the enemies, its form is as gross* as its 
Alambatia (support) the support of the <2 (endless one) is 
obtained by the Yogin as he practises. 

19. The knower of the Yogas shall curb the sense organs 
drawn towards their objects such as sound, etc. Being devot¬ 
ed to and insistent on Praiydhdra (withdrawal of the mind 
from sense-objects), hesliould make the senses (withdrawn from 
sense objects but) merging in the mind. 



578 


Ndrada PttrAna 


20. If the sense-organs become steady, they become 
extremely 'submissive. If they are non-aubmissive, the Yogln 
cannot achieve Yoga. 

21. After keeping the vital airs under control by means 
of Prdndydma and the sense-organs by means of Prntydkdra^ 
the practitioner of Yoga shall make ihe mind stabilised 
in an auspicious support. 

Khdn^ikya said: 

22. O highly blessed one, may it be mentioned to me, the 
auspicious support of the mind, by having wliich the mind 
dispels the outcome of defects entirely. 

Keddhvaja said: 

23. O wise one, the support of the mind is twofold, that 
too based on the form. The form may be embodied or 
unembodied; it may be Pnra (greater) or Aparn (smaller). 

24. There arc three types otPhdvftnds (conceptions). The 
form and the universe is said to l>e threefold: The first is called 
lirahmn bhdvandy the otlier is known as Karma^^bhdvand and the 
third is of the nature of both Karma and Brahma. 

25. One Alta is of the nature of Karmarty ihe otherone 
is of the nature of the Brahman, and the third one is of the 
nature of both. Thus there arc three types of 
Bhdvabhdvand (conception). 

26. O wise one, Sanaka and others are always endowed 
with the Ihahmabhdvand. while the others, Devas etc. the 
mobile and immobile beings — all these are endowed with 
Karmabhdvand. 

27. In Hiranyagarbha and others, the Bhavana is of 
the combined nature of the Brahman and Karman. In those 
invested wilh authority and with enlightenment, there is the 
Bhavabhavnna. 

28. O king, in the eyes of those who dilTeientiate 
regarding that this is the Universe, chat other is some thing diffc- 
ent, when all the particularised Karmans and knowledge are not 
diminished completely. 

29. That knowledge is termed Brahman, the knowledge 
where the differences have completely vanished which 



11,47.30-41 


579 


is Existence alone, winch is beyond the sco|)c of words and 
which is self-produced. 

30 That IS the great form of Visnu who is formless and 
unborn. The characteristics of the great Aiman arc contrary to 
the diversity of the form of the entire Universe. 

31. O king, since that (i.c. the greatest fom» of Visnii) 
cannot be meditated upon by one who practises Yoga, the 
gross form of Hari that could be seen by means of the eyes 
should be meditated tipon. 

32-35. All these constitute the universe, via. —Lord Hira- 
riyagarbha, Vasava (i.e. Indra)> Prajapati, Manns, Vasus, 
Kudras, Bhaskaras (i.e. Adtiyas), constellations, planets, 
Gandharvas, Yaksas, Daityas, Dtva^Tonh (all kinds of divine 
and semi-divine beings), human beings, animals, motintains, 
oceans, rivers, trees, in fact. O king, all living beings, all those 
causes of the HhGlas namely those beginning with the Pradhdna 
and ending with the t^UcfcSj those who are sentient and non- 
sen tieni, the single-footed, the bipeds, the multi-footed, and the 
footless—all these are the embodied forms of Hari. Th^y arc 
of the nature o{Bhdvands of the three types. 

36. All this universe, consisting of the mobile and im¬ 
mobile beings, is endowed with the potency of Visnu of 
(he form of the Supreme Brahman. 

37. The greatest '^akti is said to be Vf^riu the 

Ollier ^ak(i is called Kfetrcjna and the third '^akti is called 
Avidj>dkarman. 

38-39. O king, the ^^'akti that is called K.^elrajna is pro¬ 
duced through Kamant. O highly intelligent one, in this worth¬ 
less worldly existence, it is of the active nature. It attains 
the distresses of worldly existence. The individual soul is 
enveloped and concealed by this Sakti. Hence it is called 
K^etrajSa '^'aklL 

40. O king, this is seen in all living beings in varying 
degrees. In lifeless ones, it is very little and in the immobile 

beings it exists a little more than that. 

41. In the reptiles, it is more than in the immobile 
beings. It is very powerful in birds. The deer arc more 
powerful than the birds and the beasts arc superior to the deer 

in their strength. 



580 


N^ada Pur&na 


42. Human beings are more powerful than beasts 
and men wield more power (among human beings). O king, 
superior to them are the Nagas, Gandharvas, Yak^s and 
other gods. 

43-44. Indra is the most powerful among Devas and 
superior to him is Prajapati. Hiranyagarbha is more powerful 
than he. O king, all these are his forms, since they are invested 
with his potency as though with the Ether. 

45« O highly intelligent one, the second unembodied 
form of the Brahman called V4nu is termed sat by the 
learned men. It is worthy of being meditated upon by the 
Yogins. 

46* O king, it is there that all these potencies are founded. 
These are not the real forms of Hari. It is another and very 
great. 

47. O lord of men, he assumes the forms of all potencies 
{Saktis) having the activities of Devas, animals and human 
beings in his own sports. 

48. His activities based on the ICarmans (of other beings) 
are for helpii^ the worlds. The activities of the incom* 
prehemible Being are pervasive and very benevolent. * 

49. O king, that form of the deity, the embodiment of 
the Universe must be meditated upon for the purification 
of the soul. It is destructive of all sins. 

50. Just as the fire with shooting flames in collaboration 
with the wind burns down heaps of dry grass and wood, so 
also Visnu, abiding in the minds of Yogins destroys all 
sins. 

51. (Defective) Hence, this potency is the first and fore¬ 
most of all potencies. The devotee shall keep it in the mind. If 
it is duly stabilised it should be known as one with pure charac¬ 
teristics (?) 

52. It is the auspicious support of the Atman that is 
present everywhere and is accompanied by the mind. It is 


* The reading should be and not as iu the 

printed text. 



11.47.53-65 


581 


beyond the three Hkavabhdt»Qnds (emotional conceptions). O 
king, it is conducive to the salvation of the Yogins. 

53. O tiger among men, all other supports of the 
mind, Devas and others with Karmans as their source of 
origin, are impure. 

54. (Defective) One who has no desire for any of these 
supports shall meditate on the embodied forin of the Lord. This 
is to be known as DhSrandi since the mind is concentraled 
there. 

55. O ruler of men, may it be heard of what nature 
should Hari’s form be. for being meditated upon. T^ere cannot 
be a DhdranH (retention) without a support. 

56-60. The form shall be—one with beautiful and df light¬ 
ed face; with the eyes lai^e like the petals of a lotus; fine 
checks with a wide and brilliant forehead; its earrings placed 
equally between ears and shoulders; the neck resembling a 
conch shell, with the chest marked with Srivatsn'f the three 
folds in the skin in the curved umbilical region and the belly 
<ippearing beautiful; Vi$pu maybe conceived as having eight 
long arms or four arms, his thighs large and symmetrical, hrm 
lotus-like hands and feel clad in pure yellow robes; bedecked 
in coronet, beautiful bracelets, armlets, etc. He is surrounded 
by a halo and is wielding the !§arhga bow, a a mace and 

a sword. He is to be meditated thus as the Brahman also. 

6L The Yogin shall identify himself with the deity, after 
concentrating his mind and meditate upon Visnu, O king, 
until the Dhdrana becomes firmly fixed therein. 

62. Whether the devotee is talking something or stand¬ 
ing by or is engaged in some voluntary activity, the retention 
{Dh&rand) does not vanish from the mind. In that case he 
should consider that (t.e. Dhdraj^i) as achieved. 

63. Thereafter, the sensible man shall meditate upon the 
Lord's form without Safikha^ Gaddy Cakroy ^rhga (bow), etc., but 
it is tranquil with the rosary in the hands. 

64. When this Dhdrand is more or less stabilised, one shall 
meditate upon the Lord's form without such ornamentj as 
coronet, bracelets, etc. 

65. Then the sensible man should mentally dwell on 



582 


Ndrada Purdna 


that single limb; and subsequently he shall become engrossed 
in the one (Lord) that has the limbs. 

66. At the perception of that form (there shall be) one 
obeisance and absence of desire for other objects. O king, his 
meditation is fulhlled by the six Adgas (of meditation). 

67. When his perception of the form of the deity 
without any fanciful conception becomes the outcome of 
mental meditation, it is called Samddhi. 

68. O king, in regard to the thing to be achieved i.e. 
the great Brahman, that which makes the achievement possible 
is VijHdna (perfect knowledge). That which is to be attained 
to is the Atman whose Rhdvandx have been dispelled. 

69. It is the perfect knowledge of the K,\etrajfla and the 
sense-organs therefore. After facilitating the achievement of 
the task of liberation, it has its purpose achieved and it 
recedes. 

70. Then the devotee shall achieve the emotional idem 
iJty with the great Atmnn^ he shall become nomdifferent from 
him. The difference is caused by the ignorance about him. 

71. When AjndnUy the cause of differentiation, is utterly 
dispelled who will agree to this that the Atman is different from 
the Prahman ? 

72. O Khandikya, tlius partly in detail and partly in 
brief, the Yoga has been recounted to you, since you have been 
asking me about it. What more can I do for you? 

Khdn^ikya said : 

73. The excellent nature of (he Yoga has been expound¬ 
ed by you. Everything has been done for me. Thanks to 
your instructions, the impurity in my mind has been entirely 
annihilated. 

74. What has been called by me as ‘Mine* is incorrect 
and not otherwise. Even by those who know what should be 
known, () king, it cannot be mentioned otherwise. 

75. The feelings ‘T and ‘My* are the outcome of 
Avidyd so also their utterance. The truth which is inexpressible 
is beyond the scope of words. 

76. O Kesidhvaja, go, for the atiammeni of further 
welfare. Everything has been done for me by you since the 



ri.47.77-82 


583 


unchanging Yoga devoted to salvation Im been explained 
to me. 

Sanandfina said : 

77. Thereafter, having been worshipped duly by 
Khandihya, king Kesidhvaja returned to his capital duly 
worshipped by Kha^dikya, O Brahmana. 

78. Khan;likya made his son the king. With his miiid^ 
dedicated to Kisna, he went to Viiala for the achievement of 
mastery over Yoga. 

79. He was endowed with the qualities of Tama^ etc. He 
was solely engrossed in deep meditation. The king attained 
dissolution by merging himself into the pure brahman called 
Visnu. 

80. For the sake of liberation and eager to dispel his 
Karmans, he enjoyed the sensual ple<isures and performed holy 
rites without any desire in view. 

81. O sage, by means of auspicious enjoyment of plea¬ 
sures, he wiped off all sins and became free from impurities. 
He attained Siddhi that utterly quelled the three kinds of Tspa 
(misery). 

82. Thus everything that you had asked me has been 
recounted to you. What else shall I narrate to you for dispell* 
ifu; the three types of distress? 



CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 


1. W. 2 fTof this Puran* are the sAxne as in the VP. VI. 7 26 ff- 

2. For 6 a of the NP: dtmcbhioam tsaa W brahmo^hydpayiath tuanah, 
VP {ibU) 30a reads .. najiAtrenaik tad brohma dhydtwn muftim and changes the 
meaning crampletely. For that Brahman attracts to itself the sage who 
meditates upon it and who is oT the same nature, as the magnet attracts the 
irun. 

3. NP 10a reads ddfyaU n4sya mArmam instead of <A^ya mdnasam in VP 
[ibid) 34a. But this na in the NP. makes the verse self-contradictory. Why 
iftould a yogi whose mind is not de6ned due to oUitacles require many 
more btrUis ? The reading ediya for nSsya in the VP means : '^Should the 
yogin's mind be vitiated by defects*’ etc. 

4. For dlambanavct stk&Um of the NP Ifia. VP (ibid) 42a reads 
dianba/tavatah JthdUtn (while the Yogi practises) his support [dlambana) is the 
gross form ( Hirafiagarbha) of the Lord. 



CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 


Tki stofy of Bhataia 

Ndrada said : 

l« O blessed one, the antidote for the three typ>es of 
distress has been heard by me. Still my uiind is contused. It 
does not attain proper siabilicy, easily. 

2. O Brahmai^a, how can the sinful transgression against 
one's own self committed by wicked men, be tolerated by men? 
O bcstower of honour, recount it to me. 

Sxita said : 

3. On hearing what has been spoken by Narada, 
Sunandana, the son of Brahma, remembered the activities of 
Bharaia. With great delight he said : 

Sanandana said : 

4. In this context, I shall tell you the ancient traditional 
story on hearing which your confused mind shall attain 
great stability. 

5. O excellent sage, formerly, there was a king named 
Bharata. He was the son of ift^bha. This sub*continent is 
named Bharatakhand^ after him. 

6. After attaining the kingdom belonging to his father 
and grandfather in due succession, he protected it righteously. 
He delighted the subjects like their father. 

7. He performed various kinds of sacrifices and wor* 
shipped Lord Vis^u, the embodiment of all Devas. He meditated 
upon him with the mind centering round him in the course of 
carrying out different activities. 

8. He procreated sons. He was unattached to sensuous 
objects. The learned king left the kingdom and went to the 
hermitage of Pula.stya and Pulaha. 

9* 10a. He went to the great holy centre Salagrama 
frequented by people desirous of liberation. O sage, he became 
an ascetic and performed the propitiation of Vi^nu with great 



586 


Narada Purd^a 


devotion, rendering servicc(un(o the Lord) with things obtained 
by him. 

I0b*l la. O Narada, every day in the morning he plunged 
into the pure clear water and prayed to the Sun with devotion 
muttering (he Supreme syllable expressive of the Brahman (i.e. 
Qih or Gayatrl). 

1 Ib-13a. He then returned to the hermitage. With great 
purity and devotional piety, he worshipped Vasudeva the Lord 
of the universe with the matcriak of worship such as sacrificial 
twigs, Kusa grass, clay, etc. brought by himself. He worshipp* 
cd with fruits, flowers, leaves ofTulasi and clear water. 

13b-14a. On one occasion, that highly blessed king 
took his ablution in the River Cakra. With great purity and 
attention he stayed in the water performing Japa for three 
MuhMas. 

14b«15a. O Brahmana, a thirsty hind who was about to 
be delivered of a young one, came to the bank from the forest, 
in order to drink water. 

15b*16a. As she had almost completed drinking the 
water, there arose the great roaring sound of a lion which was 
frightful to all living beings. 

16b-17a. On hearing the roaring sound of the lion, the 
hind leapt to Uic bank of the river. While she was climbing the 
steep side of ihe bank, the foetus fell down into the river. 

17b*18a. Bharata caught hold of the fawn tliat fell off 
from its mother's womb and was carried away l>y the forceful 
current and the waves of the river. 

18b-19a. O leading sage, due to the misery on account 
of the fall of the foetus and the steep ascent, that hind fell down 
dead. 

19b-22. On seeing the hind dead in the tragic circum¬ 
stances, the royal saint took up the fawn and brought it to his 
hermitage. The king nurtured the young one of the hind day 
by day. O sage, nourished by him, it duly grew up. At first 
the fawn used to graze at the outskirts of the hermitage. Then 
it went to the forest, it went far into the forest but, afraid of 
tigers, it returned soon. After some time it used to go very 
far into the forest in the morning and return to the hermitage 
in the evening. 



11.68.23-34 


587 


23-24a. Bharata kept it inside the hut in the hermitage 
during nights. Hb mind became highly involved with the 
deer-fawn that used to be near him or away from him by 
turns. O sage, hb mind was not so much drawn towards 
Visnu. 

24b-25a. Remember that he had abandoned hb kingdom 
and even sons; that he had eschewed all connections with hb 
kinsmen. Still he had great affection (feeling of kinship) 
with the fawn. 

25b-26. When the fawn was away from the hermitage 
for a long time^ hb mind was agitated by various doubts such 
as, **Ha$it been devoured by the wolves?** ‘‘Have tigers seized 
upon it ?** ^'Has it been struck down by the lion?*’ When the 
fawn was by his side hb face was bright with delight and love. 

27. As hb mind was attracted by the feelings of ^my* 
ness*, hb S<ifnAdhis (trances and concentration) l>ecame disturb¬ 
ed often. After some time the king died. 

28. At the time of passing away, he was looking at the 
fawn. Like a father by the son, he was looked at by the fawn 
with tears in its eyes. 

29. O sage, since hb mental fancy was of that nature, 
he was bom as a deer—O excellent Brahmana. Since he had 
the faculty of remembering previous births, he became 
unenamoured of worldly existence. 

30. He left off hb mother (i.e. the mind) and went to 
Salagrama. He nourished himself by means of dry leaves and 
grass. 

31. Thus he expiated for the evil action that had been 
the cause of his birth as a fawn. Having left off his body, he 
was bom again as a Brahmana who had the faculty of remember¬ 
ing hb previous births. 

32. He was born in a leading, pure family of Yogins of 
good conduct. He was richly endowed with all knowledge. He 
was conversant with all principles and topics in the scriptuml 
texu. 

33-34. That excellent sage perceived hb own Atman 
beyond Ptakfti, O great sage, thanks to the knowledge of 
Atman that he had acquired, that highly intelligent one saw 
Devas and others, nay, all livii^ beings, without any 



588 


NSrada Purd^a 


difference. He was invested with the sacred thread, but he did 
not repeat the Vedic text as uttered by his preceptor. 

35. He did not observe holy rites. He did not learn 
scriptural texts. Wlien he was addressed many times, he made 
some stupid irrational statement. 

36. Even that speech lacked in qualities of cultural 
rehnement. It was often uttered in vulgar rustic language. O 
sage, accursed in body, he was always clad in dirty clothes. 

37*40. Saliva oozed from the interstices of his teeth. He 
was always harassed by citizens. Hr used to remember the 
words of Hirariyagarbha (or Brahma*) as follows: ^‘Excess of 
respect affects the prosperity of Yoga. A Yogin dishonoured by 
the people achieves Yogic power. Hence, a Yogin should per¬ 
form holy rites of good men without defiling them. He should 
so perform them that the people should begin to disrespect him 
and avoid associating with him.’* The highly intelligent one 
thus thought of the words ofHirapyagarbha, and showed him¬ 
self to the public as one with sluggish features and of unsound 
mind. He regularly ate cakes made of Kuhnasa grain, vege¬ 
tables and fruits from the forests. 

41-42a. He ate whatever he got and whenever it happened. 
When his father passed away, he was compelled to work in the 
fields by his brothers, nephews and other kinsmen. 

42b-43a. All his limbs became stout, though he was fed 
on rotten food. He became a sli^gish worker. With food for 
his wages, he helped the whole world. 

43b-44a. (On seeing) him so unrefined but having the 
features and activities of a Brahmana, a charioteer of the 
Sauvira' king considered him worthy of being taken as an 
unpaid labourer. 

44b-45a. O Brahmana, that king was seated in a palan¬ 
quin. He was thinking of going to the excellent hermitage of 
sage Kapila on the banks of Iksumatl river.^ 

43b-4€. He wanted to ask the great sage Kapila who 
was well learned in the topic of virtues leading to salvation, as 
follows—What is it that is conducive to the welfare of men in this 

* An ancient teacher of Yoga-tttira. 

]. Variouily identified with Eder (N. Gujarat), Upper Sindh, Multan 
(Alberuni)‘—N.L.De. accepts thelut^De, p. iSS. 



11.48,47-56 


589 


world which b mostly full of mbcrie^.** On being urged by the 
words of the charioteer^ he carried his palanquin. 

47. O Brahmana> he^ the sole receptacle of all know* 
ledge, was taken as an unpaid labourer. He was one among 
other men who too were unpaid labourers. 

48. Endowed with the faculty of remembering events of 
past lives, he bore the palanquin as he was desirous of wiping 
off his sins. He, the most excellent one among the intelligent 
men, slowly walked ahead gazing at the yoke of the palanquin. 

49-50d. The other bearers walked quickly. On observ- 
ing the irregular movement of the palanquin, the king said— 
palanquin-bearers I What is this ? Go ahead at even step/' 
50b-51. Again the movement of the palanquin was 
irregular. The king laughed and asked them, ^Vhatis this? You 
are moving otherwise!** When (he king (mildly rebuked) them 
many times, the palanquin^bcarerssaid—**This fellow dors not 
thus move quickly.*’ 

Tfu king said: 

52. ‘^Are you tired? You have borne the palanquin only 
for a short distance. Arc you not used to strenuous work? Aren’t 
you seen a bulky fellow?'* 

The Bfdhmana said: 

53. am not stout. Your palanquin has not been borne 
by me. I am not tired. 1 have no fatigue or trouble. O lord 
of the earth, the bearer is another one.** 

The king said: 

54. *^You are actually seen to be stout. I'he palanquin 
b still above you. Fatigue in carrying a load occurs to embo¬ 
died beings (as they have to exert and carry the load). 

The Brdhmana said: 

55. ‘‘O king, tell me what you have directly perceived. 
The qualifications of strong or weak may be added afterwaids. 

56. Thb b a false statement—“The palanquin b borne 
by you. The palanquin b still above you.*' All thb b false, O 
Sir, listen to my words now. 



590 


Nitrada Purdna 


57. The two feet arc on the ground. The shanks 
rest on the pair effect. The chiglu are on the pair of shanks. 
The belly has the support of the pair of thighs and hips. 

5B. The chest, the arms and the shouiders rest on the 
belly. This palanquin is supported by the shoulders. How can 
it be said that I am the support ? 

59. The body designated as *you’ is stationed within 
the palanquin. •‘You arc there. I am here’*. This is also a 
wrongly put statement. 

60. O king, you, I , and the others are to be borne 
by the elements; the whole class of livir^ beings (and the 
elements) are fallen in the current of the 

61. O Lord of the earth, these— sattva and other Guf^as 
are subject to the control of Kamans. The Karmon accumulated 
due to ignorance is present in all creatures 

62. The Aimnn is pure, imperishable and quiescent. It is 
devoid of Gutiias. It is beyond Prakrti. The Atman alone abides 
in all creatures but he has no increase (falne.ss) or decrease 
(slimness). 

63. O king, when there is neither increase nor decrease, 
it was childish ignorance (that prompted you to say I am 
stout). On what basis was it uttered by you ? 

64*66. (Defective) This palanquin rests equally on the 
ground pair of feet, shanks, thighs, hips, belly and other things 
as well as on the shoulders. When the burden is equal, O king, 
the palanquin is not borne by you or the other creatures alone. 
A great burden originating from mountains, trees or houses nay, 
from tlie whole eartli has to be borne by you and by me. As 
the Purusa has distinctness (separate existence) from the sense 
organs which are the products of Prakrti what heavy load is to 
be borne by me, O King. O King the Purusa is separated 
from the sense organs produced from Prakrti [?] 

67. The material (hat Cimstitules this palanpuin is a 
conglomeration of all elements, grown large equally in regard 
to you, me or the entire world. 

Sanandanasaid: 

68. After saying this the Brahmanawho was bearing the 



11.48.69-77 


591 


palanquin became silent. Thereupon the king hurriedly got 
down to the ground and touched his feet. 

The King saxd\~ 

69. O Brahmin, be pleased with me. Leave oiT the 
palanquin. May it be revealed to me who you are, in the guise 
of a low and degraded man. 

70. I am eager to serve you. O learned one, may every¬ 
thing be mentioned by you, vi;;^who you arc, whose son you 
are and what the reason for coming here is ! 

The Brahmin said\^ 

71*73. May it be heard, O king. It cannot he explained 
who 1 am. Everywhere the action of arrival is pi oiupicd by 
some utility [enjoyment of pleasures]. The enjoyment of 
pleasures and the experience of miseries is accomplished through 
the body, etc. \ creature attains the body, etc. in order to ex¬ 
perience the outcome of Dharma and Adharma, O king, 
everywhere, in the case of every creature the reason is 
Uliarma or Adharma. Hence, how is it that the reason is being 
asked ? 

The king said \— 

74. There is no doubt in this that Uharma or 
Adharma is the cause of all effects. The transmigration 
from one body to another is for experiencing pleasure or 
pain. 

75. /Vs to your statement that it cannot be said who 
am I in regard to the Atman, I wish to state as follows. 

76. O brahmin, How is it that it is not possible to say 
“I am he who exists. O twice-born, the word Akam (I) 
refers to the Atman and not to the body** 

The Brahmin said'.— 

77. The word Aham refers to the body and not to 
the Atman. The mistaken identity of the .^ttnan with the 

* For dofdya in thU atiU the next verse read dihAya. 



592 ydrada Furi^a 

non-Atman may be due to the secondary sense of the word 
(or the effect of hearing). 

7d«79. It is the tongue, teeth, lips and palate, O 
king that say Aham [IJ. All of them must be meant by 
Aham [I] since ail of them have been the cause of 
utterance. For what purpose does the tongue say of its own 
accord the word Nor it is c<^ent to say aham means ‘I 
am the torque, I am the speech’. Is tJic utterance am'’ 
made through proper cause? Still it is not correct to say that 
I am the speech [?] 

80. O king, the physical body characierised by the head, 
hands, etc. is separate from the Purusa. Hence, where shall I 
fix the term Aham ? 

81. If there be any other person than I, O excellent 
king, I am not the body even If others wish to speak of it. 

82. When, only one Purusa is present in all bodies it. 
is futile to say, “Who arc you?’ ’Who am 1’, etc. 

83. ‘'You arc the king.” “This is the palanquin.” “We 
arc the bearers going ahead.” “This is your world”. O king, it is 
not the reality to say thus. 

84. A log of wood is obtained from a tree. From that 
this palanquin is fashioned out—this palanquin occupied by you. 
O king, is it termed as a tree or a log of wood? 

85. The people do not say, “The great king is seated on 
the tree” when you are riding in the palanquin nor do they say 
that you are sitting on a log of wood. 

86. The palanquin and the mass of log—each has its 
name and situation. O excellent king, may the palanquin that 
gives you delight be pondered over by you. 

87. Similarly, the separate nature of the umbrella from 
the ribs may be considered. Wherefrom is the umbrella born ?” 
This argument is applicable both to you and to me. 

88. Man, woman, cow, goat, horse, elephant, bird, tree 
etc—it should be known that these are the terms given to 
bodies in the world, the bodies caused by Karmans. 

89. The Being (Purufa) is neither a deva nor a man, 



11.48.90^95 


593 


nor an animal nor a tree. O king, these are different shapes of 
physical bodies originating from Karmans. 

90. O king, the object that is called a king in the world 
or the object that is called ^king^s soldier* or any other object 
is not true. It is sheer imagination. 

91. What is that object which perishes after sometime 
O king, what is the object that is evolved after transformation? 

92. You are the king for the whole world, son to your 
father, enemy to your enemy, husband to your queen, father to 
your son. O king what shall 1 say? Who are you ? 

93. Who arc you? This head? Or, does the head belong 
to you? Who are you? this belly? Or does the belly belong to 
you? O lord of the earth, arc you the foot, etc? Don’t they 
belong to you? 

94. You are separated from all limbs, O king, ponder 
carefully on the topic *Who am I ?* 

95. When the real situation is this, how can what should 
l>e evolved out of separate foot etc. be conceived as ‘By me’ 
‘I* etc, O king [?] 



CHAPTER FORTYNINE 


Exposition of the Virtuous Path to 
Libiration* 


Sanandana said : 

1. On hearing this speech, full of profound truth, the 
king respectfully bowed to him and submitted : 

The king submitted : 

2. X'enerable Sir, whaihas been authoritatively staled 
by you certainly contains the ultimate truth, but on hearing 
it, the functioning of my mind is as it were whirling. 

3. If this discriminative knowledge exists in remaining** 
beings, tliat which is superior to and beyond the ken o(Prakrti 
has been shown by you. 

4-5. But the statements : *'I do not bear the palanquin, 
the palanquin does not rest over me. The body whereby this 
palanquin is borne, is difierent from me. The propensity of 
creatures is due to influence the gunas (attributes) and it is 
urged by activities {/Carmans). (This being the case) what is there 
asinine (done by me) in it/’ This is what was spoken by you.f 

6. Oknowerofthe highest truth ! When such doctrines 
are heard by me, my mind which has become anxious to know 
the ultimate truth gets agitated and perplexed. 

7. Even at the outset, I was out to go to the sage Kapila, 
O highly fortunate Brahmana, to enquire of him about the 
doubt “What is the most excellent thing in this 


* This chapter is a ccjmbifiation of chapters 14, 15 and 16 ol the II 
AffiJa of VP. (Viso^ Purapa). 

** VP reads : yed for jNiditit4fu ol theNP. VP. means: The 

discrimhiative knowledge existing In o\\ creatures is the Brahma (the great 
principle) itieif, beyond the ken of Pfokrti (I have no doubt about it.) 
t VP. (Ibid) V. 7, Satfud m$ **Please explain to me**. 



II.49.8.17a 


595 


8. But in the meanwhile such a statement has been made 
by you as makes my mind rush to you, for getting acquainted 
with the great objective in life. 

9. It is reported that verily, the sage Kapila is the ray 
(portion) ofLoitl Visnu, the pervader (embodiment) of all 
beings, who has incarnated for the dissipation of the delusion 
of the world. 

10. Me*thinks really it is the venerable Lord Kapila 
himself, who with a desire for our welfare, has manifested 
himself to me in what has been spoken to me. 

H. O twice-born one ! Your honour is the veritable 
ocean with billows of all divine wisdom. Be pleased to explain 
to me what is the excelieninmost welfare for the dissipation of 
my delusion. 

The lirdhmana replied : 

12. You arc asking again what is a welfare ? You are 
asking this in the real sense of the term-* O king, all ultimate 
truths arc certainly conducive to welfare.** 

13. To a person who. after propitiating deities, covets 
for wealth and properly, desires to have sons or a kingdom, 
everyone of these is respectively the highest good. 

14-15a. The association of the great Atman of a person 
possessing discrimination b an excellence conducive to welfare. 
Excellent is the performance of sacrifice (and other rites) the 
fruit of which is obtaining the pleasures in the heaven. But the 
real excellent welfare lies in not coveting its fruit. 

15b-16a. There arc hundred and thousand types of 
welfares of this kind, but these are not the real objects in life. 
Listen from me what b the uliimate truth or welfare. 

16b-17a. If wealth be the ultimate reality, why is it 
spent for the sake of Dharma? Or why b it utilised for obtaining 
desired objects ? 


* VP. (11. 14.12A] retdt Pofmdrtham mt predmi for param^ihenc. 

** VP. (ibid) 12V) reads Srejf^msyiaparam^thdni. The VP. verse means the 
opposite of the NP. verse above : **0 king what are yoj again enquiring 
about—What is the most excellent thing or the ultimate truth? All such kinds 
of welfare are not the ultimate truths. 



596 


Xdrad<i Purdna 


17b 18a. If a son be the highest object (worth coveting] 
then, O king, he himself becomes the highest object of another 
(i.e. of his father) and his father thus being the son of 
another (viz. that of his father), becomes the greatest object 
of another person. 

18b-19a. Hence, in the world of mobile and immobile 
beings, the son (who is the product of his father) cannot be 
the highest object. Or, otherwise, the products of all causes would 
be the highest covetablc objects. 

19b-20a. If the acquisition ofa kingdom (and such other 
forms of prosperities) in this world be the highest object, the 
Paramartha sometimes becomes accomplished only to disappear 
or to be destroyed later on (as the highest objective is never 
thus lost, acquisition of kingdom cannot be with Paromdrtha — 
the highest object.) 

2]b-22a. If in your opinion, the performance of sacri¬ 
fices accomplished with the mantras of the ftg, Tajur and Sdma 
Vedasy be the highest object in life, may my say in the matter 
be listened to. 

22b'23a. () king! The thing that is the product of the 
earth as its cause, partakes of the nature of its cause (i.e. 
becomes of tlic same material as its cause) and becomes made 
of clay. 

23b-24a. In the same maimer, the act (of sacrifice), the 
performance of which is accomplished with perishable objects 
like sacrificial sticks, clarified butter, Kuia grass and such other 
things, is bound to be temporary and perishable. 

24b-25a. But the ultimate truth (or the highest objective 
in life) is considered as imperishable by all the (spiritually) 
wise. There is absolutely no doubt that (the life in heaven, etc.) 
which ha.s been attained by using perishable objects is certainly 
transient and perishable. 

25b-26a. If it be iny (your*) view chat a religious 
act performed without the desire of getting its fruit in recom¬ 
pense, is the real paramartha (the highest object or the truth), 


* In the context, this (fata) is the correct reading. 



IL49.26b'32a 


597 


(it is wrong for)»it is only ihc means of Liberation (from Sarhsdra 
but the paramdrtka is never the means (but the end). 

26b-27a. If meditation over the soul (distinguishing it 
as different from the body) be called the highest tnith, it (that 
meditation) is for the establishment of the discrimination 
between the soul and the non^soul. But paramdrtha {the highest 
truth) is above such distinctions and differences* (Hence» such 
a meditation cannot be paramirtha), 

27b*28a. If the merging of paramdrtha* (rather paramdtman 
the Supreme Soul) and the individual soul U desired (accepted) 
as the highest truth, it is illusory and false, for one (different 
category or) matter cannot be substantially and completely 
merged with another kind of matter. (If the individual soul 
and the Supreme soul are essentially different, they can never 
merge. But the fact of the matter is that they are really one. 
And the highest Truth is the recognition of their essential one¬ 
ness and not their combination or (merging). 

28b-29a. Hence, O king, there is no doubt that all these 
are (different kinds of) welfares (but they are not the ultimate 
objectives—. Listen from me, in brief, what is the 
highest objective or the truth. 

29b'31a. O king! It is the soul (that is the ultimate 
end or the truth). It is one, all-pervading, uniform, pure, 
attributeless, transcendental to Prakfti, devoid of birth, growth, 
etc., omnipresent, embodiment of knowledge, never related or 
un-relatable with unrealities like name, form, etc. in the past, 
present or the future. 

31b-32a. The specific knowledge that He (i.c. the soul) 
is essentially one, though abiding in one’s own body as 


* This is a misprint for Fttramaitnan, for there the repetition of 
Paramdrtha in (he same line in the NP. which is meaningless. The line in 
NP is as follows : 

Paramdrthatnuiiur yogah pantniartha itiivau I 
VP. reads: 

ParamAtmdimanor jrQgah patamarUt t ttUjfOU / 

I follow the reading in the VP. 



598 


N&fdiia Pvfdna 


well zs that of others, is the tnie knowledge. He who knows 
It* has the real knowledge. 

32b*33. The difTusive wind, though one and pervades 
the whole of the flute, is distinguished as §a4jd and other notes 
of the musical scale, when it passes through the dilTerent per¬ 
forations (of the flute), the supreme soul, though one, has 
manifold forms arising as a consequence, of different external 
acts* 

34*35a. He assumes** different forms like gods, etc., but 
he is not of such behaviour. Listen here, O king, what happened 
formerly and what was sung by Rbhu who wanted to 
awake (i.e. impart) enlightenment in the Brahma^a Nidagha. 

35b-36. Rbhu was the son of the Supreme god Brahma. 
He was innately endowed with the knowledge of true spiritual 
wisdom* He had formerly a disciple (called) Nidagha, the son 
of Pulastya. 

37*38a. With extreme delight, he imparted to him the 
whole of spiritual wisdom. Although he acquired the knowledge 
of reality, he had no inclination towards non-duality. Rbhu 
surmised this about Nidagha, O king.^ 

38b. O warrior ! It is reported that there was a city 
called Nagara (VP. Viranagara) on the bank of the river 
Devik^ !§ 

39-40a. It was founded by Pulastya and was prosperous 
and very beautiful. O excellent kiugi in the beautiful grove 
adjoining the city, dwelt an expert in Yoga named Nidagha 
who formerly became his (Rbhu*s) disciple. 


* VP. reads : Ov^itin^'taiky^dafiinaf^ / He who secs the duality (in the 
Soul and in the non-soul or in the individual and Supreme soul) hai no 
correct vision (of the true knowledge). 

*• This line in the NP. via. 

dtvddibhtdam adhjr^fU adstyfiidcarafto hi uik . 
ii defective. Thi original line in the VP. {ibtd) v. 33 is : 

dtvddibhtdi*p<idhvesle ndstvivdpcrafft hi S4k / 

When the difference in the investing form such u that of god, eic., Is lost, 
there ji then no distinction. 

{ Here ends cb. 14 in the VP. II. 

$ The river Decg. a tributary of the Ravi. De, p. 55. 



n.49.40b-51a 


599 


40b-41a. After a lapse of one thousand divine years, 
Rbhu went to his city (Viranagara) with the intention of see* 
Ing his disciple. 

4Ib*42a. When the (daily) sacriflcc to Viivedevas was 
over and he (Nidagha) was standing at the door (waiting for 
a guest), he (9>bhu) was seen by Nidagha who conducted him 
to his house. 

42b-43a. After washing his hands and feet and when he 
was (comfortably) seated, Nidagha respectfully requested : O 
excellent Brahmana, please take food. 

fibhu said : 

43b'44a. O prominent Brahmana ! If 1 am to partake 
of food in your house, please mention the articles of food (to be 
served). I never like to take bad food. 

Nidagha replied : 

44b-45a. O excellent Brahmana, you may partake of 
whatever food you like such as sektu (barley), gruel, fried 
cakes of meal, available in my house. 

(tbhu said : 

45b*46a. These are bad food-stulfs. Please give me such 
sweet food such as rice boiled with sugar, wheat, flour cakes 

milk*pudding» sugar-cane juice (and such sweet 

dishes). 

Niddgka said to his wife : 

46b-47a. O mistress of the house ! Prepare a sweet 
dish from whatever is the most delicious and sweet edible in 
the house. 

47b-48a. When thus instructed, his wife, in compliance 
of her husband’s commands, prepared sweet and delicious 
dishes. 

48b-49a. Nidagha who stood before him till the great 
sage had partaken of the sweet dishes, bowed him respectfully 
and enquired : 

49b-51a. Are you well satisfied with the food? Has 
your mind felt contentment from the food partaken by you? 



600 


Mdrada Pur&na 


What is the place of your residence? Where do you propose 
to go? Be pleased to tell us from which place you have come? 

Phhu replied : 

51b*52a. O Brahmana ! When a hungry person takes 
food, he docs feel satisfied. How can I feel satisfaction, when 
I had no hunger ? How is it that you ask me about it? 

52b*53. When the earthen element in the body is 
parched by the fire (element), hunger b engendered. Thirst is 
produced among men, when the moisture of the body is absorb¬ 
ed by the gastric fire. Hunger and thirst are the functions 
of the body with which I am not concerned. 

54a. As there is no possibility of hunger (affecting me), 
I am ever satisfied. 

54b-55a* Pleasure and satisfaction of the mind are the 
faculties of CiiiQ (mind), O Brahmana. These are in no way 
related to the Puru^a (soul). 

55b-56. As to your three queries : ‘^Where is your 
residence? Whither you go, or whence have you come?’* Please 
listen to me. PurufQ is omnipresent and pervades everything like 
the sky. 

57. Hence is the quciy ‘Whence’, ‘Where’, ‘Whither’ 
about the puru^a meaningful and rational ? I am neither going, 
nor coming, nor is my dwelling place in any place. 

58a. Nor you are you; nor others others, nor I I. 

58b*59a. If you are curious what explanation I ofTer for 
the distinction I made between sweetened and unsweetened 
food, listen to what I say, O excellcnt-most Brahmana. 

39b*60. What is sweet becomes unsweet when it causes 
satiation and repulsion (when overeaten) and what is not 
sweet tastes sweet when a person (out of hunger) imagines it 
to be so. Does such a food exist there, which at first, in the 
middle and in the end is equally tasty? 

61. Just as a house built of earth becomes reinforced 
when plastered with clay, similarly this body which is made of 
earth becomes strengthened with the particles of the earth 
which constitute articles of food. 

62. Barley, wheat, pube, butter, oil, milk, curds, raw 
sugar, fhtjt and the like consist of atoms of earth. 



II.49.63-7I 


601 


63. Hence, having realised that it is the mind which 
decides what is sweet and non^sweet, one should be equanimous 
in outlook with the notion of identity and this serene mind 
with this cfTcci of identity is the only means of liberation. 

64. * O king, having heard his (Kbhu's) speech imply¬ 
ing the essence of the ultimate tnith, the highly fortunate 
Nidagha fell at his feet and spoke the following words : 

65. Be gracious unto me, O Brahinana, please let it tie 
disclosed who you arc that have come for my good, as by listen- 
ing to your words, my delusion has been dispelled. 

^bhu rtplud : 

66. I am l^bhu, your spiritual preceptor who have come 
here to impart to you spiritual wisdom, O BrAhtnana ! I shall 
communicate to you enlightenment about ihc highest truth. 

67. Know that the whole universe is only one. it is of 
undivided, entire nature of the Supreme spirit dcsignaied as 
Vasudeva. 

The Bfdkmana said 

68. “So be it,’* said Nidagha. Then being worshipped 
with fervent devotion and due prostration at liis feet by Nidagha, 
the venerable Lord (Rbhn) went his wayj 

69| Again after the expiration of another (divine) 
millenium, the spiritual preceptor (Kbhu) came lo the same 
city (Viranagara) for imparling spiritual knowledge to Nidagha, 
O Lord of the people. 

70-71. Then he saw sage Nidagha on the outskirts of 
the city. While a king escorted with a large army and atten¬ 
dants was entering the city, his disciple Nidagha was standing 
far afar, avoiding the crowd. His throat was parched with 
hunger, and he was returning from the forest with sacred sacri¬ 
ficial sticks (fuel) and kusa grass. 


* Ai VP. stales vv. 63 & 64 are spoken by the BrShmana. 

{ Here ends ch. 15 of the VP. II. 

t This is verse no. I of ch. 16 of the VP. {iM) and it is preceded by 
(BrdAmefM uvdeo). 



602 


Ndrada Pur&fjia 


72. Seeing Nidagha there Rbhu approached him (and 
finding that he was not recognized by Nidagha) saluted him 
and asked him, ^*Why are you standing here in such a lonely 
place, O Brahmana?” 

Nidagha replied : 

73. O Brahma na! There is such a huge crowd of 
people, as this king is desirous of enlcriug this beautiful town. 
Hence I am standing here. 

^bhu asked : 

74. O excellent Brahmana ! I believe you to be well 
informed. Please tell me which is the king here and who are 
the other persons ? 

Nid&gka replied : 

75. He who is riding the stalely elephant that is in rut 
and huge like a mountain peak, is the king and the others are 
his attendants. 

Pbhu said ; 

76. Both the king and (he elephant are seen by me 
simultaneously. But you have seen them separately with their 
special features.* 

77. Explain to me, therefore, what is the difference 
between them, as I wish to know which is the elephant here 
and who is the king, O highly fortunate one. 

^iddgha replied : 

78. That which is under is the elephant and he who is 
above it (the elephant) is the king. O Brahmana, do you 
not know the relation between that which is borne and that 
which bears. 

^bku requested : 

79. O Brahmana I Please enlighten me so that 1 can 


* NP reads nimfefepa for VP ns tdhfefie **wilhout specific characteristics 
disiinguishing them**. 



II.49.8(W}7 


603 


understand what is that which is called the underntath (the lower 
section) and what is it that is above (the upper section). 

The Brdhmana narrated : 

80. As soon as he spoke this, Nidagha jumped upon 
Rbhu and said ; Please listen to my reply to what you are 
enquiring about. 

81. I am above like the king and you are underneath 
like an elephant. This practical demonstration is given by 
me for your understanding, O Brahmana. 

^bhu asked \ 

82. O excellent Brahmana! If you are sitting as if you 
are a king and if 1 am the elephant, please let me know which 
of us is you and which is I. 

The Brdhmaiia said : 

83. As soon as rCidagha heard these words, he instantly 
bowed down to his feet and said. Venerable Sir, you are Rbhu, 
my spiritual preceptor. 

84. The mind of no other person is so much consecrated 
by the concept of non*duality as that of my spiritual precep¬ 
tor. I, therefore, presume that you arc my preceptor who have 
come to me for imparting instruction. 

Rbhu replied : 

83. Due to the service rendered by you previously and 
out of deep love, your teacher called Rbhu has come to impart 
him spiritual instruction. 

86. O highly intelligent one! The entire range of the 
philosophy of non*dualism which is the epitome of the highest 
truth—the essence of which is the non^duality of all—has been 
succinctly communicated to you. 

The Brahmana said : 

87. After saying this, the preceptor Rbhu imparted to 
him the lore, (the non-dualiscic philosophy). Impressed by 
that advice, Nidagha became devoted to non^lualistic 
philosophy. 



604 


N&raia Pur&na 


88. He saw all creatures as being non-distinct from his 
Atman. And thus (in due course) the Brahmana got the 
highest liberation into the form of the Brahman. 

89. In the same way, O knowcr of the dkarma you also 
be equal to your friends and enemies. Acquiring the knowledge 
of the soul, identify yourself with the soul who is all pervading. 

90. Just as the sky, though one, appears diversihed as 
white, blue, etc., so is the soul though one, looked upon as 
different by persons with erroneous visions. 

91. That one which abides here in all things is the 
Immutable Vi^nu. There is none other than He. He is I, you 
and all others. He is the embodiment of the Universe. Give up 
the error of differentia cion. 

Sanandann said : 

92. 7'he king when thus enlightened, became truthful 
of vision, eschewed the notion of distinct existence. While the 
Brahmana, who, due to the recollection of his previous births, 
had obtained the perfect knowledge, and in this very life, 
attained Emancipation (from Sarhsira and had not to take 
another birth). 

93. O prominent sage ! The highest truth pertaining to 
the soul which has been elucidated to you is ellicacious to grant 
Liberation to Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaiiyas who ever 
listen to it. 

94. I have explained to you as and what has been asked 
by you, O Brahmana! This is the pure knowledge about the 
Brahman, What else shall I explain to you ? 



CHAPTER FIFTY 


Ttu arrangiifunt of noUs and syllables 

SQia said ; 

1. Oil hearing these words of Sanandana, sage Narada 
spoke to his brother Sanandana* as though not fully satisfied. 

J^drada said \ 

2. Venerable Sir ! Everything of whatever has been 
asked by me, has been narrated by your worship. But despite 
hearing the stories of Hari repeatedly^ my mind docs not feel 
satisfied. 

3. It is heard that Suka, the son of Vy&sa, was a great 
knower of Dliarma. He became disgusted (with the world) 
both internally and externally. He attained very great Siddhi 
(spiritual accomplishment). 

4. O Brahniana, without the service rendered to the 
great ones, no man can gain perfect knowledge. How did, then, 
the infant son of Vyasa attain perfect knowledge ? 

5. I am eagerly listening. Kindly recount to me the 
secret of his birth as well as his activities. O highly blessed 
one, you are the knower of the scripture on salvation. 

Sanandana said : 

6. O Brahman a, listen. I shall narrate to you the 
origin of Suka succinctly. O sage, on hearing it, a man 
becomes the knower of reality of the Brahman. 

7. It is not through the ageing years or greying hairs, 
riches or kinsmen that the sages performed their Dharma (and 
gained esteem). A person who is AnOedna (so well-verscd in 
the Vedas and their Angas that he can both repeat them and 
teach them) is a great man unto us. 

Ndrada said : 

8. O bestower of honour, O Brahma^, how does a 

person become an Please narrate tome that achieve¬ 

ment. I am eager to hear of it. 



N&rada Purdna 


606 

SaMndaM said : 

9. O Narada, listen. I shall recount to you the charac¬ 
teristics of an An^kdna. On knowing them» a man becomes well 
conversant with the Vedas along with their(ancillary 
subjects.). 

10. (the science dealing with laws of euphony, 
phonetics), Kalpa (treatise on rituals and ceremonials), Vydkarana 
(Grammar), Nirukta (Etymology and Semantics), Jyoiifa 
(Astronomy) and Chandas {Ptoiody )—the learned men know 
that these are the six ancillaries of the Veda. 

11. The ^gvtda^ the Tajwvtday the Sdmaveday and the 
AthaTvai>€da—x\\tst are the four Vedas mentioned while 
ascertaining Dharma. 

12. The excellent Brahmana who learns the Vedas along* 
with the Ahgas, from liis preceptor becomes an AnUcdna and 
not otherwise, even (by studying independently) through crores 
of book.*. 

Ndrada said : 

13. Mention the characteristics of ancillaries as well 
as those of the Vedas in details. Among us, O bestower of 
honour, you are the greatest scholar of these (Vedas) along* 
with their ahgas. 

Sanandana said \ 

14. O Brahmana, this unparalleled burden of problems 
has been placed on me by you. I shall, however, succinctly 
narrate the quintessence of these definitely. 

15. Svara (Note or Accent) is glorified as the most 
important item in the Siksd by sages and Brakmanas well-versed 
in the Vedas. I shall describe that to you. Listen. 

16. In the authentic treatise of the Science of Svasas 
(notes), it is enjoined that the Svardntaras (the type of the 
interval of the Spar as ^noxe%) viz. Arcikdy Gdtkika and Sdmika^ arc 
to be employed for specific purposes. 

17. The Svara with one interval is used in Sgveda 
mantraSi the Svara with two intervals is used in the Cdthds 
(religious Verses) and the Svara with three intervals is used in 



11.50.18-25 


607 


the Sdman hymns. One should know that this much is the 
interval in regard to the notes in the^). 

18. Those who make use of the adgas of the Sdmarty 
and rajus in the T'ajnas without the thorough knowledge of 

will be committing the blunder of Visvara (wrong 
intonation*). 

19. * A mantra uttered with a defective accent or deficient 
in Sifora and badly pronounced Keraa (syllable) does not convey 
the proper meaning. It is like a Vdgvajra (thunderbolt in the 
form of words). It injures the house-holder (on whose behalf 
the YajHa is performed) just as the compound word Indraiatru 
(the Bahuvrlhi compound was used instead of Genitive T&tpuru^a) 
when there was the wrong utterance of Soara.^ 

20. In the treatises (of ^ikfd) the bases of pronuncia¬ 
tion is the chest, throat and head. I'hese are called Savanas or 
Sdmans with half the intervals. 

21. Urds (chest) has seven Vivdrcs (expansions) so also 
the Kantha (throat) and the Siras (the head). You are 
incapable of clearly understanding. Such is the rule regarding 
the Exposition. 

22. The first Swa (viz. Artika) is to be used in chanting 

iht Kafha {Kdthaka) Sivhhitdy the Sathhitd called Taittira (i.e. the 
Taittiriya Sarhhiid of the Black Yajurveda), the and 

Sdmd^Veda SarH/n(ds. 

23. The Bgveda continues (i.e. is chanted) in the second 
(i.e. Gdtkikd) and the third (viz. Sdmika) Svarash%wcl\. From 
the material point of view, the Siuira is {classified as) Ueca (high 
pitched) Madhyamdy (the middle one) and Sanghdia (combined 
or a vowel with its consonant). 

.4. (Out of the seven Svaras) The Ahvarakas* use the 
third, first and KruH^ (loud, sixth) Svarasy the chanters of the 
Taittiriya Sarfthitd use the four Soaras beginning from the second 
and ending with the fifth. 

25. O great sage, the Sama-singers use (in chanting) 
the first, second, third, fourth, the fifth Mandra and the sixth 
{Kru^ia).^ 




Cf. Pdstiniya iikfi v. 52. and Mdradi/a fikid 1.1.5. 



608 


K^rada Purdjia 


26. The second and first of these svaras arc associated 
with * * * § Tdn(ly<^'Brdhmana and its school Bhdllavi. These are the 
Svaras of the chanters of Satapatka Brdhmana and the Vdjasanlya — 
the Sarhhitd ol the white Tajurvtda, 

27. These are especially laid down (for the above), 

although (ail) Svaras are common to all the Vedas. 

28. f I shall now explain to you the functions of the 
Svaras in the Sdnut^Vida. The ancillary (viz. Sdma^vtda Sikfd) 
though brief is profound in meaning. 

29. The characteristics ofTdna (the protracted tone or a 
key-tone in music), Bdga^ (a musical mode or order of sounds), 
Svaras, Grdmas (Gamuts or scale in music) and Mdrchands (or 
mQrchd^ melody**) which are sacred, sanctifying and meritori¬ 
ous, have been alreadya expounded to you. 

30a. The education of the twice-bom castes is charac¬ 
terised by the (study of) the (tgveda, Yajurveda and Sdmavtda. 

30b-3la. Svaras are seven, gtdmas are three and 
Mdrchands are twentyone. Tdnas are forty nine—all these 
constitute the svara^mandalc. 

31 b-32a. Sadja ( Sd), K^bha (Re), Gandhara {Ga), 
Madhyama (Ma)^ Pahcama (Pa), Dhaivata {Dha) and Nisada 
(JV’t) is the seventh Svara.^ 


* Ni^di-^h4llfivinau. Out of this is an obvious misprint for 

Tdvdi —^ In the Devanagari—script to and na are often mistaken for each 
other, BhdUavi ii the name of the school of that (Tiip^a) BrdhnavOf vide 
MW p. 754. 

X After completing (he general discussion about the use of svaras 
{Svara~saMra) in Vedas, the NP. deals with the in the 

$dma~veda. 

§ According (o Bharata (^^d^J^a*Sdttra) Bhairwn, Kauiika, Htndoldy Dfpaka, 
.^rl and Megha are the pramar> Bdgas, Other writers give diftereni natnes. 
Each Rdga has *'female consort*^ or aftaj^ipi and their union gives rise to 
several musical modes. 

** This is a gradual rise {ereseetida) and fall in tlie volume of •S’raroj. 

Kramnt stfardftdm saptdndm drohaSedt>arohaaatk sa murchstj/ucjiate. 

Quoied in Aptc— Sk. DU/. 

a. This is a misplaced quotation, for llie description ol this is not yet 
given, Many verses from this chapter are quotations from a common 
source (Pfdradiya Siksd) of (he NP. and Narada's Sangita Makaranda. 

h. h is hazardous for a translator to combine such lines as 30b & 31a 
as constituting one verse in (he absence of MS evidence but such a combi¬ 
nation gives (he complete seme syntactically. 

€. Cf. Bhaia(a--NS (Ni|ya«Sastra) 28.31. 



II.50.32b-43b 


609 


32b. Gramas (scales is Music) are said to be three, viz. 
Sa4ja^ Madhyama and Gdfidhdra. 

33. is born of the earth (Bhu-hka), Madhyama 

from Bhuvar-loka (the ether, the atmosphere just above the 
earth) and Gandhara from the heaven (or the firmament) 
— These arc the three abodes ofGrdmas- 

34a. It is remembered (by ancients) that Gramas Md 
Rdgas are due to the particular (combinations of) Svaras. 

34b«35a. In the case of Saina-singers, twenty Tdnas 
(protracted tones) are in the Madhyama-grdnui, fourteen are 
in the Sadja^grdma and fifteen are in the Gandhdra (Grama) 
(Thus 20-1-14+15'*■49 are distributed In three Grdmas). 

35b*36a. The seven MUrcckanas * Modes* or regulated 
rise and fall) of the Devas areJVa^f, ViSAld^ Sumukhiy Citrdi 
Citravati, Mukhd and Bald^ 

36b-37a. The seven MSrahands of the Fitrs arc Apydyiniy 
Viivabkrld, Candrd, Htmdy Kapardini^ Maitri and BdrhaiU 

37b-39. The seven Murchands pertaining to sages {R^is) 
should be known as follows: Uttara^Mandrd in the Svara called 
SadjOy Abhiruhatd in RsahkOf Aii>akrdnid in Gandhdra is remembered 
as the third Mdrcchandy Saxwira verily in Madhyama (the Stfara 
Ma,), Hrfikd in the Svara called Paheama^ the Murchand cdXXtd 
Ultard should be known in Dhaivata and Rajani in the Svara 
Xifdda. 

40. The Gandharvas depend upon the seven Murcchanas 
of Devas. Undoubtedly the Yak^s depend upon the seven 
Murcchan^ of Pitrs. 

41 •43a. The seven Murcchanas of sages arc remembered 
as Laiikika (worldly, popular) The $adja note pleases Devas, 
ihe R^abha note pleases sages, the Gandhara note pleases Pitrs, 
the Madhyama note pleases Gandharvas, the PaAcama note 
pleases Devas, sages, and PilfSi the Nifdda note pleases Yak^as 
and the Dhaivata pleases the whole multitude of living. 

43b. The good qualities of music are ten viz., 
the Gunas (good qualities) such as : PUrria^ Alarnkria^ 
Prasanna^ Vyakta^ Vikru$t<ii Sama^ Suhmdra and Madkura* 



610 


.Vdrada Purdiut 


[Rakta (iovely, charming) : (he harmonious mingling of the 
notes of the flute and the lute and (the voice of the singer) is 
called Rakla. 

Pur^a (complete) : So called as it complements {Svaro 
and *^ruli (a division of the octavo) as well as the ^Ailing in* 
of the metre and the syllable. 

Alankrta (Bedecked): Properly emanating from the 
regions of the heart, (he head (i.e. the upper part of the palate) 
and the throat, i. e. lowering down or raising up the Suara 
from the throat region. 

Prasanna (Easily intelligible): That which is free from 
inhibitions, choking and hesitation (confident, uninterrupted). 

ThiVyakia (clear): That whichcorrccUy renders the fol¬ 
lowing grammatical subtleties, viz., \}\tPada{ the word}, the mean¬ 
ing, thebase, (he alteration^ the augment, the Kfi and Taddhita 
suffixes, the compound, the root, the Mipdla (the exceptional 
and the irregular forms and particles), the preposition, the 
vowels, the gender, the gloss, the Vdrliika (an explanatory 
rule)*, the meanings of the cases and the numbers. 

Thi Vikruf^a (Distinct): That which is utlered loudly 
with the clear pronunciation of words and syllables is called 
Vikrufto. 

Tfu Slak^m (soft, bland): Accomplishment and presenta¬ 
tion (of song) with rapid and quick accentuations (like ucca^ 
nicoy plutamd their combination), dalliance, beating of time, etc. 

The Sama (the equanimous): The simultaneous applying 
together of Svaras in the proper place(in the rise and fall of Suaras .} 

The Sukumdra (the gentle, tender) that which is accom- 
panied by soft words, letters, notes and the cooling^ sound is 
called Sukumdra, 

Tht Madhura (sweet) that which is rich in the qualities of 
pleasing and jingling words and syllables occurring naturally is 
called Madhura.] 


* It it a supplementary rule whteh explains the meaning of that which 
it said, of that which is left unsaid and of that which has been impeHeclIysaid 
e.f. Kilyayana's on PSqmi. 



11.50.44*53 


611 


A (good) song is endowed with all thesie ten qualities. 

In this context the following verses are cited: 

44-45. There are fourteen defects^ in music (song), viz., 
(hesitant) Bhisona (terrible), Bhita (frightened), 
Udghufta (pronounced loudly), Anundsika (nasally produced) 
Kdkaspara (shrill tone as that of a crow), (undue 

cerebralization) {or Ordkvagata^thd^i has gone too high up), 
Sthdriaoivarjiia* Non-observance of the places of articulation), 
Visvara (Discordant), Virasa (unpleasant or disagreeable), 
VUliffa^ (disjoined), Vi^amdhata (odd and non*sensical), Vydkula 
(Agitated or bewildered) and Tdlahina (out of tune). 

46. The preceptors wish for the quality of Soma \ the 
scholars wish for the quality of Padacchida (i. e. Vydpta men* 
tioned above); women wish for the Modhura (sweet) quality 
and the other people wish for Vikrtt^fa (a loud song) with clear 
pronunciation of words or let ten. 

47*4B. The Sadja note has the lustre of the petals of the 
lotus; the ^fabha note, the reddish yellow colour like that of 
the parrot; Gdndkdra note is gold*coloured; the Madhyama 
note is white like the Kunda flower, the Pancama note is of black 
colour; they know that Dhaivata is yellow in colour; and 
the Pfifdda has all the colours — these are the colours of 
the Svaras* 

49*50. The Pakcama, the Madhyama and the ^adja—the$t 
notes are remembered as Brdhmai^as. Both the^o^Ac and the 
Dhaivata notes are Kfatriyas. The notes Gdndhdra and Pfifdda arc 
partially Vatiyas and partially Sudras undoubtedly because they 
are fallen. 

5 1 . That scale of notes should be known as fd^jd in 

which the Svara is devoid of Miirchandt Paficama is 

combined with Dhaivata and falls in the Madf^foma Rdga along 
with NUdda, 

52. If the Paficama note ceases, the GOndhdra becomes 
the internal note, and the ^abha is accompanied by NUdda^ 
know that Paheama also like this (i.e. ^d^ja). 

53. It is called Madhyama Crdma when Dkaivaia it weak, 

Gdndkdra rules (i.e. becomes dominant) and the has 

Gatdgata (comes and goes). 



612 


NUtada PuTd^ 


54. It is called Grdma when Jiifdda is Isolsprft^ (i.e. 
slightly touched or intoned); the Gdndhira is predominant and 
the Dhoivala is tremulous. 

55. It should be known as iht KaUika (lidga) based on 
PcMamc (Po) ^nd with proper support, where a low sweet tone 
(Kdkali) is perceived accompanied by Antara^Svara (internal 
note). 

56. After associating Katdka through all the Svaras all 
round, if (it is commenced from) there is^(ydsa (fixation) in 
the Madhyama note, it is called KcUika Madhyama. 

57. When Kdkali u seen and there is the importance 
(predominance) <APahcaina^ Kaiyapa calls that Kaiiika-raga 
as originating from Madfyamagrdma. 

58. The word Gandhartfa represents all the constituents 
or parts of musicology: Intelligent persons know that the letter 
Ga stands for vocal music, the letter Dhc means playing on 
the musical instrument, and the letter va symbolizes the 
musical instruments. 

59-60. [These verses give the correspondence between 
the notes of the flute and those of Sdma (singing):] What is 
the first note of the Sdma^singm is the Madhyama of the flute, 
what is the second {ofSdma) is remembered as Gdndh&ra [of 
the flute] and the third is Ryabha, the fourth is called Sadja 
while the fifth will be Dhaivala and the sixth should be known 
as NUdda while the seventh is Pancama. 

61. The peacock gives out the §a4ja note and the bulls 
bellow the Rfabha note; goats and sheep bleat the Qdndhdra note; 
and the Krauhca bird (heron or curlew) chirps the Madhyama 
note. 

62. During the (spring) season when flowers bloom, 
the cuckoo coos the Pancama note. The horse neighs the Dhaivala 
note and the elephant trumpets the Niydda note* 

63. The Sadja note originates from the throat; the 
f^fabha note is remembered as one produced fremt the head 
(or the upper palate), i)\t Gdndhdta note is a nasal one and 
the Madhyama note originates from the cardiac region. 

64. The Paheama note originates from the cardiac region, 
the head and the throat. One should know that Dhaivala 



I r.50.64-78 


613 


originates from the forehead and the is bom from all the 

joints. 

65. note is so called because it originates from 
six organs, viz. — the nose, the thtoat, the cardiac region, the 
palate, the tongue and the teeth.^ 

66. The wind originating from the umbilical region and 
striking against the throat and the head sounds like the 
bellowing of a bull. Hence it is called ft^abka. 

67. The wind originating from the umbilical region and 
striking against the throat and the head blows (as if) wafting 
sweet fragrance. For that reason the note is called Gdndkira. 

68. The wind originating from the umbilical region and 
striking agaia^t the thigh^ and the heart comes back to the 
umbilical region. Stationed in the middle (ofall the notes) 
the note is called Madhyanuf. 

69. The wind originating from the umbilical region and 
striking against cardiac region, cavity of the heart, throat and 
the head produces the Pancama note, since it originates from 
6ve places or organs- 

70. Excepting Dhaivata and J^ftfdda, all the other 6ve 
notes are known as originating from 6ve organs. 

71. As the notes are found abiding in five places, it 
is maintained (as produced?) in all places. The note sung 
by the Fire-god is Sadja and that sung by Brahma h^fabha. 

72. Gdndhdra was sung by Soma (the moon) and the 
Madhyama note by VUnu. Understand that the Pancama note 
was sung by you alone (i.e. Narada). 

73-75. The notes Dhaivata and were sung by 

Tumburu. it is said bv the learned men that the deity of Sadja^ 
the first note is Brahma. The deity of ^$abha is Huidtoiia 
(the 6rc-god) since its lustre is warm and brilliant. When this 
note of Gdndkdra is presented, cows are satbfied. Hcoce it is so 
called. Undoubtedly on hearit^ this note, the cows stand still. 
The deity of the Pancama note is Soma. It is remembered as 
Brakmardl (Royal Brahman). 

76-78. On attaining Grdma (?) its increase and decrease 
is like that of the moon. Since this note ovcr-reaches all the notes 


Gf. Mrada Sikfd. 1-57 



614 


Ndrada 


previously originating> this note is called Dhaivaia. Since all the 
other notes sit down (i.e. are submerged) the (last) note 
is csJled It excels and dominates all the other notes, 

as its deity is Aditya (the Sun). 

79. In the sphere of music there are two types of Vii^ 
(lute), viz. thcDiravi (wooden) and the Gitravlnd. The GStravl^A 
is used for singing Sdmans. Listen to its characteristics. That 
in which the singers of Sdmcns sing is called QAtravif^. 

80-82. It is accompanied by the manifestation of the 
note; it is ^coloured* by the thumb and the other fingers. The 
hands should be placed controlled above the knees and kept 
together. (The student) should imitate the teacher and his 
mind should not be elsewhere. At the outset, ihe Prctywa is 
uttered and the (seven) YyShrtis (utterancesPAfi4,PAtfi'c^, etc*)* 

83. The SAviiri mantra is then chanted. Then only the 
regular song is begun. The sphere of Svaras must be fixed up 
after spreading out all the fingen. 

84. One shall not touch the thumb with the (other) 
fingers nor the fingen with the thumb. The fingers shall not be 
kept separated from one another leaving much space in the 
middle. Nor should he touch it at its root. 

85*86. He shall touch it always with the tip of the 
thumb at the middle joint. In order to differentiate the Mdtrds^ 
two Mdtrds and the extended (span of time), the knower of 
the division shall point out two Mdtrds by means of the fingers 
of the left hand, where three lines are seen, one shall specify 
the Siddhi {sandhi ?) therein. 

67. (Where the lines are seen) shall be known as the 
Parvan (joint) and the remaining portion is called Aniarc, In 
the Simons one shall make the interval as much as that 
between the joints. In the J^ks (Mantras ofRV.)one shall make 
the interval as much as that between two gingelly seeds.(?} 

88. The sensible man shall place the Svaras in the 
middle Parvans (joints) closely knit with one another. He shall 
not shake any of the limbs even slightly. 

89*91. (Defective) The learned singer shall dust his 
hand with the earth*parttcles below (?) He shall remain steady, 



II.50.91-98a 


615 


calm, and fearless and utler the syllables. He shall withdraw 
all his sense organs like the tortoise its limbs. His eyes shall be 
fixed and the mind concentrated. Just as the lightning is seen 
in the middle of the clouds, like a thread in a necklace of 
jewelSi similarly should the padas be distinct just as the thearen 
of the hair pass the scissors over it silently. As he utters the 
letters (of the Mantra) he shall keep the nose held with the 
hand like (holding) the cow’s ear. 

92. Fixing the eye to the tip of the hands, he should 
ponder over the meaning of the holy scripture. He should duly 
express the sentence by means of the hand and mouth. 

93. He shall conclude (he letters in the same manner as 
he utters it. {No different system be introduced in the same 
mantra). And the beating of time should be synchronous with 
the song, nor should he tremble (?). [There should be no 
omissions or additions nor should he tremble] 

94«96a. He must sing the Samans with the quality of 
Sama (smoothly) like the flying movement of the Sjma (falcon) 
in the air. Just as the path of the fish moving about in the 
water is not observed, just as the movement of the birds in the 
sky is not visible, so also the SruH (a division in the octave) of 
the note (is not noticeable). Just as the clarified butter present 
in the curds, or the Are latent in the flrewood is obtainable 
only with effort so also the ^ruii is latent in the Svara. 

96b«97a. He shall make the transit from one Swa to 
another, the joining of notes, not very intense (strained], or 
manifest. He shall make it even, gradual, its continuity being 
uninterrupted like the subtle and imperceptible chaise from 
the sunshine to shadow. 

97b-98a. This verse gives six defects or mistakes in the 
’Protraction’ {Kar^amy of the tones and advises to avoid them. 
They are as follows: (4) The ^non^arrivar {andgata)stzgc is 
before the beginning of the second note, the completion of the 
first svara is the atikrdnia stage. The first note should not be 
’pulled or protracted’ in both the stages. He should not interrupt 
^e first mdtrd for this. It will be Vifomihatc. He should not 
pass on to the next Soaraf with tremulous note (as if trembling.) 
During the period of konaffay the note should not be extended 



616 


Ndfoda PuT&na 


beyond three mdtrds. He should give up the asthitdnta. He 
should stabilise in the next Svara for a period of three mdtrds 
only (not of two mdtrds). 

98b«99a. If a note swerves from its place of origin or 
goes far beyond its place of origin, the singers ot Sdman call it 
Visvara (discordant) and the players on the Vind (lute) call it 
Virakta (unsymphonic). 

99b-100a. For the purpose of practice, one shall adopt 
Druta Vrtti (quick movement), for the performance one shall 
adopt the middle movement and for the purpose of instructing 
the disciples one shall adopt the slow movement. 

lOOb^lOla. In this way, the learned Brahmaria who has 
mastered the treatise of Sdmn^gdna (singing of Samans) accord¬ 
ing to the scientific method of study, should impart injunctions 
in the Sik$d texts to pupils with the movement of his hands. 

lOlb'lOSa. The place (of origin) of the krusfa 
(Seventh or Fifth Svara) is in the head, of the first 5't^ara [Sa^a) 
in the forehead, of the second {^fabka) Svara in between the 
eye-brows, of the third {Cdndhdra) m both the ears, of the 
fourth {Madhyama) in the throat, and of the Mandra {Pahcama) 
in the tongue. And the place of ^ifdda called aiisvara is located 
at the heart (chest cavity)* 

103-105. KfUi^c Svara (seventh and fifth) should be 
placed upon (and thus as if^fixed’) on the tip of the thumb. 
The place of the first svara is the thumb. The Gdndhdra is 
located in the index huger, the fi^abha in the middle finger, 
the Sadja in the ring-finger and the Dkaivaia in the small finger. 
The NUdda should be indicated below at the beginning of the 
small finger. As it is not completely distinct from the Mandra, it 
is called aparva (at^) ; as it is not separately (audible and } 
grasped it is called asarhjna (undesignated}. And due to iis 
continuity by nature ? (or non-relation with gender, number 

etc.) it is caviled Avyaya (indeclinable). 

106-109a. When Mandra becomes lower it is called 

{Parisvdra PfUdda) . Deities live by (depend for their life on) the 
Krufta Svara and human beings by the fini ( ^adja ), the 
animal world by the second {^abka ), Gandharvas and Apsa- 
ras by the third, the oviparous beings (like birds) and 
Pitfs (manes) live by the fourth {Madhycma). Piiicas 



IL50.109a-I16a 


617 


(goblins)» A&uras and Rak^sas subsist upon the Mandra while the 
(lower) mobile and immobile world lives upon the low 
Atisvara {Nifdda). In this way all the created beings are sustained 
in life by the Svatas of the Samitn. 

109b-110a. A person who is notan expert in the ^Tuiis 
(the divisions of the Octave) known as Dipta^ Ayaid^ Karund^ Mrdu 
and Madhyamd (terms explained below) does not* deserve to be 
called a preceptor. 

llOb-llIa. The of the five Svaras viz. Mandra 

{Paiicamn) second, fourth, atisvara (sixth) and (he tliird {Gdndhdra) 
is called Dipii while that of the seventh Svata is karunS. 

Itlb-U2a. The Srutis known as Mrdu^ Madhyamd ^nd 
Ayatd are in the sccomi Svara. I shall now separately deal with 
their distinctive characteristicf. 

112b. When based on the third svara^ it is the Ayatd 
StuH of the second svara^ while when it is based on the fourth 
svara [viparyaya)^ it is the Mrdu of that Svara. 

113a. When iruti depends (entirely) on its own Svara 
and does not shift or change to another Svara it is the 
Madkyamd ^ruti. It is after duly considering (and examining) 
these that the Sdma notes are to be applied (sung). 

113b*115a. The .fm/i which is established in the 
note ends up finally and settles on the Dvitiya. Ifs<d>ha note is 
called Diptd but if it docs so with Prathama {Sadja)^ it is regard¬ 
ed as Mrdu (soft Sruii). It is abo called Mrdu Sruti^ if it finally 
settles on the Caturtha (Madhyma) svara, but if it does so with 
mandra svara it is called Diptd^ Tlie ^ruti which may be 
settled or established on any svarazt the time of completion of 
5ima-singing, becomes Diptd. 

115l>116a. After the completion of the note (Svara), 
‘^rutis like Ayatd should not be used. Even after completing 
the note but before the end of the musical concert ^^riUi should 
not be used in between two Svaras. (A ^ruti is to be used in pluta^ 
prolongated Svara) but not when a short or a long syllable is 
to be sung. Nor where the note called Gkufa is sung. 

* This single na in the text ii te be token with both the clauses. 



618 


Nitadd Purdjfa 


116b-l I7a. Where there are two gatis (viz. Bhdva 

and Bkdvc of palatal vowel t,) and the sandhi of the final 
syllable of a word with sibilants and s —in these hve 
^places', the note is called gkufi. (Here no ^ruti is allowed). 

117b-118a. In Srutis where the note {Svara) or the 
interval between soaras is not completed and the notes, viz. 
shorty long and ghufa —are all devoid of <SrutiSf Sruti is not 
to be sung. In this position the svatus by themselves act 
as 

118b-119a. (In places other than Sdman )know that the 
•^ruti called Dipti is in the Uddtia (highly or acutely accented 
Svara. ) Learned persons know that the D\pi^ ^ruii is in the 
Svariia (mixed tone lying between high and low) tone. Mrdu 
(soft) ^fuii should be recognised in the Anuddtta (the grave) 
accent or which is not raised or accented as Uddtta) Svara. In 
the Gandharva method of singing (where ^^rutis are absent) 
Svaras are to be used like Srutis. The grandeur and sublimity 
of Gratis lies in tones (svara). 

119b-120a. The kinds of svaras are five—uddtta^ onu- 
ddtta^ svarita, pracajNi (svarita followed by svarita) Md Jiighdta 
(svarita preceding pracaya is alTected. This affected svarita is 
Pfighdla). 

120b-121a. Henceforth^ 1 shall explain to you the three 
svaras connected with Bhs (dreika Svara). They are uddtta (the 
acute accent, the highly accented svQra)^ anuddtta (the grave 
accent), and the third svara^ svarita (mixed tone or accent 
lying between uddtta and anuddtta.) 

121b-122a. If the si^ora which is called uddtta is beyond 
svarita^ that is called Pracaya by experts (in that science). There 
is no other variety of svara elsewhere. 

122b-123a. The accent or Svara called svarita is remem¬ 
bered as of two kinds ! (1) var^^^svara and (2) atita^svara. In 
the same manner, a varna (a syllable) which requires a 
period one mdird (mdtrka) to pronounce becomes long (of 
more than one mdird) after ucearita (articulation). 

123b*124a« That svara should be known of seven types by 
having a look at the desinence. What it is, where it is and how 
it is should be understood by tu (actual) use in the word. 



II.50.124b-]33a 


619 


124b*] 25a. The seven notes should be applied (for hear¬ 
ing) to the right ear. This science (of Phonetics-*^t^^) has been 
composed by Sclbyas (learned preceptors) with a view to 
serve the interests of their sons and pupils. 

125b. There is no tone {svara) louder than the VdHila 
and no tone lower than the low {Anudatta). 

126*I27a.* What is the position of svdra — the particular 
form of the i&dre which came to be designated as Svara. The com- 
mon {Sddhdrana) Soara between Uddtta diod Anuddtta is known 
by the teachers of the Siksd ^dslra under the designation 
sifdra. 

127b*128a. In the Uddita are found Ni$dda and Gdndhdra 
and in the AnuddUOy the svaros ^$abha zTidDhakata and ^odjoy 
Madhyama and Pafleama have svarita as their source. 

128b«129a. That after which comes the sound *k’ and 
‘kh’ as well as that which employs the sibilant sound called 

X XW*) should be regarded as Mdlrd. 

By its very nature it is kaid as well. (This should be applicable 
to the sounds vpadhmdniya i.e. X X ph.) 

129b*131a. There are seven Svdrtts: Jdtya Kfaiprcy 
Abkinihita^ TairavyaHjanay Tiro-virdmCy Prailiftay and the seventh 
Apdda-vrtta, Now I shall describe the separate, distinct character¬ 
istics of these. After defining them 1 shall give specific illustra¬ 
tions of these. 

131b-132a. The syllabic (or ietter*tfi(:fera} which is accom¬ 
panied with -y - or-v - sound and becomes Svarita and has no 
Uddtta svara in front of it (i.e. following it) is called the 
Jatya svdra. 

132b-133a. When an Uddita (acutely accented) t or u 
has a Sandhi with an anudatta (grave accented) a- in the ini¬ 
tial position of word and thus become svarita (a mixed tone 
between high and low tones) ^ orr^ it should be regarded as 
the characteristic Svdra. 


* In PrStiUkhyai, (he term Svira b used for Sveritc (the circumflex 
accent). They record the following seven varieties of Svira : 

Niiyay Pfatikatay Abhinihala, Praiiiffa, FaJa-cflia, and Taire-tyahjma (All with 
slight difference in terminology are explained in the NP. below). GT. 
Taittirpa Prititdkhya XX. 1-7. 



620 


Ndrada Pufdt^a 


133b-134a. The AnudSita (ha( comes after an Uddlla 
e or 0 and gets disappeared (lost in previous -e or ) is called 
abkinihita svdraA 

I34b-135a. If in Chandas (Vcdic literature), there be a 
Svarita vowel preceded by an UdStta that bdtu^svdra {svurita 
that is optionally found everywhere) is called ToiravyaHjana^ (or 
rather TeiVd-VyaAj ana according to Pratt^akhyas). 

133b-136a. When a Soarita vowel comes after Avagraha 
(separation of a compound word into Us component elements as 
shown in the Vcdic Pado pdfha) and if the Avagaha be acute* 
accented (Udatta), it is called (or Tniro-virdmay^ 

of the PrdtUdkkyas). 

136b*137a. Where an acute-accented b is seen 

combined with a grave-accented (Anudatta) i, regard it as 
Svara. 

137b-138a. The Gastric treatise gives the following 
characteristic of Paddnta-vrtla: If (he vowel is acutely accent* 
ed, and its combination with the previous Pada (word) be¬ 
comes separate (For example: ka M Vfda/ KV. VIII.33.7). 

I38b-I40a. The illustration of svdra is: sajdtyena 

(RV.VIII.20.21). The K^aipra Svdra is in ^^rufyogre (prob^a 
misprint). In ti mcnvata (RV.IV. 1.16) is the Abhinihita 
svdra.Thc Tciratyanjana svdra is in (i.e. u+dtaye). In KtV* 
ka^ta (Viskabhita ?) there is Tirovirdma. The praHiffa 
svdra is in kl i govarna (?). The Pddavrtia vowel is in ka irh veda, 
(RV. VIII.33.7). 

These arc the seven svdras. 

140b-141a. With the exception of svaras, the syll¬ 

able which follows upon an acute accented syllable is the charac¬ 
teristic of Svarita (the circumflex accent between the acute- 
uddUa and the gtdiVt^nuddtta accents). 

]41b-142a. If the above-mentioned four SPdras are uddUa 
or if they precede an anuddtta^ from the scientific point of view 
it creates vibrations (the wording of the text katfi^arfipurftsphuti 
is confusing). The example of it is juhbgnih. 

142b-14Sa. When the prcviotis/o^e (word) ends in-i and 
is followed by -u the intelligent man should clearly understand it 



11.50.143a453a 


621 


to be a short vibration (the larynx vibrating for a short while). 

143b«144a. If a pada with two ukdras (u vowels) follows a 
pada (a word) ending in -iy one should know that there is a long 
vibration in <. Here the example is ^dgdkdsU (some mis¬ 
print and hence obscurity in the illustration). 

144b*f45a. It should be known that in the diphthongs 
(^, di, 0 and au) there are three long vibrants {kampas). For 
example manyd yathd{ ?}, nn Indrdbhydm. The rest are declared as 
short ones. 

145b-l46a. If (here be any Anuddtta alHx allcr many 
it should be regarded as Siva^Kampa (in the second 
and third Uddtta) if the pratyaya is Vditia, 

146b-147a. Where two (three, four) syllables arc Uddttn 
and they are followed by an Anuddtla or UddUa^ learned people 
know that the previous and the syllables preceding it are 
Uddtta. 

147b-148a. There is no reduplication of r or h. Nor are 
the second and fourth letters of different classes of consonants 
(i.e. ih-dh^ etc) geminated. 

I48b-149a. The fourth letter be combined with the third 
and the second with the first and the first, middle and 
end letters of a clas.< (such as k, g, and 4} may be 
geminated. 

149b-]50a. If in a conjunct consonant, the non- 
fmal letter (e.g. k , kh^ g, gA,) js followed by (he nasal, then 
yama^^ oi its own vantas intervenes and becomes the same as the 
previous syllable. 

150b-151a. Seeing the nasals (last letter of each of the 
five classes) conjoined with the sibilants f,and s- or with semi¬ 
vowels {y^ Vy Ty Bind 1) f yama (sounds) recede like travellers on 
seeing high-waymen. 

151b-152a. (When in Vedic recitation) the third and the 
fourth letter (of the five classes of consonants) is a conjunct, 
the pada is to begin from the fourth. If the second letter or 
the third letter is conjoined with -A, the latter word is to begin 
with -A. 

lS2b-153a. The nasal (utterance) the {upadkminiya 
( X ^ or X i&A) the phonetic element substituted for a visarga 



622 


J^droda Purd^ 


foUowed by p and ph and the jihvdmSlija ( X A or X 
phonetic element into which a visarga is changed when followed 
by or 'kh) seldom form a part of a word; it is not repeated 
(twice) in the word. If the previous syllable or letter be a 

conjunct with r or A, the following letter is doubled. 

153b* 154a- Where the conjunct has a circumflex accent 

(or the accent intervenes between uddtta and anuddtta or vice* 
vena), the svariic should be placed at the beginning of the 
next aAga (pardt^ga is the consonant which begins the next 
pada ). 

154b* 155a. When after being separated from the conjunct 
the consonant that appears freed (and separate) from the next 
consecutive word, it should be regarded as pQrvdAga. And the 
consonant which begins the next word is patdAga. 

155b* 156a. The latter part (letter) of the conjunct 
(should be accented as it) is the main factor (a leader) of the 
conjunct (as that is a *resting*pldce’ of the svara). The pre* 
vious member of the conjunct consonant is svarita (but should 
be pronounced without an accent.) 

156b* 157a. Anusvdra, end of the peda (word) affix, 
gemination (due to the repetition of the same letter at the 
beginning of the next word), the consonant r, and svara-iAaJtti 
(vowel*separation, insertion of a consonant (glide) sound in 
a conjunct with r or / e.g. Tryambakoih {yajdmahi) is pronounc* 
ed as TTiyambdkdm —all these are included under pdrvdf^a. 

157b-158a. At the beginning of a word, or in the middle^ 
in (pronouncing) conjunct consonants and avagraha^ y<i should 
be known as a geminated-^ {yy •). It is remembered that in 
other places it is simply 

156b-159a. With the exception of the unseparated 
conjuncts of r and h in the initial and final positions in words 
and -ry *, other letters or syllables are not duplicated. 

159b*c. A conjunct consonant is (metrically) guru (of 
two matras). A consonant conjoined with a nasal or a visarga 
are obviously guru. Tlie rest are atomic {laghu^ of one matri). 

For example An, goh^. In this, the first is a conjunct 
consonant while the secMd is accompanied by a Viswga. The 
gurutva (heaviness) of a vowel followed by a conjunct 
consonant or a vis<argd is obvious. 



11.50.160-165 


623 


160. The (acute acceni) remains as acute (i.e. 

the acutely accented vowel remains as it is.). What is Svarita 
(circumflex accent) becomes muddtta (grave accent) in the 
body of the word. The anudatta vowel remains unchanged. 
The pracaya* type of accent becomes anudatu (acccntless). 

161. The {following) words (occurring in different 
mantras) such a$ Agni^^ Sutah^ Mittam (a friend], Jdam^ Vayam^ 
Aydy Vakd, Priyamy DOtarriy Ghrtamy Citta m and Aihi^nTt 
anuddtta. 

162. The (recitation of) Sruti starts with an unaccented 
syllable (anud^ita vowel) in words like Akka {Arka?)y Suta, 
Taj Ha y Kalatdy Saia and Pavitra. 

163. In words like HSriy Varunay Vare^Oy Dkdrd and 
Purufay the vowel with r i% svarita (circumflex). In the word 
jVara, the vowel with r b always Svarita except in the case 
of VUvdnara which- na* is svarita. 

164* In the two Mantras pertaining to Varuna: viz. ud 
uUamarft tvarh Varuna (RV. I. 24. 15) the Vn of Varuna is svarita 
and not ru (despite the r-element). 

In the Mantras(\) uru^dhdrdmararhkrtam (RV. VIII. I, 10) 
and (2) uru dharesva dohaU (mbprint for uru^dhareva dvhate RV. 
VIII. 93. 3), in the words cM4rd dhd b svarita and not the 
syllable with r (An exception to the rule in v. 163.) 

In these examples the syllable whether of one mdtrd (short) 
or two mdtrds (long)» the first half mdtrd b udatta and the rest 
is anudatta.^’ 

Where a dvUsvara (dbsyllabic, containing two vowels) b 
used, the short vowel should be pronounced as long. 

165. In the KampCy ut^svarita and Abhigita (terms ex¬ 
plained already) the short-vowel should be protracted. (As to 
the duration of a mdtrdy according to one authority) a mJ/rd 


* b a specific feature or quality (Dkarma) at iht AnrtdAUa tactiM, 

when a vowel, accented grave, U preceded by a Sparitti (Circumflex aecenc 
and b followed by anoiher grave-accented vowel. The grave accented vowels 
which are not followed by an acute or circumflex (accented) voweb are 
neither dbtinctly circumflex nor distinctly grave. They are uttered slightly 
like acute, e.g. Imam ms Gaflge Yamune Saraevaii {m, ti herein are 
uttered thus). 



624 


Nirada Purina 


extends upto the twinkling of the eye while the others hold that 
the duration is that of a flash of lightning. 

166* While it is opined by some others that duration of a 
mdtrd is the time required to pronounce the vowel r (the read- 
ing rksvara is a bit confusing as literally it means ‘a vowel in a 
^K’^manira*) . 

167. A compound may be dissolved but the members of 
the compound should retain their original form in the Samhita. 
For that initial syllable** (?) that Svarn is known as the end 
of the member of the compound. 

168a*. (Everywhere the words putra^ mitra^ sakhi^ aAf, 
SotakratUy Adi^o^ Vipfajitavida^ Satpati^ Gopati^ Vrlrakiy samudra 
deserve to be dissolved (when members of a compound). 

Incases of svarayupuoo (?) Devayavali {D^vQyuval^)^ 
{Araiim?), Divatdtapi (} Devatdicye ), Cikilik, dha Com{}), the 
learned persons do not dissolve the compound. 

168b-169a**. According to my view four wrhs (rather 
Mif^//i^separation of two vowels which were euphonically com¬ 
bined into one) should be known according to the order of the 
letters. Listen to their names from me. 

169b-170. When the first pada has a short vowel which 
is followed by a long vowel (like a calf followed by the mother 
cow), the VivfUi is called Vatsamisrtd^ but in which 

the previous pada ends in a long vowel followed by a short 
vowel in the latter pada^ is called Vatsdnusdrif^i. When vowels in 


* The text gives the above pmion in brackets. Hence this matter U 
bracketted here. It is included under v. no. 168, although the printed text 
gives it no number. 

** 168b if : These verses describe the pause (technically called Vir4ma 

in Pratisakhya works) which is to be taken (at the end of the word or at the 
ttid of the first member of ibe compound (which is shown split up in the 
Padapdtha) or inside a word or at the end of the word or at the end of a 
vowel when it is followed by another vowel. The TaittirijfA Prdtiidkhya {Wli, 
13) gives four kinds of such pauses : (1) pause at the end of a 

foot or a verse and the duration of the pause in three mdtrds. (2) Pada^wdmo 
pause of two mdtrds between two words and e.g. t;e tpd Hrje ltd. (3) A pause 
of one mdtrd between two wx>rds the preceding one ending in a vowel, and the 
following one beginning with a vowel but the vowels are not euphonically 
combined e.g. $a Mdnak- (4) A pause of half a mitrd between two vowels 
inside a word e.g. dro^ugam. 



II.50.170-I76 


625 


both the podas are short, it is called while vowels in 

both the Padas are long, that vivrtti is called pipilikH. 

The diflference in time or duration between these vivrttis is 
of one mdtrd^* 

171. According to some other teachers, the duiation 
between these two is half, while according to others it is just 
atomic (anumSlrikam). 

172. When m (maidra) is followed by affixes beginning 
with the consonant r, f,and s, the m is changed into anujvdra. 
If followed by -t/- (p-tf- in the print of text is wrong) and /•, 
it becomes para-iai/arna, while before sparJa vama contact con¬ 
sonants via. ka^varga, ca-varga^ ta^arga etc., it is changed to 
the last (nasalised] consonant. 

173. When the preceding v/ord ends in -n and is followed 
by a vowel beginning the next word, the vowel preceding -n in 
the previous word is coloured (affected and changed into 
nasalized pronunciation) and hence it is called ^coloured* 
rakta (e. g. rtwhdn au mahi \ asi). 

174. If the preceding word ends in -a and is followed 
by>, r- and A- (in the following word,) half the mdtrdot the 
vowel preceding •n is slightly (atom-like) coloured (i.e. 
nasalised). 

175. If the previous word ends in a conjunct of n and is 
followed by another word it is changed into four forms. Some¬ 
times it becomes r {repha), sometimes it colours (slightly 
nasalises) the syllable, sometimes it is dropped and sometimes 
it becomes an musvdra. 

176. The colour {range) is emanated from the heart 
and resembles the sound produced by a bcll-mctal. It is soft 
and of two mdtrds induration, as illustrated in the pronuncia* 
tion of dadhvdn, (In other words, ra/tga i$ the nasalisation of a 
vowel) 


• Some ircaiisea jay that the duration bciween these different 

VipftHs should be one mdtrd. one half three-fourth m&tfd and one 

fourth mAtrd reipecdvciy. Bui the duration between two words of a 
com pound-word split up in the Podfi-pdtka should be oiiemdW. 



626 


Xdrada PurdM 


177. Just as a woman from Saurastra pronounces (the 
nasalized vowel in) Ar6, the same way raAga of nasalized vowel 
be produced.^* This is my opinion^ O Narada. 

178. The four classes of words [viz. .Vdma (substantives)» 
Akhydta (verbs)» Upasarga (prepositions) and Mipdta (particles)] 
end in the ten syllables viz. d, by it, n, m, and s. 
These are declared as word endings. 

179. The vowel (accent) may be acute, grave or circum* 
flex, consonants have to follow the svara (they have no in* 
dependent accentual status.) 

180. Authoritative preceptors have declared the prominence 
of only three accents of stforas. Consonants are like beads while 
vowels are the thread (which weaves and holds them together). 

181. Just as a powerful monarch snatches away (and 
annexes) the kingdom of a weak king, similarly the (accented) 
vowel, being powerful, takes possession of the weak consonants. 

182. 0-bhdva (i.e. 0,*u-bhdva in the NP b a misprint), 

viprUi, /, Sy r, (repha) and the special pronunciation of the 
Visarga before A*, kk* and (specially known as jihvd^miUiya 

and upadhminiya^ These eight are the transformations of sibilants. 

183. The interval between two vowels pla:'ed near each 
other in Saihhita^^ should be regarded as visarga or is changed 
to a palatal. 

184. If in a penultimate diphthong (like s, o, ai and au) 

^ or is dropped, there is the consonantal vlvrtti, and the 
protisafhhitd of vowels. 

185. Where the pause is on a sibilant (and under excep* 
tional cases) there is in the Sandhi (Sarhbhavab ?), that 
vivftH or hiatus should be called vowel*hiatus {paxaMvfiii) • 

186. If the vowel o of the previous pada is to be linked up 
{prasandhdna^'^) , then the next pada b^ins with r (e. g. vdyou). 
And this Mink up* should be regarded as vowel *cnding. What is 
difTerent from thb is the Mink-up* {Prasmdhina) of sibilants. 

187-188. If the first or the last letter of a class (e. g. t-, a- 
of the dental class) are at the end of a pada and is followed by 
sibilants, /, / and s, it u changed to the second position. When 
they are combined with sibilants as the second mmber of the 
conjunct, the first member of the conjunct consonant, even if it 



11.50.188-196 


627 


be the first Ietter(like ty ky p) of a class is to be shown 
(pronounced) as the second letter (such as thy khypk) but should 
not be recognised or represented aj actually the second letter 
e. g. Mat-syay K-surdy Ap^saras (their pronunciation will have 
some aspiratory tinge like thy khy or pk but for all purposes they 
are t, A, and p). 

189. In ordinary metrics* to undentand the metre, etc* 
of a verse (Jloka) there are three causes: (1) Chandomdnay 
(2) Vrtia (the metre ) and (3) the end of the pdd<i{Pdddnta)^ But 
Vedic manlrds (^cs) have been composed in their own respec¬ 
tive metres (like Gdyairiy Jagatiy Triffubk) ; the metrical feet of 
ordinary metres arc governed by the number of letters and 
their being of one or two mdtrds. 

190. The r-element present in the vowel r or in Svarahhakt i 
should be indicated as a separate syllable (for calculation of 
mdtrds or Akfaras. But in Soarahhnkd the letter (without the 
repkay element) should be calculated alongwith the aflix. 

191. In the letter r, the consonantal r is distinctly 
apprehended and its nature as a vowel (vowel form) is clearly 
perceived. If the r is not conjoined with a sibilant, know it to 
be laghu (short, of one matra only). 

192. If the vowel r, is combined with a sibilant and is 
compressed'^ in pronunciation, the syllable should be regarded 
as a guru (heavy i.e. of two matr^). Here the illustration is 
(the form) Trcam. Here r is short. 

193. There is no doubt that in the following five instan¬ 
ces, the (vowel) r is short (the illustrations are: Rsubhcy CrhitCy 
Brhaspatiy Pftkivi and Nir^rti ). 

194. In case of words with conjuncts beginning with/, 

Sy hy and r in the initial position, there is internal svarabkakti (in 
the same word without insertion of f, or u as a glide), when it is 
being conjoined with another word. 

195. Svardbhakti is of two types—one characterised by f, 
the vowel and the other by r> the consonant. These are known 
as Svarodd and Vyahjenodd (respectively) by contemplative 
grammarians. 

196. The learned ones know that the svarabkakti in the 
case of sibilants (/, s* and s) is (vowel-born) svarodayd and open 



628 Jidrada Purdnc 

{vivrta)j while that with h is vyahjanoiayd (consonant-!)orn) and 
closed {sayhvfia). 

197. A person resorting to svarchhakii should avoid three 
defects viz. Svarcbhttkii with u and a &ulty (pronunciation). 

198. The following syllables are not regarded as 
(short, of the duration of one MitrS ): 1. That which is followed 
by a conjunct consonant; (2) or which is followed by ch\ 
(3) or it combined with a Visargat, (4) or which possesses two 
mitrili ("is long) or (5) is at the end of a foot (word) or 
(6) be combined with an Anusvdra or (7) ends in gkut (the 
first five case affixes). 

199. The metre (viz. ^fyS) whose hrst and third foot 
consists of twelve mdirds^ the second contains eighteen and the 
last consists of fifteen mdtrgs only. This characteristic has been 
spoken of (the Aryd), That (metre) which is different from 
thu is Vipuld. 

200. If a syllable is short {laghu) znd if it is not followed 
by a conjunct consonant, it is still laghu (of one mdtrd only). If 
a short (vowellcd) syllable is followed by a conjunct consonant 
or if it itself is long, it should be regarded as guru (heavy or 
long of two mdirds), 

20U202a. Where Vtvrdi is found in front of the vowel, it 
should be regarded as a guru vowel, there is no (prevalence 
of) Kfaipra {or kfipra-sandhiy*. 

202b-203. There are eight kinds or types of svaras of a 
pa da: Anioddila, AdyuddUOy Uddtta^ sAnuddHuy J^iCQ^Svarita^ 
MadhyoddHdy Svarita^ Dviruddtta. These are the eight designations 
of those padas. 

204. (Now follow the illustrations of the above Padas); 

(1) Agnir vrtrdue —(RV. VI, 16. 34). Here Agntk is 
AntoddUa. 

(2) Sgmafi pavuie (RV. IX. 96. 5 also VS. 7. 21). Here 
Soma is AdyuddUa. 

(3) Pra voyakvum (RV. I. 36. 1). In this pra is udatta 
while vdk is Anudalta. 

(4) (Balarh nyubjam) Viryam (Sama Veda I« 95). Here 
Viryam is ^^ica^juariia. 


11.50.204-209 


629 


(5) Vidhma havi^^ (AV. I. 3!. 1). Here Hcvi$A is 
Madhyod&ita. 

(6) Bhur, Bhuvali, Br. 5. 31.4. etc.). Here 

svaf} is svarita, 

(7) Vanaspatih (AV. XII. 3. 15). Here both va and spa 
are Udaita. This is an instance of Dvirud&ila. 

(8) Tajnyat (?)*This b Madhyodatta. Nipatas are Anu* 
daita. In prepositions, Svarita follows the initial vowel. There 
are two Anudiittas in Akhyatas (conjugations?). Thtdhdrya 
letter after the svarita e.g. nihoid salsi. Here Satsi is a dhdrya 
letter, as it follows the svarita in o td which arc the pracaya* 
sthdnas. There b the previous Svarita, becomes toned down to a 
grave accent. 

203. A wise reciter should tone down the to a grave 
accent wherever pracaya is seen. Where there is merely a soft 
circuinHcx accent, there is no need to tone it down. 

206. The duty of a preceptor b of five typts^Mukha 
(mouth, ^ydsa^ Katana, PratijUd dsid Uccdraisa. It is said here 
that utterance with a vow {tapratijha ucedrana) or positive vocal 
utterance is creditable. 

Those (castes) to whom the science of Siksd is not 
available (or who are not eligible for the same), the affirma* 
live assertion (backed by a tradition of guftii) b to be resorted 
to. For Karana (phonetic treatise) is of the form of the affirma* 
tive teachings (of traditional gurus), 

207. O Narada! You, Tumburu, Vasisfha, Visvavasu 
and other Gandharvas are not able to comprehend the entire 
lore of Sama-singing due to the niceties and subtleties of the 
Svara-sastra. 

208. You should always take care of your gastric fire 
(i.e. digestive capacity). Take in wholesome (?) food which 
contributes to it). When food is digested, one should wake up 
at dawn and meditate on the Brahman. 

209. It b desired (prescribed) that after autumnal 
equinox, to vernal equinox, one should get up early at dawn 
for the study (and recitation of the Vedas). 


Vidt note on Aaoiria. p. 623. 



630 


Mdrada Purdtia 


210. Getting up early in the morning, one should silently 
chew the tooth*brush twig of (any of) the following trees: 
Mango, Palasa (Butea frondosa), Bilva (Aeglc Marmelos), 
Apamarga (Achyranthes Aspera), Sfrisa (Acacia Sirissa). 

211. The following trees too are holy: Khadira, Kadamba» 
Karavira, and ICaraAja. All thorny and milk«exuding trees are 
holy and conducive to fame. 

212. By using these for the purification of the mouth, 
sweetness in tone and subtlety of tone in generated. He is able 
to utter every syllable clearly and distinctly as recognised by 
the ancient teacher Audavati (a misprint in the text 
for Audavraji-^the ancient sage and scholar of Vedic grammar, 
who revised the original text of the ^»tantra'Prdiiidkhjfa of 
the S^ma Veda). 

2)3. The student should always take in Tripkald (the 
three Myrobatans) along with salt. This increases digestive 
power and intellect, heightens the clarity of tones and distinct¬ 
ness in the utterance of letters (syllables). 

214. After performing the necessary morning duties (like 
brushing the teeth, taking bath, which is necessary for the care 
of the gastric fire, he should purify himself by taking in honey 
{DhQma in the printed text is probably a misprint for Madhu) 
and ghee, and then start the recitation. 

215. It is the general rule in all branches of the Veda 
that one should start recitation in a low tone. After reciting 
seven Mantras in a low tone, one should then utter in the 
desirable (or prescribed) tone. 

216. At dawn, one should not strain his voice as would 
obstruct the normal breathing. For such obstructions in breath* 
ing cause wrong intonation {Vaisuaiya). Not merely that, it 
certainly spoils the sweetness of vowels and consonants. 

217. Just as there is no absolvement to a person eating 
forbidden food coming from an evil source, as in the case of 
saving the life of a person (bitten by a poisonous serpent) 
from the poison of the venomous serpent in the form of the sin 
of wrong pronunciation in this case), similarly a person who 
imbibes the fruitless (lit. burnt) teaching (of Vedas etc*) 
with wrong pronunciation, accentuation etc., of syllables from a 



11.50 217-226 


631 


bad (incompetent) teacher cannot escape the sin of 

distorted pronunciation, etc. learnt from that sinful teacher 
(like serpent-poison spread within the body). 

218. The Vedas, comir^ from (i.e. taught by) a good 
teacher well-rehearsed and well-established in good intonation— 
when orally recited shine beautifully. 

219. A person with frightful appearance, protruding 
lips, pronouncing all syllables through the nose or with a choked 
voice or tongue-tied (due (o difficulty in the mov^ements of the 
tongue] is not eligible to utter Mantras. 

220. A person c.*(ercising control over hU mind and one 
who has concentrated it and whose teeth and lips are shapely, 
becomes pure after performing his bath, avoids singing (or sing¬ 
song manner) should pronounce the syllables of the Mantras 
(clearly). 

221. The following five types of persons cannot grasp a 
new lorct—A Berce person, a stubborn or arrogant one, an 
idle person, a sick person and one with unsteady (scattered) 
mind. 

222. One should acquire learning slowly, should hoard 
wealth slowly (i.e. saving even small amounts); one should 
climb a mountain slowly (by degrees); one should travel on 
foot slowly (not more than a Yojana at a stretch). 

223. An ant walking slowly and steadily covers even a 
thousand Yojanas. But Garuda, if he does not move at all, 
cannot cover the distance of even a single foot. 

224. A (person whose) speech is a fleeted by sins (or 
defects] does not deserve to utter the text of the Vedas just as 
a clever (intelligent) beautiful maiden does not deserve to hold 
a coiwersation with a deaf person. 

225. He who recites the Vedas in a low mumbling voice 
as though he is afraid, remains always in doubt about thousands 
of its forms. 

226. Studies carried on with the help of books only and 
not under (i. e. near) a preceptor, do not shine in the 
assembly of learned men like a woman impregnated (out of 
wedlock) by a paramour (from point of social status). 



632 


Ndrada Ptirdna 


227. Having observed how even a heap of collyrium 
disappean (by its daily use )and how ant-hilU become accumulated 
in a high, huge heaps (by slow but continuous additions of 
particles of earth by ants), one must utilise every day by 
engaging one’s self in religious gifts, studies and religious 
acts. 

228. That a very big ant*hill is built up by insects (ants) 
with very small particles of earth is not due to the (immense) 
physical power (of the ants). Sheer hard work is its cause. 

229. If a lore h studied (repeatedly) for thousands of 
times and taught to pupib for hundreds of times, it (automa* 
tically) comes to the tip of the coi^e like water flowing from 
a higher level to a lower level. 

230. Just as horses of noble breed go to sleep for the 
half part of half the night (i.e. for three hours only), similarly 
sleep does not (nay should not) occupy the eyes of students 
for a tong period. 

23 L A student should not be late for studies by spend¬ 
ing a long time for his meals. Nor should he be enmeshed in 
temptations about women. A person desirous of mastering a lore 
should traverse (fig. study) long and fast like eagles and swans 
flying over seas. 

232. A person who is afraid of (i.e. does not mix with) 
crowds of men and shuns the formation of company of friends 
as if it were a hell, and protects himself against association 
with women as if they were chesses—only such a person attains 
mastery over learning. 

233. Dishonest persons do not get wealth (or learning); 
nor do cowards or persons whose heads are swollen with pride; 
nor can people afraid of public criticism or who put off their 
work (out of procrastination) can earn money or learn a lore. 

234. Just as a person digging with a spade or pick-axe 
(reaches the water-level in the bowels of the earth and) gets 
water, so, a student, bent on rendering service to the teacher, 
obtains learning possessed by the teacher. 

235» Learning can be obtained either by rendering 
service to the teacher or by paying sumptuous amount of money 
(as the fee) or by exchange of one type of lore for another (by 



11.50.235-237 


633 


imparting one's expertise in a particular field for learning the 
special technique of another field). (Otherwise learning cannot 
be mastered. 

236. Even if one masters a lore by dint of his intellec** 
tual gifts, even without serving a teacher, it does not yield 
fruit to him like a barren young woman. 

237. O Narada! In this way, I have briefly indicated 
to you the treatise on Sik^d by just pointing out to its direction. 
By understanding this first accessory to the Veda, one becomes 
eligible to be absorbed in the Brahman. 



CHAPTER FIFTY 


]. It ii not undentood why Nlfud* U omitted. Cf. Tm'i. 

pT4tiSAkhja\Xlll. 12. 

2. Anika (pertaining to9k^}» OAtkJea (pertaining to Gathas) and iS’dini^e 
(pertaining to Sima*tmging]. 

3. Thii refers to the wrong pronunciation of InAra-^atru in svik$ndra^ 
iatfuf imdkAM (TS. II. 5.2. l)i by vrtra'i father. 

4. N. of a Khool, Tahtiriya Pritiiakhya —MW» p. 163. 

5. Kvh<trn^A also means indUiinct pronunciation in low lone. Cf. 
J^aTAdiyA $ihA 1 3.11-12. 

6. Probably a misprint for ut4ti (on the chest) 

I. Cr SAtUljc tikfA 1.7.19. 

8. AbhinihiU is a ^endhi or euphonic combination In which the vowel a, 
as a first or second member, is absorbed into the other member, e.g. 
T<Uhibkjf^h'\‘^ni^rAih4bi^*gn4 i>t ddiuf4-^0ini^4iiuf$*An$. Here a- of Agni is 
absorbed in the preceding -a and -c. ^A Dut. of Sk. grammar, p. 34. 

Here the tenn is used with reference to the absorbed vowel, -e. 

9. Here the definition in the NP does not explain why lyaf^and is 
associated with this vowel. The fact is that this is a kind of jvnrila or circum¬ 
flex-accented vowel which follows the acute-accented vowel, with the inter¬ 
vention of a consonant between the actite-accented vowel and the circumflex 
vowel which (vowel) was originally grave, e.g. haiye. Here tlie vowel— 
# is a Taira^yc/fjana-ivaritn. cf» <$Mro tyafljofutyutaj taira-ojanjanafi — VAjataneyi 
Fr4tiiAkh/a 1. 117. 

10. Tairo-virima is a kind of stfarita, a vowel with a circumHex accent 
which follows an acute-accented vowd characterised by an Avagrahat i.e. 
coming at the end of the first member of compound e.g. gopataviti go*patau. 
Here the vowel o of^ which follows the (’} opagraha is called Tniro-virima^ 
swUa.—A Dwt. of Sk.gram, p. 178. 

II. Jdpu is a variety of swrito or circumflex accent, e.g. sva^ nyak, Cf. 
Sk FrAHJAkh/a IV.4. 

12. a a twin letter available in pronunciation before a nasal letter 
and similar to it, when the nasal consonant is preceded by any one of the four 
consonants of the five classes. The S. iT. on Pap. VIll.Ul explains it as a 
transitional so\md intervening between a non-nasal and the following nasal 
as a counterpart of the nors-nasal. e.g. A^nih, ghghnanti, cakhkhnatuh, 

13. Pan. I. 2.32 S.K. explains A^ia/i^tbe first half of the mAtrA should 
be undcniood as Udiita and the latter half as Anudktia. 

14. TaiSkfarAdtkaratum is a obscure. 

15. Cf. Pioinlya Slk|i» V. No. 26 

16. Cf'SaAMAjMjat Mars/k W Weyttf-saihjfiafh sykt—Uvvata 

on 8aunaka'i Sk'p^AtUdkJ^ //.I This interval is one mgfrg according to 



J^oUs 


635 


the T^tiriy^ Priiigdkhy^ XXII. 13 but U of only one half M^trA according 
10 Tantra^S^. 

17. PfASAndhAnA-^\h\% term meanr repeating a ^ot6 in (he kracna-pA(ha 
and joining it with the following word e.g. RV.I. I to be recited thui: 
Ue purohitnm, puro/ulam y^KA^. But in this vene^ *'joining or linking up'* is 
implied. 

18. When in pronunciation of voweb and consonants a fault is caused 
by the compression or contraction of the place of utterance, it is called Pfd^nA 
cf. vyAMjanAndm Ataprt^AUunptfirAfiAmpldAtwfi. 

fthPrAtUAkhyA XIV. 5 

19. According to PrAtiiAkfymt a euphonic combination of the vowel 

*»a, /, with a following dissimilar vowel. The name k^rc (quick, ^ori) 

is given to this Sandhi as the vowel, short or long which is turned into a 
consonant, becomes very short. 



CHAPTER FIFTYONE 


Thi Treatise on Rituals (Kalpa) ^ 

1. O leading sage, henceforth I shall recount to you 
the treatise on rituals, on understanding which a man be¬ 
comes efficient in holy rites. 

2. There are five Kalpast viz.^ (1) J^ak^atra Kalpa (i.e. 

Kalpa pertaining to the constellations), (2) Veda Kalpa^ (3) 
Sarhhitd Kalpa^ (4) the fourth is that of Ahgiras and 

the (5) fifth one is l^dnti Kalpa. 

3. The narration preebely and in detail of the pre¬ 
siding deities of the constellations is indicated in the .Kakfatra 
Kalpa> The same thing should be known here also. 

4. O leading sage, the injunction regarding the Rks etc. 
for the purpose of the achievement of the Puru^drlhas^ viz. 
virtue, wealth, love and liberation, has been mentioned in 
detail in the Veda Kalpa. 

5< The sages (seers of the manlras }, the metres and the 
deities of the SiAta^‘ mantras have been specified in the Sarhhitd 
Kalpa^ by the sages who have seen the Reality. 

6. In the AngirasaKalpa the fatkarmans* have been 
specified by the self-born deity (Brahma) by way of enjoining 
black magic and spells. 

7. O excellent sage, the modes of subduing the evil por* 
tents of divine, earthly and atmospheric origin are separately 
mentioned in the ^Snli Kalpa. 

8. These characteristics are succinctly mentioned in the 
context of defining Kalpa. The special characteristics of these 
are separate in other Sdkhds or Branches*. 

9. Since all these arc of utility in the Gfhya Kalpa (i.e. the 
Kalpa pertaining to the duties of a householder), 1 shall recount 
them to you, O excellent Brahma^. Listen attentively. 


* Se^ha in the NP. ii probably a mUpHiit for as *the conch- 
sheJP is inexplicable in this context. 



11.31.10-18 


637 


10. The OihkAra (the syllable Om) and the word 
Atha —these two words formerly pierced through the throat 
of god Brahma and came out (weie uttered). Hence these 
two are auspicious ones. 

11. He who has completed the rites mentioned and wishes 
to do the subsequent ones, shall utter the word Atka. It is 
sought for the purpose of endless benefits. 

12. Kuia grass which is spread (in a particular way) 
is extolled for the rite of sprinkling water (in the prescribed 
way) round the fire. In the desired holy rite, the number (of 
kuia grass-blades) should not be less or more, lest it should 
be fruitless. 

13. The rite of PerisamUhana is enjoined as a preventive 
action against worms, germs, insects, etc. that crawl and move 
about on the surface of the Earth. 

14. O Br&hmana, the three (parallel) lines that are en¬ 
joined, should be made equal. It has been laid down that they 
should not be made smaller or larger. 

13. O Narada, the fat of the demons Madhu and 
Kaitabha has spread over the Earth. So, it should be smeared 
over the cowdung. 

16. It has been mentioned that the cowdung of certain 
types of cows should not be used in the holy rite of Yajna —viz. 
the barren cow, the wicked or defiled cow, the cow with afflicted 
limbs and the cow whose calf is dead. 

17. O Brahmana, the rite of ProHdharann (i.e. sprinkling 
of water upwards) is intended for the purpose of eradicating 
such terrible beings as moths, etc. that always roam about in the 
atmosphere. 

18. One should scrape or scratch the ground with the 
Sruvi (sacrificial ladle or spoon) or the Kusa grass. It has 
been enjoined by Brahma lor the achievement of Asihikantaka* 
(bones and thorns?) 


* NP. reads : 4Sthi-K99t^^-tid<ihjcrtham. Hence this strange ersnjUtion. 
I suggest for ^tiddhyarlitem, as the mtndalien. The emendation 

will mean : *Tor the purification of bones, thomi etc.** In the Devanigari 
icripi, such slips (ii- for fu-) are possible. 



638 


N^roda PuTdi^n 


19. The waters represent all the gtoups of Devas and 
Manes {Pitrs). O firahmana^ hence the sprinkling (the 
altar) with water has been laid down by sages who are experts 
in injunctions. 

20. It is mentioned that die sacrificial fire should be 
brought by women endowed with Saubhdgya (good fortune) 
(i.e. woman having her husband and sons alive) in an auspicious 
earthen pot. The fire should be placed in the earthen pot 
sprinkled with water. 

2K On observing the wastage (i.e. disappearance by 
being stolen away by demons) of the nectar, the fire latent in 
the sacrificial twigs has been placed on the altar by Brahma 
and all other deities (for its protection) • 

22. O Nirada, Danavas and others are standing (in 
readiness to create trouble) to the south of the TajHa, For the 
sake of protection from them, one should establish god Brahmi 
in that direction. 

23. The vessels (intended for consecration and cooking) 
and all other vessels must be placed in the north; the Tajam&na 
(the householder on whose behalf the Yajha is being performed) 
sics to the West. O Narada, all the Brahmanas sit to the east. 

24. The maxim (or situation) is that whether in playing 
dice, business transactions or performance of sacrifice, if the 
performer be unconcerned or has an indifferent attitude, that 
activity goes to ruin. 

25. The Brahma and the Acarya must be appointed 
from one’s own 8akha (branch of Veda) in the course of the rite 
of Tajna* There is no restriction in the case of the Rtviks. They 
should be invited and honoured according to availability. 

26. The two Pavitras (the Kusa grass twisted into a ring 
like loop with a tail) must be three Afigulas in lei^th. The 
Prokfi^x (the vessel containing the holy water) must be four 
AAg}das in length. The AjyasUiUli (the vessel holding ghee) shall 
be three A^las in length and x^titCaruslhUli (the vessel in which 
the Ccfu i«e. food ofiTering is kept) must be six Angulos in 
lei^th. 

27. The Upoyamanc (the Kusa grass used to place down 
fire) shall be two Afigulas long; the Sommirjona (that used for 



11.51.27-39 


639 


sweeping) shall be one Afigula in length. The Sruvd (sacriRcial 
ladle) is enjoined to be six long and S'ru^J (sacrificial 

spoon) is said to be three and a half A^gulas long. 

28. The sacrilicial twigs are a span in lengthy the 
Purnapdtra (vessel filled with water) is six Angulos in length. 
The Pranild vessel eight Angulos in length is placed to the 
north of the Prok^ini vessel. 

29. Whatever sacred water is there in the world as rivers 
and oceans, is present in the Pra^ild vessel. Hence it should be 
lilted with water. 

30. O Brahmana, the (sacrificial altar) is said to 

be naked and devoid of garments (otherwise). Hence a wise 
man shall clotlieit by means of ilieDarbha grass* 

31. The Povilro consists of three cutters, viz. the thunder¬ 
bolt of Indra; ihe discus of Vispu and the trident of Vamadeva 
in the form of the Dorbhos. 

32. The sprinkling must be done Irom the water taken 
from the Profits vessel. Thereby the holy rite becomes the 
yirldcr of great merit. It is glorified as very sacred. 

33. Tile .Ijyaslhdll (the vessel holding ghee) shall be 
made with a Pala weight of metal. The earthen pot shaped 
by the potter’s wheel is remembered to be demoniac (in 
character). 

34-38. The vessel Sthdliy etc* shaped by means of the 
hand is said to be divine. The auspiciousness or inauspiciousness 
of all riles depends on Sruvd, In order to make it sanctified it 
is warmed in the fire. When it is held at the rip there is no 
widowhood (?), if it is held in the middle deficiency of progeny 
(or death of children is the result); if it is held at the root, the 
Hotf dies. Hence it should be held after considering all this. The 
following six deities report to the Sruva at the interval of each 
ahgulo via - Agni, the sun, the moon. Viriftci (i.c. Brahma), 
the wind god and Yama. Agni may lead to the destruction of 
objects of pleasure; the sun may cause sickness; the moon 
does not yield any special result; ViriiicI is the bestower of all 
desired objects; the wind god is said to be the bestower of 
prosperity and Yania is considered to be the bestower of death. 
(Hence the sruva should be held at the fourth or fifth ongula ). 

39. The Sammdfjana and the Upayamana are to be made 



640 


Nirada Purina 


with Ku^a blades of grass. The former one may be of all* the 
branches (?) and the other of five branches (or blades otdarbha 
grass ). 

40. In order to make Srut>i and Sruk^ it should be known 
that the trees, ^riparnly Samiy Khadira Vikankafa and Paid fa are 
used. 

41. A S'ruvdy a Hasla (24 AnMuIas or about 18 inches) 
long is commendable, and a Sruk of thirteen Ahgulas is also 
commendable. This is laid down for the Brahmanas. In the 
case of others, it should he one Angula shorter. 

42. O Narada, it is laid down (in Smrlis) that the 
sprinkling of the vessels is for the destruction of defects 
(defilement) due to the glances of fiudras» the fallen ones 
and donkeys and other beings (at them). 

43. If the vessel is not filled up completely, there may be 
a loop hole in the rajna, O Brahma na, ifit is filled (completely), 
the Tajha becomes full. 

44. Learned persons have known that eight muffts (a 

particular measure of capacity^'handfub’) make a {kiHcit 

is a misprint), four kuncis make a Pu^kala* (a particular measure 
ofcapacity), four Pufkalas mnke one POr^a^pdtra (a full vessel). 

43. When the time for Hama has arrived, one shall not 
offer any seal anywhere. If it is offered, the fire may be excited 
and may give a terrible curse. 

46. Two Aghdrai (sprinklii^ or oblations of ghee) are 
said to be the two nostrib, the two oblations of AjyOy two eyes, 
this is said to be the face of Prajapati and the waist is (formed 
out) of the Vydhrtis. 

47. The head, the hands and the feet—these five are said 
to be of the homa called Paflea-varuna (?). O Brahmana, 
what is Sviffakria (offering belonging to Agni) and the PSrndhuli 
(the final offering) are the two ears. 

48‘51, The physical body of the Fire god should be 


{ Probably the reading should have been sapia instead as seven 

dnrbha blades are used for the fonner. 



II. 51.51-57 


641 


conceived as follows* has two faces, one heart, four ears, 
two noses, two heads, six eyes, tawny colour, and seven tongues. 
It has three hands on the left side and four hands on the right 
side. In the four right hands it holds the Sruk, Sruva^ Akfomdld 
(rosary) and Sakti (javelin). It has three girdles, three feet, a 
vessel for ghee and two chowries. Agni is seated on a ram> It 
has four horns and the lustre of the morning sun. 1 1 has a 
sacred thread and it is bedecked in earrittgs and has matted 
hair. One shall perform the rite of ffma after conceiving the 
physical body of Agni thus.* 

52. The Brahmai^a who performs the Homa rite by 
using (mere) hand for oblaiing milk, curds, ghee and any fried 
object becomes the slayer of a Brahmana. 

33. The food that a man cats, his deities also eat; (but) 
for the prosperous achievement of all desired objecu, the gingelly 
seeds must be used more in the Havis offered. 

54. In the course of Hmas, three Mudrds {ritualistic 
gestures or symbolic representations by certain positions of 
tiiigers.etc.) should be shown, viz. what is designated as the hind, 
the shc-swan, and the sow. While magic spells and incantations 
are used, the mudrd called the sow should be used and during 
the auspicious rites, the gestures of the hind and the she-swan 
shall be used. 

55. The rituatiHic gesture called the (female) swine 
shall be by means of all the fingers; that of the she-swan shall be 
without the (use of the small finger); the mut/rj called *the 
hind’ shall be by means of the three fingen, viz. the middle, the 
ring finger and the thumb. 

36. One shall perform the Homa with gingelly seeds 
along with curds, honey and ghee the magnitude being the same 
as (mentioned) before, graspir^ these with all the five fingers. 

57. (n all auspicious rites the Kusa grass-blades should 
be held closely to the ring finger. 


* or. RV. IV. 56.3 aad the description of the fire god in the SmfU or 
PcurditK verses in the orRgvcdins. 



642 


NArada Putif^^o 


VinAyak<i^Kalpa 

58. Vinayaka (god Ganesa) has been appointed as the 
controlling head of G<in<is (like Puspadanta and others—Mit.»» 
MitAksard* for creating as also in warding off impediments 
in acts (conducive to ihe attainment of Purufarthas), by gods 
Rudra, Brahma and Visnu. 

59-6la. Understand the symptoms of a person who is 
haunted (lit. caught hold of) by Vinayaka: In dreams (he 
sees that) he is carried away by (a stream of) water or is drowned 
in deep water; he secs men with shaven heads and clothes red¬ 
dish (blue MU.) colour, (in dream that ) he is riding carni¬ 
vorous birds (like vultures) and beasts of prey (like tigers). 
He sees that he is surruonded by Cahd^I^i donkeys and camels. 
(He feels thdt)while he is going he is hotly pursued by ene¬ 
mies (to attack him). 

6lb-63a. Such a penon*s mind becomes distracted or agi¬ 
tated; all his eiTorts (at success) become fruitless; without any 
reason, he becomes dispirited. Even though bom in a royal 
family (and endowed witli braveryi learning and such other 
qualities-MtV.); a maiden (though possessing beauty, good 
family-background etc.) does not get a spouse and 
a married woman does not become pregnant. A learned 
Vedic Scholar does not get preceptorship and a student (though 
endowed with discipline and other virtues) gets no study faci¬ 
lity or tuition. A merchant geano profit nor a husbandman 
gets profit in his agricultural activities. 

63b-c. (For the propitiation of Vinayaka for paciheation of 
troubles) on a meritorious day (with a favourable constellation) 
such a person s ablution as per due formalities should be 
performed with the viscous pulp of white mustard seeds (after 
extracting oil), while benedictory mantras are being recited by 
(learned) Brahmanas** {who should perform pu^^avAcana^Mi.). 


* This b a famous commentary on the Tdj/iotalfym Smfiu It was the 
paramount authority on the Hindu Law in Briti^ Courts and even after, 
before the Hindu Code Bill. Its author, Vijftiaesvara ^a.D. 1070-1100) 
being tacb an authority I follow hu interpretations, u this and the neKt 
Kalpa are borrowed from the Toj. Smr. by the AP. 

** NP. 63c U a combination of the 1st part of Tij. 1.1^7 7b and the latter 
half of rS;. 1. 278 b. 



IL51.64-71a 


643 


64. Clay must be taken from (five places, viz.) the sta^ 
bles of horses^ elephants, an ant*hill, from the confluence of two 
rivers and from a deep lake. Jtocona (yellow pigment), scents, 
Guggulu (gum-resin), etc., must be thrown quickly* (into the 
water). 

65. (Defective) Water must be brought from the deep 

lake in four pots of the same colour. The (the honour¬ 

ed holy seat) must be placed on a red-coloured hide of a bull 
(when the haunted person is thus seated. Brahmanas should 
recite Soasli mantras. 

66. (After recitation ofmen Suvdsinis—womr.n 
wiiose husband and sons are aUve-*should pour water over the 
haunted person from the pitcher kept to the eastern side of the 
Bhadr&sana while the following M(intra is being uttered). 

sprinkle you with waters endowed with innumerable 
potencies, flowing in hundred(s) of streams, sanctifled by 
sages (like Manu). May the purificaiory waters sanctify you.** 

G7. (Water from the second pitcher placed to the south 
should be poured with the following Mantra ): *'May king 
Vaiuna bless you with fortune. May the sun, B|‘haspati, Indra, 
Vayu, (each of them) confer auspicious blessings on you. The 
seven sages have bestowed blessings on you.*’ 

68. (Incantation while pouring the third pitcher) : 
“May the water goddess destroy for ever whatever is in¬ 
auspicious (and unlucky) in your hair on the head (Afi7.) 
the parting of the hair, (he forehead, ears and eyes.” 

69. (The fourth pitcher is to be poured while reciting the 
previous three mantras —After water from the fourth pitcher is 
poured) holding in the left hand blades of Ku^a grass, mustard 
oil should be oblatcd (poured over) the head (of the haunted 
person) with a ladle (spoon) made of Indian Hg tree, when the 
person is thus bathed. 

70*71a. (While pouring the mustard oil as oblations 
the following names ofVinayaka preceded by Ofh and followed 
by Soahd should be uttered per oblation as follows: Orft Mitdya 
Svdhd, Orh Sammitdya Svakdy Om ^aUtja Svdhdy Ofti Katadkafdya 


• For 4{u of NP., Ylj-1.279 reads apsw. 



644 


Mrada Purd^ 


Svdhdf OfA Kd^ffidnidya Svdhd^ OrA Rdjaputrdya Svdkd. (Then in 
fire Caru oblations be given with these very Mantras and the 
remaining portion of the Cffm should be oblated with bali^ 
Mantras to Indra, Agni, Yama» Nirrti, Vai*uoa» Vayn, Soma, 
Ijana, Brahma ai.d Ananta using each name in the dative 
case followed by nama/t ^Bow tOj* as follows Om Indrdya namah, etc. 

7lb-75. As an offering (Maiasdya) the following articles 
are to be presented to Vinayaka (and his mother--Parvatl*):— 
rice once beaten (half-polished), boiled rice mixed with 
powder of sesamum seeds, fish both raw' and cooked, flesh both 
raw and cooked, flowers of variegated colours, incense, three 
kirtds of spirituous liquor, radish, PuriSy Apupa (baked or boiled 
pies), garland of Ko/e (in Marathi), boiled rice mixed 
with curds, milk pudding, flour.cake with raw sugar or jaggery 
along with la44us (AfiX). 

He should then bow them down with head (with the 
Mantras as follows* * 

The remainings of this offerings should be placed in a 
winnowing basket which is spread over with Darbha grass, and 
should place that Ralx where four roads meet (with the 
following invocation! 

After offering Arghya (with water, flowers, etc.), he 
should again offer DOrvd -grass and mustard-flowers filling the 
cavity of his folded and joined hands {anjali). 

76. (He should then pray) 

^*Be pleased to bestow on me beautiful form and features, 
renown, fortune, sons, wealth and grant me all desired objects.*’ 

* I am following MiiikforA on Tdj, in interpretation. Tiie Mantras for 
bowing are : 

(a) tatpvruf^ vidmak* / vakra^tuftddva dhtmahi I tan m dantl prneodayat // 

(b) svbhiiirai vidmaht I dhfmahf I Ion no gaurf pracodaydU / 

** MiL quotes the Mtmtos which may briefly be translated here : *'May 

Dev as, Adityas, Vasui Marut-godi, A$viiii*kumSras, Rudras, Suparcas, 
serpents, planets, Asuras, Vaiudhanas, Piiaeas (G?>blins), reptiles, Mnir- 
devatSs, (divine tnoihen), female evil spirits, Yaksas, Vetfilas, Yoginis, 
PuUn&s (goddesses of epidemics), spirits causing yawning etc.)^ Siddhas, 
Gandharvas, VidyAdharas, men, guardians of quarters^ protectors of different 
worlds, Viniyaka-godlings creating impedimrnts accept this offering. 

O great lages beginning with Brahmli, the promulgaton of peace ! May 
there be no trouble or impediment or sin or enemies to me. May goblins 
and departed spirits be statisfied and hrin^ us happiness.*' 



II. 5L77-83 


645 


77. After worshipping Durga, the consort of &iva, he 
should worship Siva, the Lord of Uma, by means of incense, 
lights, food^ofTcrings, scents, fragrant garlands and unguents. 

78. Thereafter the worshipper should wear white gar^ 
ments, garlands of white flowers and apply (sandalpaste like 
white) unguents to his body. He should feed the Br5hmanas 
and give a pair of clothes to the preceptor (who conducted this 
w'orshtp with full knowledge). 

79. AAer performing the worship of Vinayaka the per* 
son desirous of wealth, peace, nourishment, prosperity, longe¬ 
vity and virility should worship the planets. 

The rite conducive to 
Pacification of Planets 

BO. The nine planets are to be installed in the following 
order, viz. the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, 
Saturn, Rahii and Kccu. 

81. For attaining auspiciousness, the replica or represen¬ 
tation of the planets should be made of what follows 
respectively:* copper, crystal (silver in NP), red-sandalwood, 
two in gold and silver (gold in NP), iron, lead and bcil-metal. 

82a. Or they may be painted on the canvas-cloth in 
their respective colours or they may be represented by means 
of esoteric diagrams with coloured powders or pastes. 

82b-83. (The procedure of worshipping planets). Each 
planet should be wmhipped by offering cloths^ scents, or un¬ 
guents and flowers according to the complexion of the planets. 
They should also be offered scents, Bali (food-offerings), 
incense and Guggulu (a particular fragrant gum resin). For 
each (presiding) deity (of the planets), (oblation of) Caru 
(and Samidhs) be offered (in the Are) with the following 
(nine) mantras. 

* V. 81 is defective as (he objects are duplicated and do not inike up 
the number 9 required for (hr planeu. Thus NP reads : 
tSmrakdd r/tJatOd rakta-eawlonSt ttanulM i^i I 
Armne s(sdt UryO tubhipiojn ff 

Here rgjata ^silver* and gold (mmAe dt Arman) are repeated twice The 
original verse (TSj. I. 297) is accepted for translation. 



646 


NUraia Purdna 


84-85. The following are (the Pratikoi of) Mantras of the 
planets (1) ^ krf^tna (RV.I.33.2), (2) Imarfi devA (VS.9. 40), 
(3) AgnirmQrdhd (RV.VI1I.44J6), (4) Udhudbyasva (VS.15. 
54), (5) • Tad aryak (RV.2.13.15), (6) Anndt parisrutaliy 
(7) San no dnik (RV.X.9.4), (8) Kdi?4^t (VS. 13.20), 
(9) Ketum krpvann aketavc (RV. 1.6.3) {?). 

86. The sacriBcial sticks (special to each planet) are as 
follows: the sun-plant {arka)^ paldia (tree), khadira {Acacia 
catichu ), ApdmSrga (the .\chyranthcs Aspera) the pippata , 
Udumbara (the Indian fig. tree), Dtlrod and Kuia grass. 

87. To each of the planet one hundred eight or twenty 
eight sacrificial sticks (that of the sun-plant for the sun, the 
paldJa twigs for the moon, etc.) smeared with honey or ghee 
or curds or milk should be obkued. 

88-89. The yaivedya oflered should consist of the follow* 
ing articles: ricecooked with jaggery, milk-pudding, (food 

partakable to sages), $dstika grams cooked in milk, cooked 
rice with curds, Havis (ricecooked in milk) Cilrnn (rice mixed 
with sesame), rice mixed with flesh (A///.), boiled rice of various 
colours (due to its various components). These articles should 
be offered (to each planet) in due order. The wise person 
should give meal to Brahmanas according to his (financial) 
ability and the availability of the foodstuffs. The food etc. 
should be offered after duly honouring them (by washing their 
feet, etc.). 

90. The following is the prescribed religious fee {Dakfind) 
for the planets (respectively); a cow, a conch, a (strong) 
bull, gold, (yellow) cloth, (a white) horse, a b1ack(tawny ?), 
coloured cow, iron (a weapon), a goat. 

91. The different articles (offered as Daksi^a) should 
be a Pala in weight. At the time of monetary gifts this should 
be said, BrahmaM, boon has been granted by these: 
Beif^ worshtppe<l (bless) them.*'** 


* the mantra should be ati yad aryc (RV. 2.13.15) 

The text in YSj : *'A boon has been grxoied to these pluieu by god 
BrahmA/^Ye planets, when worshipped ynu worship (rcd^ocsliy) the 
tvorshtppen (by removing their calamaitei and cooferTing blessing on them) 
YSj. 1.307. 



11.51.92-102 


647 


92. ^'Wealth, nobiliiy, rise in position of leading men 
are controlled by planets. The existence and the nonexistence 
of the univene depends on the planets. Hence* planets arc 
highly adorable.” 

93-94. The performance of worship every day of Lord 
sun with red-sanda], etc.) as well as that of god Skanda and 
the great ^od Ganapati leads to accomplishments of desires, 
fruits of one's religious acts am! unsurpassed affluence. 

95. If a person l>egins to worship planets without per¬ 
formance of MdtT'-ySga (a sacrifice in propitiation of divine 
Mothers), the Mothers get angry with him and create 
imped uneuts. 

96'97. rhosc who seek auspiciousness should perform 
Vasordhdrd ( a particular libation of ghee at the Agni^cayona) by 
means of holy mantras of Vasu. Gauri and other holy 
mothei's should be propitiated by them on auspicious occasion. 

98. The mothers are sixteen in number viz.—Gauri, Padma* 
Sad, Mcdha, Savitri, Vijay4, Jayi, Devasena* Svadha, Svihi* 
M^tfk^, Vaidhrti. Dluti* Pus)i, Dnti and Tu^fi—these sixteen 
should be worshipped on the occasions or for the sake of 
prosperity alongwitluhe Atniadtvald (the family deity). They are 
even superior to Ganeia. 

99-100. All the necessary items in the worship should 
be followed: viz. the invocation, offering of pddya and Arghya, 
ablution, sandal paste, Akfatas (raw rice grains), flowers, in« 
cense, burning light, fruits, Naivedya^ Acamanfya, betel leaves, 
arcca nut, showing of lights (^irdjand) and Da/tfind, All these 
must be offered for their satisfaction. 

• Thf Pf(r~A‘a/pa ( ^rdddAa) 

101-102. I shall now explain to you the Piir^K^alfia which 
increases wealth and progeny. The following are the occasions 
for the performance of Srdddha.i The new moon day; the Asfakd 
days**, Vrddki (prosperous occasions like the birth of a son), 

* The NP hsi borrowed this sectiMi from the of the 

Tij. Smfli I. 217 If. I'he printed text has the hnes of the T^. disarranfed 
with phntinff mitiakcs in addition. Please vide cb« 28 and ooCei, as 
(he topic of is treated there. 

** The 8th day in the dark half in the months covered in the seasons 
Hemanca and Sihra—.\ivalSyana. 



648 


Ndrada Purdr^a 


the dark half of the month, the two Ayanas (southern and 
northern transits of the sun), availability of suitable Brahmanas 
(as detailed in the next verse—AftV.), equinoxtal transits of the 
sun, (the first point of Aries or Libra into which the sun enters 
at the vernal or autumnal equinox), Vyatipdta (a particular 
evil yoga* or time) Gajacchdyd (a particular day**), the solar 
and lunar eclipses and whenever one feels inclined to perform a 
Sr&ddha. 

103* 106a. The following Brahmanas are regarded as the 
‘health Of assets to $raddha,f {Brdhmana^sampadah mentioned 
in the above verse): proficient in (recitation and teaching) all 
the Vedas, *^rotrtya (wcibvcrscd in the Vedas), the knower of 
the meaning of the Vedic texts, a middle-aged person^Mif, the 
knower of the meaning of the Veda-inantras, one expert in 
teaching and observing the vow of the Jytflha^sdma portion of 
the Sdma-veda,^^ the expert (as described above) in the (ru 
madhu and tri^suparna hymns, ^sbter's son, a ^tvik (a priest 
officiating at a sacrifice), a son-in-law, the father-in-law, or the 
maternal uncle who can perform a sacrifice, the knower of the 
Trii^ddk0ta kynws, a grandson (through a daughter), the disciples, 
kinsmen and relatives^, performers of prescribed karmans, 
practitioners of austerities, keepers of five (sacrificial) fires, 
strict followers of the vow of celibacy and those who carefully 
serve their parents. 


* Vyatfpdla^thc day of new moon when it falls on Sunday mjd (he 
moon is with certain constellation such as 3ravana, Dhani^thi, Ardri. 

Dhanif(hd*rdrd / 

Todlmd ra ucyaU // 

quoted in SKD. IV. 531, 

** A particular constellation (MW. 342). But SKD II. 290quotes 
from Krtya^cinidmaai : 

kfffUi-’pMkfi traycdajydm Meghimnduk kart radh / 
yadd tadd JrdddMt pu^yair <tv4pytte // 

t Vide Manu III. 150-169. Cf. Supra 28.6*10 and notes, 
tt tdma^pUifat iad^adf^ayaitdJiia^vralam ra tad^vrold^arajitHa 

yas tad adkUi^Mit on I. YSj 219 

X The list from'*mter*i ton to relaiives" is for the 2Dd preference, 
if the BrAhmapat enumerated in the previous verse ate not avail able** Aftt. 
on YAi I. 220. 



lI.5M06b-113a 


649 


106b’109a. The following (Brahmanas) are despicable 
(and should not be invited for ^rdddha)*: 

One affected with heinous diseases (like leprosy), one 
possessing a surplus limb or dcRcient in a limb, a squint-eyed 
person, a son of a remarried widow, a religious student who 
violates the vow of celibacy, a bastard, one of deformed nails or 
of conspicuously black teeth, a salaried teacher, a eunuch, a 
(false) accuser of girls (a girl-teaser or ouirager of the modesty 
of girls), one accused of senoas crimes, a traitor of friends, a 
backbiter or slanderer, one who sells (sacrificial) Soma, one 
who marries or takes up Agnihotra before hb elder brother, one 
who abandons his parents or preceptor, one maintaining him¬ 
self on the earnings of unchaste women, Uieson of a Sudra, the 
husband of a divorced woman, a thief, a person fallen from 
holy rites, 

109b’110a. The house-holder himself remaining self* 
controlled and pure, should invite Brahmanas on the previous 
day** itself The invited Brahmanas too must control themselves 
mentally, verbally and physically. 

llOb’llla. He should welcome and honour the Brah¬ 
manas a^ they come in the afiernoon (on the muhorta called 
Kutapa^Afii .). After they have sipped water as Acamana he with 
a Pavitra (of Darbha grass) in his hand (fingers), should seat 
them in their respective seats. 

11 lb-112a. In the rites pertaining to deities he may have 
(invited) as many Brahmanas as he can afford. In the rites 
concerning he must have odd number of Brahmapas. He 

should seat them on a ground purified (by smearing with cow- 
dung Afi^) covered and sloping to the south. 

112b-113a. The two Brahmanas representing deities 
should be seated with their faces to the east. And each of the 
Brahmanas representing Pitrs should be made to face the north 
(or one Brahmai;ia for Devas and one lor Pitrs may do). In the 
case of the Sraddha of the maternal grandfather, the 
procedure of Brahmanas representing gods etc. is the same. 


« Cr. Swpra 21.1 M8 k notes. 

cr Msnu III. 167 : pU4 Pd. P. SrffiSMM. and the 16 . 17 - 20 , 

also S. Sriddk4, P. i06. 



650 


Ndrada Purina 


113b-114a. He (the householder) gives them water for 
washing their hands and even number of Kuia-grass (blades) 
for the purpose of a seat. When so permitted by Brahmanas, he 
should invoke the gods with theRk verse VUvtdevas^ (RV. I. 3. 7). 

114b-116a. After scattering the barley grains in a vessel 
along with the Paviira^ he should pour water with the Mantra 
^anno devi (RV-X. 9.4). Repeating the Mantra ^avo^si 
(VS. 5. 26; TS. I. 3. 11), he should scatter barley grains. He 
should then |>our the atghya water** into the hands, repealing 
the Mantra Yd dityd (TB. 2. 7. 15. 4). After giving water, 
serving food, with a lamp lighted, applying fragrant sandals 
and Bower*garIands (he should give them water to wash hands). 

116b-117. He should then changef his sacred thread, 
hang towards the left part of the body over the right shoulder 
(when he deals with rites concerning W/rj—manes) offering 
Kuia grass (blades) twice in number to the Brkhmanas 
representing RtVrs, he should invite his fathers (i«e. father, 
grand^father and great-grand-father) with the mantra U§Qntas 
tvd nidhlmahi (RV. X. 16. 12, AV, 18. 1). After inviting the 
Pitrs^ he should, with the permission (of the Briihmanas— 
representatives oiPitts) perform the Japa (undertone recitation) 
of the mantra Ayaniu nah pitarafi (Aft/.) 

118*li9a. The rites to be performed witlt barley may 
be performed with gingelly seeds. Offeringalong with 
barley grains put in their vessel according to the ritual he 
will repeat the mantra Pitrbhyas sthdnam asi {Tdj. Sntr. I. 234,) 
and place the vessel with (its) face downwards. 

119b-l20a. Wishing to perform Agnau-Karana (offer¬ 
ing into sacriiicial fire), he takes cooked rice soaked in ghee 
and formally requests the permission (to offer oblations). If 
the Brahmanas say *'Do so'’ and permit him he oblates them 
formally into the firej as in Pitr^yajna, 

* The Sntgrta Mantra—dgaufuvuu mahdbk^gih ete.-^is also reciteii. 

** The NP reads hasU Pddyam The oddity of pouring water 

meant for washing feet into the hands bring obvious, the T4i» reading (which 
is the original one) hasUfoargh^aiH viniktiptt is accepted. 

t NP reads xapradakfi^ but the original text and the actual practice 
of irsddha shows that the reading apradakfiaoftt in the T^j, 1. 232 is correct. 

t In practice, now^*dayf, these are o/Tered in the band of Brahmana 
in iiead of In Are. This is sanctioned hy Many. 

AgnyahhSoi tu vipra^ pdniv€Popap^daut (quoted by AfU,) 


11.51.120b-130a 


651 


120b*121a« After the Homa is over, he will carefully 
(with great concentration) place the remainir^ food into 
vessels. Those vessels may be of whatever material available, 
but particularly silver vessels are recommended. 

121 b« 122a. After keeping food into the pots, the pots 
are invoked with the mantra Prthivi te pdtram {Mdnava^^rauta^ 
sdtra 11 9. 2.) and make the Biuhnana place his tliumb on the 
food with the Mantra Idarh vi$nur vicdkrame (RV. I. 22. 17). 

122b‘I23a. He shall then repeat the Gdyatri along with 
the Vy.ihrtis and the three Rks beginning with Madhu idld 
etc. (RV. 1. 90, 6-8). After the Japa he must say, “All of you, 
take food at your leisure'*. They also shall take food with 
restricted speech. (The householder) shall serve them the 
desirable food and ghee. He shall not be angry, lie shall not 
be in a hurry. Till they are satisfied (the food is offered). 
(While they take food) he shall repeat \\\c J<^Q as before. He 
shall formally ask them “Are you satisfied?*' He shall then 
take the formal permission regarding the leavings of food etc. 
He shall then take the cooked rice and strew them on the 
ground. Water shall be offered once for each. 

125b-126a. Taking all the strewn food along with the 
giiigelly seeds he shall stand facing the south. He shall place 
the Pin4<^s near the Ucchi^fa (leavings of the food) as in the 
case of Pitryajna, To the maternal grandfather also, the 
Sraddka offered is like this. He shall then offer water as Acamana, 
He should then request them to give the benediction Svasli and 
they say it. He should then request them to bless him with 
benediction. He should pour water on their hands and they utter 
that blessing. 

126b-128. After giving JJak^ind according to his ability, 
he should seek their permission to say Svadhd; when so 
permitted by them he should utter the word Svadhd with 
reference to the concerned Pitrs on his father’s and mother’s 
side. Then water should be sprinkled on the ground. 

129a. He shall say then^^May the I'ifve devas be pleased.” 
When the Brahmanas say this, he shall repeat it. 

129b*130a. He should then pray to Brahman as: “May 
don on flourish and multiply in our family. May Vedas increase 
(by recitation, teaching etc.); May my race flourish. May not 



J^craia 

our faith in Sraddha and other rcligiou3 rites dwindle. May we 
have abundant (gold etc*) to give.’’ 

130b-131a. After saying such pleasing words, he should 
(go round them and) bid them adieu. He should repeat the 
mantra Vdje vdji (RV. 1.10 7?) and with delighted heart take 
leave of Pitrs with due formalities. 

13lb-132a. The Arghya-pHra in which Arghya water 
given to the Brahma^ias was poured, should be placed with its 
face upwards and the Brahmanas be formally let go (after being 
blessed by them)* 

132b-133a. After accompanying thedepartingBrahma- 
^as to the border (of the village), he should circumambulate 
them clock-wise and returning, he should eat the food partaken 
of by his Piin, On the night of the ^rdddka he (alongwith the 
invited Brahmanas) should observe celibacy. 

133b-134a. Thus repeating the circumambulation, he shall 
perform and other Yajhas to the Pilfs during the occasions 
of prosperity. The Pinzas must be made of barley grains and 
mixed with curds and Karkandku (the fruit of the Jujube tree). 

I34b-]35d. TheEkoddi^fa {irdddha y/ith a single Brahmana) 
consists of one Arghya and one Pavitra. It is devoid of 
divas, 

135b-136a. It has neither the Avdhana (invocation) nor 
the Agnaukarajjia (consigning of cooked food into the fire). The 
circumambulation is anticlockwhc. (Here the difTcrcnce between 
the two ^fdddhas is:) Here akst^yasthdne upaiUfkatdm should 
be uttered [}miedjdoiak^ayyodaka etc). At the time of bidding 
goodbye to the Brahmans, after reciting Vdje v&jt he should 
request with llie words ahhiramyat&n (please do enjoy) and they 
would say abhiratd^ (enjoyed). (This is to be performed at 
mid-day-Afi/.). 

136b-] 37. He shall have four vessels made filled with 
gingelly seeds and scented water. For the purpose of Argfya^ 
water shall be poured into the vessels of the Pitrs from the 
vessel of the Preta (the dead one). At that time the two 
mantras b^inning with Ti SamMb (VS. 19.45) etc. shall be 
repeated. He shall perform the other rites as before. 



II.5I.I38*t48a 


653 


138-140a. This rite of Ekoddi^fa and Sapt^4^arana is for 
women abo. If the Sapi^4if^ara^a b performed after a ycar» the 
food along with the water pot shall be given to a Brahznana 
for a year( ?). Every month, tbb rite shall be performed on the 
day of death. The rite is performed every year, and month 
as well as on the eleventh day. 


140b-141a. The shall be given to the cows, goats 

or Brahmapas or consigned to fire or water While the Brahma- 
i^as are present at the place of the meal, the leavings of food 
of the Brahmanas shall not be swept. 

141 b-142a. The Pitrs are delighted for a month w ith 
Havi:iySnna (cooked rice soaked in ghee) and fora year with milk 
pudding. The meat of the following shall be offered in the 
different months, viz—fish, deer, ram, birds, goats, Prfot deer, 
hna deer, Ruru deer, boar and hare. If these are offered the 
Pitamahas are satisfied.* 


142b-145a. If a person staying at Gaya (or at any 
highly sacred place like Prayaga, Nainii^^—A/tV.) gives i.e. per¬ 
forms if with the fiesh of a rhinoceros, a kind offish 
called Mahasalka,** honey, food suitable to sages, flesh of a 
red-coloured goat, Makdtdka (i.e. Kalaiaka or Pfared in 
Hindi), white goat, he attains eternal benefit (or bliss). 
That is particularly so, if it is performed on the 13th day of 
the dark half of Bhadrapada when the constellation Magha 
is on that day. 

143b-148a. A person who offers Srdddha from the 1st day 
of the dark halfof Bhadrapada uptothe new moon day (with the 
exception of the fourteenth day which is reserved for those 
killed with a weapon in battle, etc.) forever gets (as a fruit 
of performance of ^rdddha on that particular titki as follows): a 
(beautiful) girl (of good character and characteristics), 


* The Mitikw^ clariAet that it U (rice boiled in milk) 

that should represent each kind of flesh for 

** in the NP is most probably a mixprint as this is a bit of 

food’Stufls). 



6S4 


}fdrada Purdnji 


(intelligent, handsome) sons*in-Ia;v, small beasts like sheep, good- 
mannered sons, success in gambling, (Harvest in) agriculture, 
profit in commerce, two-hoofed animals like cows, one-hoofed 
animals like horses, sons with the brilliance of Vcdic studies, 
etc., gold and silver (also other metals like lead, zinc), leader¬ 
ship in one's caste, fulfilmenr of all desires (of heaven etc.) The 
[ekoddUfa) SrAddha on the fourteenth day of the dark half of 
Bhddrapadaxs (reserved) for persons who die of being struck 
with weapons. 

I48b-l32a. If a person, full of faith, deep reverence, 
devoid of arrogance and jealousy performs a ^r&ddha with due 
formalities on every Pfdkfdlra (constellation) beginning from 
Krttikd (the Pleiades) and ending with Bkarnni will attain 
the following desired objects : the heaven, progeny, exuberance 
of Atmic (spiritual) powen, bravery or fearlessness, fenile fields, 
physical strength, a (virtuous) son, prominent social status 
(in one's community), popularity, affluence in wealth etc., 
prominence, auspiciousness, unchallenged command, commerce, 
agriculture, cows, etc. health, fame, absence of sorrow (due to 
bereavement of a dear person), attainment of the highest 
{BfohmM) region, money, gold, etc. (mastery over) the Vedas, 
efTectiveness of medicines, metals (except gold and silver), cows, 
he and she-goats and longevit)'. 

IS2b-lS4a. The deities presiding over and propitiated in 
^iraddha such as Vasus, Rudras, sons ofAditi (devas) and Pitrs 
when satisfied by propitiation through Sr&ddha give pleasure to 
the manes of the performer but these grandsires of human 
beings bestow longevity, progeny, wealth, learning, heaven, 
emancipation from Sarhs&ra, all pleasure and (even) a 
kingdom. 


154b-155a. In this way are narrated a few special 
features or particulars of the Kalpddkydya, The details should be 
known in Vedic tentras and other purdnas. 


155b-157. He shall attain auspicious goal here and here¬ 
after. The man who devoutly listens to this chapter on 
during the holy rites pertaining to the Devas and the PUrx 



IL51.137-158 


655 


obtains the benefit of the holy rites pertaining to Devas and 
Pitrs. He obtains wealth, learning, renown, and sons here 
and the highest goal hereafter. 

138. Henceforth, I shall recount to you the treatise 
on Grammar which is called the face of the Vedas. I shall re¬ 
count it succinctly. Listen attentively* 



CHAPTER FiFTYONE 


1. deals with Vedic rituab. According to the topic discussed, it 

was classified as G'Ajra and Dh^rma sutrms. The NP. divides them 

under: (1) the Vrda, (2) Sarnhita (3) Ahgiras, (4) S4Titi, and (5) 
Nak^atra Kalpa. NP. borrows mostly from Ylj. Smr. in this chapter. 

2. These are measures of capacity, vide SKD JII p. 203 ApaiUmln 

.frsaM Satftt is quoted. 



CHAPTER FIFTYTWO 


Exposition of Grammar'* 

Sanandana saii\ 

1. ONarada^ I shall now explain to you in hntlVydkarasia 
(grammar) by means of (illustrations of) readymade forms (in* 
ductively?); grammar is regarded as the mouth of the Veda. 

2. Words are either Suhanias (substantives) or 7in* 
anfas (verbs). O Brahmana, the seven cases are covered by 

terminations. The (indexiotis) AUy Jas constitute 

the Pratkamd (the first i.e. the Nominative] case. It consists of 
the Prdiipadika (the noun in its uninflected state before case- 
terminations are applied). 

3. A significant form of a word» not being a verbal 
root {Dhdtu) or an {Pratyaya) or a word ending in an 
affix is called Prdtipadika (crude-form or Nominal base)^ The 
Nom. (Nominative) casc-aifix is employed when the sense is 
that of addressing (Sambodhana)* or where there is the additional 
sen.se of gender only or to denote the subject. 

4. Amy Auy »Seuare the inllections of the Accusative case. 
Thai which is done (by the agent) is Karma (object). In the 
object, the Accusative case is used.^ And also when a word is 
joined by (i.e. governed by) the word Aniard or Anfarena it 
takes the second case-affix^ (i.e. of the objective case). 

5. fd, B/iydm, BAis are the terminations of the third 
(Instrumental) case. In denoting the agent or the instrument 
the third (Instrumental) case-affix is employed)^. Thai 

* A% stated in the Introduction, the presentation of Sk. Grammar in 
the NP ii popular but unw^tematic, os he givei a number of examples with¬ 
out ditcuisiog the rules. But w 2*24 show that the NP has giveti a number 
of PSoini'f /fitfdf in averse form, leVr the Kireka Frakarofio and tbe annotations 
on these verses. It appears that this section was written after the 7th cent. 
A.D, that U after Plnini refoinrd his popularity by Bhartrhari'i VOk^podSjra 
and such ocher works. 



658 Ndrada Purdna 

wherewith something is done is ihc instrument and he who 
does it is the agent (ATflrM). 

6. The desinences of the Dative case are Bhyam, 
Bkyas and they arc to be used with Sampraddna Kdraka, The person 
to whom something is desired to be given, something is owed' 
or something appeals (or is liked) is called the Samfnad^na. 

4 

7. Nasii Bhy^m^ Bhyas arc the terminations of the fifth 
(Ablative) case. They are to be used m the Apdddna Kdraka. 
Apdddna is that from whidi something moves away, gets sepa* 
rated or is taken away. 

8. The terminaiions for the sixth (Genitive) case are 
Nas^ Os and Am. It is mainly used when the relationship of 
possession or ownership is indicated. .V'. Or, Sup are the termina¬ 
tions of the seventh or« Locative case. It shows AdhuKarai^.a. 

9. O promiuc.it Brahma^! it (the ierm AdhikaranQ) is 
used in the sense of Adhdra^. Verbs implying protection govern 
the Ablative case. That which is des'^cd or that which is 
abhorred are called Apadanakas (and they take the Ablative 
case]. 

10-11. The ablative case is used when the preposition 
Pariy Apay AHy [tara and arc used as Kanna^pravacaniytP and 
with words denoting quarters. The kaTma*pravac(sniyas govern 
the accusative case also. The words Pratiy Pari and Anu^'^ arc 
Karma^pravacaniya when used in the sense of (1) *sign\ 'in the 
direction of*, (2) ‘mere statement nf a circumstance or as 
regards {ittham bhSta)^ and the word Abhi in the above sense of 
^in the direction of*, 'as regards* but not when it means division 
or ‘share of’". Anu is used in the sense of Saha. In the sense of 
Afrta'* (inferior, subordinate to) and They are used as 

Karma-pTQvacaniyas (governing instrumental). 

12. In the case of roots implying motion, (he place to 
which the motion is desired or directed take the termination of 
the second (Accusative) or the fourth (Dative) case'*. In denot¬ 
ing the indirect object, which ts not an animal, of the verb 
tnanya {^/man +>a) *to think*. The Dative case is (optionally) 
employed, when contempt is to be shown'*. 

13. The Dative case Uused with words }fama^ (Bow to), 
Soasti (peace and bliss), Svdkd, Svadhd (to be uttered in 



IL52.I3-19 


659 


oHering oblations to gods and manes respectively), alarh 'a 
match for’ and (a mystic term in sacrifices). This case 

termination is used when the crudeTorm (base] ends in an affix 
denoting 'condition* or having the force of the infinitive of 
purpose (which lias —turn as the affix 

14. The instrumental case is used with Saha^^ (acconv* 
panied by], in an attribute pointing to the physical defect of a 
person^^ While indicating ciine» abstract notion both the 
Locative as well as the Genitive case is used. 

15. The Genitive and Locative case terminations are 
used when they are conjoined with words Svdmtn ‘master*, 
UvQta 'Lord*, Adhipati ‘Sovereign ruler*, ‘witness*, d&ydda 
‘an heir’, Sfii<ika {Prasf^la in the S^itra) ‘born** and with words 
specificating an individual from the class [nirdhdrana)^'^. But only 
the Genitive in Heluprt^ga^^ i.e. after a noun implying the 
cause of an action, when the word hetu is used only with such 
a word (e.g. annnsya hehtvasaii. ‘He dwells for the sake of food* 
and not the Instrumental. 

16 The Genitive case is used with objects of verbs 
connoting memory, attempting or exerting for or doing violence 
lo or with a word denoting an agent and the object when it is 
used alongwith a word ending in a Kft affix*. 

17a*b. The terminations of the Genitive arc not used to 
express the agent or the object, when the word is formed by a 
past participle (in kia and kl<walu^^. In the case*ending begin¬ 
ning with Sup^ etc., the alternative uses should be known. 

]7c. In case of roots (of 1st, 2nd conjugations) like 

Vdy which end in (i.e. take the inflexions) Tin. There arc 
ten Lakdras^^ (tenses and moods) for conjugation. 

18-19. Tipy Tas, Anti arc the inflexion of the Pralhama^^ 
Puru.ta (but in modern Sk. gracnoiar it is called the ‘third*) 
person. Sip, Thesy Tha are the inflections of i\it Madhyama Puru$a 
(called (he ‘second person*in modem Sk. grammar). Mipy For, 
Mai are the terminations of the Uitama Purus a (designated ‘fint 
person* by modem Sk. grammarians). The above terminations 
are in the Parasmaipada. 

In the Atma/upada set of roots, the terminations of the 
third person are Te, Au and Anti. Those of the second penon 



660 


Nirada Purdf^ 


are Se^ Athe and DhiH\ and those of the First person are V&hi 
and Mahi, It should be known that there are other substitutes 
for these terminations in LiA and other tenses and moods. 

20. When a substantive is used it is called the ^third 
person.’ When the word Tufmnd (‘you* or ‘thou*) is used it is 
called the ‘second person’, and when the word Asmai {‘I* or 
‘we’) is used it is called the ‘first person*. 

21*22. BhU and others (i.c. other roots of different con¬ 
jugations] are called Dhdlus. Those ending in San and other 
suiTixes are (also) called Dhaius^ In tlie present tense 
Laf is used. In the past Tense (not of the present day), and 
with the use of the particle Mdma^ ihei^^ (Past Imperfect) 
is used. In expressing benediction, Laf is used. To denote 
injunction, permission, etc. as well as in giving blessings Lift 
(the Potential mood) is used. These an; the twofold uses of LiA^ 
O Sage. 

23. In the past not witnessed by the speaker personally, 
Lif (Perfect) is used. In the future (not of today), Aw/(1 
future) is used after the roots. 

24. In denoting the past, L 119 (the Aorist) is used. In 
case oi Alipatti (lapse or non-occurable condition) Ar^ (^) 
(conditional mood) is used. 

Now understand the ready made examples beginning with 


Sartihitds (sandhis). 



25-30. Danda 

4 Agram 

« Dandagrain 

Dadhi 

r Idam 

^ Dadhidam 

Madhu 

Udakam 

Madhudakam 

Pilf 

-f Rsabha*^ 

Pitrsabha 

Hofr 

Lkara 

Hotrkara 

Sa 

+ lyam 

— Scyani 

Lahgala 

+ Isa 

Langali^ 

Manas 


Manisa. 

Ganga 

+ Udakam 

' Gahgodakam 

Tava 

4 - (jeara 

— Tavalkara 

Rna 

- Rnam 

* 4 

R^arnam 

Sita 

+ Arta 

» Sitarta 

Sa 

-j- Indra 

» Sendra 



11.52.30-31 


661 


Sa 

+ 

Oiikara 


Saunkara* 

Vadhu 

+ 

Asanam 


Vadhvasanam 

Pitr 

+ 

Art ha 

«« 

Pitrartha 

Nai 

+ 

Aka 


Nayaka 

Lo 

+ 

Ana 


Lavana 

Tc 

+ 

Adyah 

- 

Ta ddydh 

Visno 

-f- 

E 


Vifnave 

Hi 


Atra 


Hyatra 

Tasmai 

+ 

Argho 

- 

Tasma argho 

Gurau 

1 

t' 

Adhah 


Gwh adhah 

Hare 

+ 

Ava 


HareVa 

Vi§no 

+ 

Ava 


VisnoVa 

III 

+ 

E?a 

- 

Itycsa 

Ami 

+ 

Aghah 

- 

Ami agha. 


From this onwards O excellent sage, the words remain as 
before i.e. without any Sandhi or phonetic change. 


Sauri 

+ 

Etaii 


Saur! Etau 

Visnu 

+ 

Imau 


Visnu Imau 

1 % 

Durge 

+ 

Amu 

- 

Durge Amii 

No 

+ 

Arjuna 


No Arjuna 

A 

4- 

Evam 


A Evam 

Absence of phonetic change only upto thb. 

!$at 

+ 

Aira 


$adatra 

§at 

+ 

Matarah 

*- 

Sanmatarah 

Vak 

+ 

(S) Churah 

S3 

Vakechiirah 

Vak 

+ 

Hari 

«- 

Vagghari 

Harih 

• 

+ 

Sete 


Harisletc 

Vibhuh 

+ 

Cintyah 


Vibhuscintyah 

Tat 

+ 



Tacchesa. 

Yat 

+ 

Cara 


Yaccara 

Prainah 

+ 

Tvatha 


Prainas tvatha 

Harib 

+ 

Sasthab 

* 

Harifsastliab 

Kr?nah 

4- 

Tikate 

• 


Krsnaftikate 


31. Bhavan+Sastha]> $at+^ntalt and Saf+Te (in 
these three cases no phonetic change) 


If SaukdTA be the reading, it will be from 



662 


Xdradti Purdna 


Tat 

+ 

Lepali 

Tallepah 

Cakrin 

+ 

Chindhi 

Cakrimichindhi 

Bhavan 

+ 

Saurih 

Bhavaf^chaurih 




or BhavaA^aurih 




(two forms) 

32-34. Samyah 

+ 

Ananta 

Samyannananta 

Anga 


Chaya 

Angacchaya 


O excellent sage, Ktstiam+namaini ‘I salute Krsna*. 
(Here 'M* becomes Anusvira) ^Krsnafti namami. Similarly, in 
TejSthsi and MaiftsydU, In Ganga, the Anusv^a becomes 
(the gutteral nasal letter). 


Harih 

+ Chcltr 

e% 

Hariichcttf. 

Anurah 

+ Sivab 


Amarasiivab* 

Ramalii 

+ Kamya 


RamabX^^n^y^ 

(Here the Visarga becomes 


Krpah 

-f PujyalA 

* 

KrpaxPiijyab 

(Here the Visarga becomes Upadhmanlya 
PQjyali, Arcyah+Eva-Arcya eva.) 

or simply Harih 

Ramah 

• 

+ Dr$tab 


Raino drsfab 

Abalah 

+ Aira 


Abala atra 

Suptab 

+ Is^ab -h 

Imah 

• 

4 Yalah -- 


Supta Ista Ima Yatab 

Visnuh 

4 - Namyah 


Visnurnamyab 

Ravih 

4 

+ A yam 

« 

Ravirayam 

Gir 

4 Phalam 

* 

GiXphalam 

{Upadhmdniya). 

Pratah 

4 Acyutab 

— 

Prataracyutah 

Bhaktaih 

4 Vandyah 


Bhaktairvandyah 

Api 

4 Antaratma 

=« 

Apy antaratma 

Bhoh 

% 

4 Bhoh 


Bho Bho 

E^ah 

4 Harih 

— 

Esa Harih 

E^h 

4 ^rngin 


iarngin 

Sab+Esab + Ramah 


Saisa ramah 


Thus the Safhhita {Sandhi, close proximity) has been 
narrated. 


35. This verse gives the dccletwion of Rama (Masc. 
Noun ending in—a) in all the cases : 

Rdment^^ bhihitam karomi satatam 
RdmaA bhaje sadaram / 



11.52.35-45 


663 


RiminA* pahrUih samasta^Juricam, 

Rimdya tubhyam namah / 

Rdmdn muktirabhlpsita mama 
Rdmasya daso*smyaham / 

R^me rafijatu me manah suvisadam 
he R4ma tubhyam namah / / 

(I) Rama does those things that benefit all; 

(2} I always respectfully worship Rama 

(3) all sins are removed by Rama 

(4) Obeisance to you, Rama 

(3) Liberation is always sought for from Rama by me. 

(6) I am the servant unto Rama. 

(7) May iny mind be clear and take delight in Rama; 

(8) O Rama, obeisance to you. 

36-37a. All the words (ending in vowels] arc (to be 
declined like thU) Gopah* Sakki becomes S'aAAd (friend); Pati 
(lord), Hari; Suirih (one with good glory); Bhanu (the Sun); 
Svayarhbhu (the self-bom), Kartr (the Agent); Rah {Rai 
means 'wealth'], Gauh (bull); Nauh (boat). 

37b-39, Words ending in consonants: Anadvan (bullock); 
Godhuk (one who milks cows)> (lit. one who licks), Dve (two); 
Trayah (three); Catvarah (four); Raja (king); Panthafi (way); 
Dandi (one with a staflT); Brahmaha (a slayer of a Brahmin), 
Pafica (five), As^a and A${au (eight) ; O sage (these are all 
examples of consonant ending words). (The following too are 
words ending in consonants): Samra( (Emperor); (the next 
two words are defective); Pratyah (the individual soul); Puinan 
(man); Mahan (great); Dhlman (Intelligent); Vidvan 
(learned); Pipathih (one who desires to read); Doh (the arm); 
Usana (the preceptor of the demons). .\I1 th^e above words 
are in the masculine (and are typical of nouns ending in 
different consonants.) 

40^’-43. The following are feminine words ending in 
vowels and consonants viz.: Radhi; Sarva (all);Gau (goal, 
gait); Gopi (cowherdess); Stri (a woman); 8ri (glory); Dhenu 
(cow); Vadhu (bride); Svaiii (sister); Go (gaub) (cow); 
Naub (boat), Upanat^^ (shoe); Dyaub (heaven); Glauh 
(moon);—Ksut (imnger); Kakubh (the quarters) Sarhvit 




664 


Jflirada Pur Ana 


(knowledge); Ruk(lustre); Vi{ (excrement); Bhah (splendour). 
All the above words are feminine. (Then the neuter nouns): 
Tapas (penance); Kulam (family); Somapam (that which 
imbibes Soma juice); Ak$i (eye); Gramani (leading in the 
village); Ambu (water); Khalapu (that which sweeps); Kartr 
(that which does*). 

Svanadut (that which has good bull); Vimaladyu (a non* 
cloudy bright day); Vah (water); Catvari (four); Idam (this); 
£tat(thu) Brahman; Ahah (day); Dandl (havir^ a stick); 
Asrk (blood).There are some words beginning with The 

diHercnt forms of Go+Aiic^^ arc Gavak, Gavah, Goak» Go*ah 
and Goh; Tiryak (animal); Yakft (spleen); Sakft (ordure); 
Dadat (that which gives); Bhavat (that which takes place); 
Pacat (that which cooks); Tudat (that which inflicts pain); 
Divyat (that which shines); Dhanus (bow); Pipafhih (that 
which reads); Payas (milk, water); Adas (this ); Supum&msi 
(those which have good men); I shall mention a few qualities, 
objects, and actions of the three /i/igas (genders); Sukla (bright 
clean); Kilalapah (goblins); 6uci (white); Gramani (leader 
of the village);SudhTb(intelligent); Pa^u^ (clever); Svayambhuh 
(self'bom}; Karta (Agent), Mata (mother), Pita (father), Na 

(Nr). 

46-47a. (Defective***) 

47b*49. Sarva (all); Viiva (all); Ubhaya (both); 
Ubhau (both); Anya (other); Antara (interval); Icara 
(other); Uttara (higher); Uttama (highest, excellent); 
Nema (half, part); Asama (unequal), Sama; I^a (one 
possessing strength); Puivottara (north*east); Dak^ina 
(southern) Uttaradhara (northwest); Apara (another); Catura 
(clever) Yavat (As much [relative]); Yusmad (you); Asmad 
(we); Prathama (first); Carama (last); Alpa (little); Ardhaka 
(half). 

50. (Defective) and the Avyayas (indeclinables) (?) 


* Two words afier thb vU. CMri aod Filinu appear defective. Are They 
ca-^attri aod (noo*navigable). 

** The group eoaitsts of Ud, jf^d, iUd etc. 

*** Probably the following words in V* 46: Safya, asdruf, epwhsa, maUtp 

h^/m (47a wunuliiiihU). 



11.52 51-55 


663 


51. In the sense of *cluld* or ^Progeny* Taddhita sufhx* 
is used. The examples are :— Pandavas (sons of Pandu); 
Sraidhara (son of Sridhara i.e. Visnu); Gargya** (descendant 
of Garga) ; Nadayana^* (Descendant of Nada); Atrcya** (son of 
Atri); Gahgeya (son of Gahga); Paitrsvasriya (son of father’s 
sister). 

52. In the sense of “Deity**, “that which belongs to’*, 
the example is Aindra (that which belongs to Indra, ih:ii the 
deity of which is Indra); Brahma means belonging to Brahma; 
these two refer to H<ivis ^ndBait (oBcrings and oblations). When 
the object and the agent (of a verb) arc united with the action 
(Taddhita suifix is used as in the case of) Dhaureya (one worthy 
of bearing burden) ^ad KcuAkuma (pertaining to saffron). 

53. In the sense of *horn of’, Taddhita suHix is used and 
the example is Kanina (born of a virgin); the word Ksatriya 
(one wlio protects from wound), Vaidika (one who follows the 
injunctions of the Vedas). Here the sufBx —Aka is used. ‘Cora’ 
itself is ^Caura*. Here the suffix an is used in the same meaning, 
Both Cora and Caiira mean Uhief’ The usage, ‘he sees the 
face like the moon” is for the purpose of equality. 

54. In the sense of an abstract noun the suffixes —Tvam 
etc. are used. Examples are Brahmanatva, Bralimanata and 
Brahmanya (all mean Brahminhood). The word Gfman means 
“one who has cows”, similarly, Dhanin and Dhanavan mean 
“one who has wealth”. In the sense of magnitude Kiyan (How 
much) is used. 

55. The words Tundila and Sraddha-Iu arc derived after 
the suffixes have been added in the sense of “that which has 
occurred.” ‘Tundila* (one who has protuberant belly) and 
‘Sraddhalu’ means “one who has iaitli”, Dantura (one who has 
long projecting teeth). In the following cases the Taddhita 
suffix-‘/n’ is in the sense of ‘it exists’, ‘possessing’ Sragvin 
(one who has garlands),Tapasvin (one who performs penance), 
Medhavin (one who has excellent intellect), Mayavin one 
who has Maya (deception). 


* I'hougb we cun trace the examples in that veries to PAQini, the 
treatment » not lystemaiic in the NP. tride : lacro. 



666 


Ndrada Purdna 


56. The words Vacila and Vacata are used to indicate 
^one who speaks many despicable things’, the suffixes Kalpa 
and Deliya are used in the sense of^a little short of’. 

Kavikaipa and Kavideiya mean ^‘one who is 
almost a poet”. The word Patujatiya is used in indicating 
similitude. In indicating contempt the suffix Pd^a is used. 
^Vaidyapaia’, means ^onewho is not worthy of being a physician*. 
The word Vaidyarupa means *a praiseworthy physician’. O sage, 
the word ‘Dr^a cara* is used in the sense of ^what it was for¬ 
merly!* In the sense of abundancy, etc., the suffix ^Maya’ is 
used e.g. Annamaya (full of cooked food), Mrnmaya (mostly 
of clay) and Strimaya (abounding in women). 

59. The word Lajjita means *one in whom bashfulness 
has occurred’. O Narada, in indicating excess Sreyan and 
Sre$(ha are used. They mean very excellent and most excellent; 
Ki^natara (blacker); Suklatama (whitest). From the pronoun 
Kim (what) indecUnables are derived! [They are :] 

60-62. Kiihtaram, Atitaram (too much), Abhihyuccaista* 
ram (highly, etc.). To indicate the measure some suHixes are 
used. Janudaghnam, Janudvayasam and Janumatram (upto the 
knee). To specify one among many, we say ^Katara’ (which of 
the two?). In order to specify the ordinals there are suffixes : 
Dvitlya (second), Trtlya (third), Caiurtha (fourth), Sa$(ha 
(sixth), Paficama (fifth) Ekada^a (eleventh). O Narada, 
Katipaya, Katitha and Kati mean; ^How many?’ 

63. Virhsa and Viiiisatitama both mean ‘twentieth’. 
Similarly *$ata-tama* and other words. O leading sage, in 
order to indicate divisions of number there are suffixes as for 
example : Dvidha, Dvedha, Dvaidha (in two ways) • 

64. In indicating frequencies, suffixes are used e.g. 
PaAcakrtvah (five times): Dvtlj (twice), Trib (three times) 
Bahuiab (many times). Dvitayam and Dvayam mean the same. 
So also Tritayam and Trayam. 

65. Suffix-—ra is used in signifying dimuni tive forms 
Ku^ira (a small hut); Samira (a small fruit, legume) Sundara 
(a small trunk of the elephant), Straina (belonging to women) 
Pausna (belonging to the sun). Tundibha (one who has the 
umbilical region ‘protruding’; Vrnd&raka (Deva); Krsivala 
(fiinner). 



11.52.66-73 


667 


66. Malina (dirty); Vikata (hideous); Gomi (an owner 
of cattle); Bhaurikl (treasurer), Utkata (exceedingly manifest); 
Avatija and Avanau both mean flat*nosed. Nibida (dense, 
compact); I ksu^akinam (having sugarcane as crop?). 

67. Nibirisama (compact, crooked nosed), Isuk&n, 
Vitto, Vidjiat, Cana* (?), VidyacuAcu (celebrated for learning); 
Bahutitham (many days); Parvata (mountain), Sthginah (of 
one which has peaks). 

68*69. Svatnin (owner) ; Visamarupyam (?), Upatyaka 
(a land at the foot of a mountain ); Adhityaka (a table land) 
Cilia (the Bengal kite); Cipi(a (flafnosed); Cikva^^ (?) Vatula 
(affected by wind, crazy); Kutapa (the eight Muhurta of the 
day); Valla (covering); Himelu (competeni to endure snow). 
Kahoda^^ (?), Copada^ (cream MW-402), Urnayu (ram, 
woollen blanket); Marutta (a king of the solar race); Ekaktn 
(alone); Carman vati (name of a river). 

70. jyoesna (moonlight); Tarnisra (night); $th!vai 
(spittle); Kaksivardyamanuati (?);^ Asandi (a small couch) 
Cakrivaii (An ass) Tusnika (Taciturn, silent); .Jalpaka 
(garrulous) ; (Reading Jalpak€tjf<>pi), 

71. O Narada, to the words Kajn and Sam seven termi¬ 
nations arc added in the sense of possession. They arc VA, Bha, 
Yus, Ti, Tu, Ta and Ya and the new words formed arc Kamva, 
Kambha, Karhyus, Kamti, Kamtu, Kamtah, ICamyah, as well as 
$amva, Sambha, Samyu, Samti, ^mtu, Partita and Samyah. 

Similarly, Ahamyu (an arre^ant fellow), Subhamyu (one 
endowed with auspiciousness). 

Canjugatian 

72-73. The forms of the roots of different conjugational 
classes in the diH'erent tenses and moods are given in the 
third person singular: 

I conj. : Bhavaii (is), Babh&va (was), Bhaviid and 
Bhavifyati (will be), Bhavatu (let it be), Abhavai (was), Bhavet 
(should be), Bhuydt (may it be), Abhat (was), Abhavifyat (if it 
had been). 

11 conj. : Alti (eats), Jaghdsa (ace), Atid and Atsyati 
(will eat), Atiu (let him eat), Adat (ate), Adydt (twice ) (should 
eat, may eat), Aghdsal (ate), Al^t (if it had eaten). 

* Probably, the word U (well-known tor learning). 



668 


ydrada Purdna 


74«76. Ill conj.: (performs a Homa)^ Jahdva and 

JuhavdHcakdra (performed the //erne), Hot4, Hofyati (will perform 
the Homa) Juhotu (let him perform the Homa), Ajuhot (he 
performed the Homa)^ Jukujfdt (he should perform the Homa), 
Hdjfdt (May he perform the Homa), Akau^lt (He performed the 
Homa) ; Aho$yai (if he had performed the Homa). 

IV conj. : Diiyati (he gambles) Dideva (he gambled), 

Dfvitd, Devifycli (he will gamble) omitted in the text), 

Adlvyai (he gambled), Dwyet (he should gamble), Dxvydi (may 
he gamble) Adevit (he gambled), Adm^yai (if he had 
gambled). 

V conj.: iSWc’/i (he distils), Sufdva (he distilled), Sotd 
and So^yati (he will distil), Sunotu (Let him distil) Asunot (he 
distilled), Sunuydt (he should distil), S^ydt (may he distil), 
AsdvU (he distilled ), Aso^yat (if he had distilled). 

VI conj. : Tudati (he inflicts pain) Tutoda (he inflicted 
pain); ToUd, Toisyati (he will inflict pain), Tudntu {\ti him inflict 
pain), Atudat (he inflicted pain), Tudei (he should inflict pain), 
Tudydi (may he inflict pain), Aiauisii (he inflicted pain), 
Ahtsyat (if he had inflicted pain). 

VII conj. : Kunaddhi (he impedes), Rurodha (he impeded) 
Roddhd, Rotsyaii (he will impede), Rufjiaddhu (let him impede) 
Arunat (he impeded), Rundhydi (he should impede) (This is 
omitted in text). Rudhydt (may he impede), ArautsU (and the 
alternative foim Arudhat which is omitted in the text) (he 
impeded) Arottyat (if he had impeded). 

77-79. VIII conj. : Tanoti (he spreads or stretches) 
Tatdna (he stretched), Tanitd^ Tanifyati (he will stretch), 
Tanotu (let him stretch), -4(he stretched), Tanuydt (he 
should stretch), Tanydt (may he stretch—omitted in the text), 
Atanit and Atdnii (he stretched) Atanisyat (if he had stretched). 

IX conj. : Krindli (he buys) Cikrdya (he bought), Kretd, 
Kwydti (he will buy), Krindlu (let him buy) AkrU^ (he bought), 
Kriniydt (he should buy), Kriydt (may he buy), Akrai^it {he 
bought), Aktifyal (ifhe had bought). 

X conj. : (he steals), CorayOmdsa (he stole), 

Corayitd and Corayifyati (he will steal), Corayatu (let him 



11.50.79.88 


669 


steal), Acorayat (he stole), Corayet (he should steal) Cor)>dl 
(may he steal), Acfkurai (he stole)y A^arifyat (? Acorayifyat) 
(if he had stolen). 

Thus there are ten Ganas or conjugational classes. 

The causal form is Bhdvayaii (causes something to be), 
the desiderative form is BubhSl^Ati (desires to become). As the 
frequentative form, O sage (we have) (again and 

again he becomes). 

80*81. In the Tanhk (i.e. where Yon termination is 
omitted) the form is BobhauUi. O Narada, in order to denote 
wish or emulating action. Putriyati is the form meaning 
'desires a son for himself’ or 'behaves like a son*. O BrAhmaQa 
know that a root with an Anuddita Atmontpado (low tone) or letter 
as its VT’ (i.e. indicatory mark) takes Atmanftpada termina¬ 
tions. When the duty is interchanged it takes Atmampada (as 
for example vyatilunlUy 'he reaps the harvest’ (though it is some 
one else’s duty). The root Vif . after the preposition Ni takes 
Atmanfpada tenninations. Where the Atmanepada does not have 
access, the Parosmaipada terminatiotis are used by grammarians. 

82-83. If the root has a Svarita or .y for its indicatory 
mark, it takes both padas (but when the fruit of the action 
goes to the agent, it takes the Atmonepada terminations). In 
the impersonal passive, Yak termination is used. O sage, in 
order to indicate the excellence and facility in the action, the 
activity of the agent is not taken into consideration. Then the 
other Kdrakas too take up the term Kartr (agent), as in the 
use Asih Sddho Chinatli (the knife cuts well), Sthdli Pacali 
(the vessel cooks). If the root is transitive, the terminations 
are added to both the impersonal and the passive bases (?) 
Hence the use Odonakpalate (the rice is cooked). If the root 
is intransitive it is impersonal and active only. O sage, if the 
action and the fruit of the action are in one and the same per¬ 
son, it is intransitive. 

86-88* If they (i.e. action and the fruit to the action) 
are stationed in different substantives, the root is said to be 

* ef. duhyidth pradhbss nhhrk^ 9 i^kdm / 

hb44‘kam4kirtAik // 

prn;^jya‘k^mae^KU9;9i9dik maidbt 

KArikd quoted in StddhdnU on Pin. 7.1»69. 




670 


Ndrada Purina 


transitive. When roots that take two objects are to be changed 
into passive, the secondary object is turned into the nominative 
in the case of roots tTSr etc* (e^g. Oauh Duhyate Payaft), 
But in regard to the roots Jfi, Hr^ Ktf, and Vak^ the main 
object is turned into the nominative in the passive (e.g. 
Ajd grdmarh Niyatt ‘‘The goat is taken to the village’’). But in 
the case of roots of the sense of knowledge or eating, any of the 
two objects may be turned into the nominative Bkojyate 
md7?avakam odanafi or Bhojyate mdpavakatiodanam). (In the case of 
causal roots, (the object so caused) the Prayojyakaman is changed 
into the nominative. {Devadat(a^ grdma/ft gamyate^DtvadsiiiSi 
is made to go to the village). The teiminations are reitiem* 
bered in the receptacle of the fruit as well as the action. The 
action \s important in the case of the fruit. The meaning of 
the TiA is an attribute. 

89*90 The Kriya suffixes are used in the impersonal and 
passive forms. The Kft suiBxes are used in the active forms. 
Example for a Kftya suffix is Edhitatyam and Edhaniyam, The 
Agent and the Kdrakas etc. are cited in the event of the past 
(?]. Gcmya etc. are indicated in the future sense and the 
remaining is considered applicable in the present. (?) 

Compounds 

91-92. Examples of compound words are given now: 
Adhislri and Tathdiakti exAmplts oC Avyayibhdva. Examples 
of Tatpurufo* arc Ramdiriiat Dhdnydrthi (one seeking grains) 
TSpaddru (wood intended for sacrificial post) Vydghrabhi (fear from 
tigers) Rdjapurufa (A king's officer) and Akfoiaun^a (clever at 
the dice). Now Dvigu is explained: Panca-gava ‘‘an aggregate of 
Bve cows”, DaSagrdmi (collection of ten villages), Tnphald (the 
three myrobalans). The last word b conventionally used in 
this sense. 

93. When the two words constituting a compound are equ* 
ally important and have the same meaning it is called 
Komadhdraya, Examples are Mlotpala (bl\xt lotus) Mahdsa^thi 


* These examples arc according to eases e.g. Rdmsirt ddritaft RSmdfritafi 
is the accuiative (Dvltlyl) Tatpurufa and illustrates Pan. 2.1.J4, while the 
\9at4/i4$fu a locative Tatpuru>aisaa illustration 

of Pan. 2.1.40. 



11.52.93-96 


671 


(A form ofDurga in Tantras). The example for J>>/^antatpuru,ui 
is abrdhmanak (non-Brahmin). KumbhakSra (potter). '-This is 
an example of a Kri Somdsa. 

94. O Brahmana> the examples for a Bahuvrihi compound 
where the meaning refers to another word (as its qualifying 
adjunct) are: Prdptodaka (where the water has reached), it quali* 
6es Grdma (village) PafUagu (one ’> has 6ve cows 
RBpavadbkdryah (one whose wife is beautiful)» Madhydhnah 
(middle of the ^ Sasutddikah (one who is accompained 
by sons and others). 

95. The particle Ca has two meanings via. Samuccayn 
assemblage) and Anvdcdy^ (secondary statement). 

The example for the former is Gurum ca Uarhea Bhajasva (worship 
the preceptor and God). The example for the latter is 
Bkihfdm aiay gdth ca dnaya (Go begging and also bring 
a cow). 

96. Example for ItareUtrayoga Dvandva is Rdmakr^tfou (i.c. 
Rama and Krsna). As a SamdhSra (collection the form is 
Ramakrsnam). O Brahmana, only the Brahman is worship¬ 
ped. As it is devoid oiDvandvas (clashing opposites). 



CHAPTER FIFTVTWO 


1. NP. 3 is An reproduciion of P&ti. (Partial) l>2.f5 & 

2.3*46. Thus P^n. 1.2,45 U : 

Arthavad’a-dhitur ^prcfynyttk pritip^dikam 
NP. 3b 

Artkaif^ prdtipadtkarh dfuHu^pratyavo'carjitsm 

2. Pin. 2.3.47, 

3. ?\t). 2.3.2. 

4. Pio. 2.3-4. 

5. ?i:i 2.3.18. 

C. Pio. 1.4.3,% 1.4,33. 

7. Piu. J.4.4.% 2.3,36. 

8. Pin. 2.3.29, 1.4.88, 2.3.10. 

9. When cer(4in prepositions, pariides or adverbs Are not connected 
whh a verb, yet they govern a noun in particular cases they are called JCarmo* 
pravQCMiya e.g. i : d mukU^ somsdrch *the samsdra lasts till Mokfa'; anu : 
Jap<\m aiur prA9<trfata *Il rained heavily afier the performance of jepd.' 

10. Pan. 1.4.90. 

11. Pin. 1.4.91. 

12. Pan. 1.4.85-86. 

13. Pao- 1.4.87. 

14. Fin 2.3.12. The 5d/ra further clarifies that the cases are used in 
denoting the * object’ when actual motion is meant and (he object is not a 
word expressing 'path*. 

1.5. Pin. 2.3.17. 

16. Pip. 2.3.16. 

17. Pin. 2.3.15. 

18. The original sutra is Saha-ytikU* prodkdne 2,3.19 which means : when 

the sense is (hat the word in the instrumental case is not the principal but 
the Skccompaniment of the principal thing or person. For example : puirrpa 
Schdgaiah piid 'the father has come with the son. The same rule holds about 
the synonyms of Saha such as Sdrdka. —Siddhinla Kcumudi. 

19. Pin. 2.3.20 For example : pddtna Khatijah 'Lame foot*. 

20. Pip. 2.3.39. 

21. Pip. 2.3.41. 

22. Pip. 2.3.26, 

23. Pip. 2.3.65. 

24. After these the Inatrumenial case must be employed to denote the 
agent and the Accusative ease to denote the object. For example, 

* Fi.fgimd haid daii;fdh or Dai^n hoUPdn Viffo^h 'Vifpu killed demons*. This 
SOtra (2.3.69) debars the Genitive which would have been applicable under 
Pin. 2.3.65. The NP. however, partially quotes Pin. 2.3.69 which includes 



Notes 


673 


affixes ending in-^, •Vka, ^Tfn, and those having the sense of Khal. 

25. The Lakdras are as follows : Lai (Present), Lif (Perfect) Lul (First 
Future), Lr/(Second Future), (Vedic Subjunctive), Lof (Imperative). 
Lan (Imperfect), Lid { Potential), Lud (Aorkt), Lrn (Conditional). 

26. Old traditional Sanskrit grammarians use the term Prathama Funire, 
Madhjtama Puruia and Uttama Pu/usa for what European and (imitating them) 
Indian grammarians designate as the Mhird person*, the 'second Person* and 
*the first person', in (ransitlin^ thi /oltawifu* verses I use the tnadern Urminoiogy 
Mou^A the fiP uses ike M tfo^lwnal terms- 

27. But Bhattoji Diksita on Pan. 6.1.101 clarifies that r4r will be either 
f or r thus Hotr+Jitklra will also be Hotrkira. The NP.*s Pi/r<ir;eAAfl is 
doubtful. The v.l. Pitr>abha U better. 

28. Here Nom. sg. Rdmali is necessary as there is duplicaiion of the 
instrumental case in the verse and the nom. goes unrepresented. An 
emendation like Rdma^t saroahitam keroti 'Rama does things benehrial to all. 
may be suggested. The italicised words contain the declension of Rkina 
(Masc. Noun ending in—a) in the sg. no. 

29. V. 40 illusirates Pki^mi's sutras for declension of feminine nouns 
ending in v<»welse.g. 7.1.16, 7.3.114, etc. 

30. P4i:i. 8.2.34. 

31. OavAe (he who honours cows or who drives cows} has the following 
bases according to the meaning—the traditional vejse quoted in the 
Siddkdnta Kaumudi on P5n. 6.2.6A records the following basrs ; Oo^aAca, 
OavaAca, Go'Aca, Goac, Gavac and Go*c. 

32. Pkri. 4.1.105. 

33. PkQ. 4.199. 

34. Vide Vartcika Pap. 4.1.110 

35. MCikka (Areca nut), 

36. N. of a man with the patronym Kausitaki-^MW*26(>. 

37. a Desya word. 

38. Kuksivnt for Kakfyd-val ^hdiikd on Pan. 8.2.12. A ^*edic seer of many 
SOktas. But the next word—untraced, possibly carmanvat. 



CHAPTER FIFTY THREE 


The Exposition of Nirukta^ 

Sanandana continued : 

1. I shall now delineate lo you the excellent accessory of the 
Veda, called Nirukta. It is said to be of five kinds and per* 
tains to Vedic conjugations or verbal formations. 

2. Therein at some places is found epenthesis, in other cases 
is seen metathesis, at some places is found modification of the 
syllable, at other places, (we get) haplology. 

3. O Narada, where due to the change or loss of a 
syllable, light is thrown on the special connotation of the root, 
it is called Snrhyoga. 

4. (Now follow the illustrations of these processes :) By 
addition of a syllable, the word Harhsa (< \/ han —) ‘a swan’ is 
formed' (by the addition of ja ). The word Simha^ ‘a Hon’ 
is formed by metathesis, gu4hotmd {gudl^a + is formed due 
to change of syllabic (here the vowel d is changed tou) 
while lapr^odara {pr$(it + Udora) there is a loss of a letter (/). 

5. The fifth kind of modification should be known in words 
like bhramora ‘ a bumble bee* (from y/bhram + ara by the 
unddi sQtra artikamibkramicami etc., cf. y/kam — > kamarOy 
V'cam — >camara) 

In the Vedic (language) there are changes or options in the 
formations of words etc. Here is the example of Punarvasu. 
(In rhe Vedas, the two stars PunarvasS may optionally be 
singular and connote a dual vide, Pan. I. 2. 61). 

6. The form nabhasvat (nabhas +vat ‘like the sky’ vaporous’, 
retains ^ S though followed by — oat (vide the Vdrtlika- ^nabho 
*dgiromanu^dfh vatytipasonkhydnani on Pan. I. 4. 9 or by the 
Vdrttika Vr,<ianDaii)ohayoft**/. The form Vrfaniva retains J n jeven 


*Bdng a technical an^ difficult sub^t, an explanation is added in the 
translation itself as mere htrrat translation would he unintelligible. 



11 . 53 . 7-9 


675 


thougli the derivation is vt^^d atvo yasya snhy {whereas in classi¬ 
cal Sk. it would he Sometimes the Parasmaipada is 

used in stead of the Atmantpada (In Classical Sk., the preposi¬ 
tions or proverbs like prn d -precede the verb and aro 
called /I). But in the Vedic« these -positions are used 
after the verbs (as pexf-positions). They are called gatis (e.g. 
haribkyditi ydhyoka d RV. VII. 32.4) Here is the verb but d- h 
placed separately after the verb in the Vedic. 

7. (In the Vcdic) then* is a change in the cases, lor 

example, dadhnd juholi, ‘He offers oblations of curds (into ih** 
fire)’. Here the word dadJii is in the Instrumental case in stead 
of (he Acr. rase. Hut as per Pan.11.3.3. the object of the 
verb \/hu - - ‘lo saerifire' the terminations of the Instr. 

as well as of the Acc. case. 

The Aorist form of abhi { ul j- \ sad is abhyu(sddayd^ 
moka (instead of Cl. Sk —Classical Sanskritin 
the Vcdic (as per Pan. 111.1.42), and dhvannyit {<i\/dhi’Gn 
‘lo sound’) as per Pan. III.I.. 1 I (m (3. Sk. aduHwanat is found. 
But in RVJ.162.I5 wc find : md Ivd'gnir dhv<mayii). 'Pliesc ar<* 
the prominent instances. 'Phe forms like ( ; * ui\ 

-hv Ar/ — ‘lo ctil’) and others are similar® And also foimations 
\\kt grbhdya and others, Hcr^ \ gfbh -|- iayac v' grbhdya, ihc 
•-h in grab ‘to seize* is \/ transformed to bh i.e. \^grah •< \/grbh 
•in Vcdic (vide Pan. III.1.84 and S. K. on it,^ c.g, grbhfiya 
jilwayd madhu (RV.VIIl.l?..^). 

8. Due to optional formations (in the Vcdic ) the writers 
on this science desire (accept; changes in declension, conjuga¬ 
tion, Padas {Parsntaipada and Atnuuiepada^) gender, person, 
tense, consonants, vowels, causatives and yan (the intensive 
suffix 

9. The verse lists the following peculiar Vedic form.s : 
rdiri rdlri + aip in the Vctlic as per Pan. IV.1,31 for class. 

Sk. rdtri ‘a night’. 

Vibhvi : fern, of vibhu as per Pan. IV 1.47 we gel vibhu^dU 
(i.c. the affix— i) in forming the feminine. 

Kadrrt : As per Pait. IV. 1.71 the feminine affix -Ca {— C) 
comes after the words Kadrd ‘tawny* (and ktmoi^ialu 
‘water bow'P). 



676 


X&rada Purdtta 


dvistya : As per Vdrtlika on the above sutra the affix— tyap is 
added to the word avis in the Veda e.g. dvi.^fyo 
vardkaU / 

Vdjasaneyinoh : As per Pan. IV.3.10.6 the affix— uini 
comes in the sense of “enunciated by him”, after the word 
Saunakn e.g. {liaunokinah “who study the chandas as per Sau- 
naka.’' Similarly, Vdjasaneya + wmi-Vajasancyin : who studies 
the Veda as per Vajasaneya. 

10. The following Vcdic fonm arc explained as below: 
h'anjehhify : Insir. PI. of Karna “an ear”. The termination 
— tbhil} instead of the tisual — ais as per bakvlash ehandasi (Pan. 

11.4,76.). 

yaiobhagya : {yaio^hhdgya^ in ilic printed text of the NP 
is not correct) is dissolved as follows : yaSas tad tva bhagab : 
This Karmadharaya compound has bhaga changed to bhagyn 
by the addition of the suffix—as per Pan. iV.4.I31,32. 

yaiobhagya and others include forms like veiobkagya. 
caturaksaram indicates four-lettered form til as like dirdvoya 
astu .trausaf.^ 

dtvdsak \ I'hcNom. pi. of^t'a *a g<xi* (vide Pan. VII. 1,50) 
satva^dtvaldti : sarva^deva + tdtil (pleonastic) e.g. savild naft 
suvatu sarvatdtim / —RV.X.36.14 Ivdvat ‘like you*. Here, as 
in asviad & yu^mad, the affix— vatup showing similarity is added. 

11. ITic following forms arc formed thus: 

ubhaydvinam : Here the possessive affix vini (i.c. is 

added (optionally) a.s per Pan. V.2.122 and the final— a in 
Ubhaya is lengthened as pet* Vdrtlika : Chandovit prakarant 
dirghaf ceti vaktavyam / 

Pralayddydk is prob. a misprint. 

Tfcasn : tri — Rc (a Sukta with three (iks)^ This form 
is derived, thus i tri by Samprasdras^a + C<CTtc. 

apasprdhelkdm * 

aiydt—**a^ in vambkir no aiydt <^o asman mukhas talhaj If 
ayo be a misprint for dpo, the quotation in the NP is probably : 

"optuprdhHhdin^lmp. 2 nd p. dual of ^ 

pfr Pif>. Vi.J.36» the reduplicaiioo of the root, vocalisation of ra and the 
etUion of a irregularly u accepted in the Vedic, 

Ai per Pip. V!.1.116, the t or p reuin their original form in 
chc middle of Vedic verse in the case of aty<U(9P0^t, avakramub, tic .} though 
'a* in these lias ^ ‘s' $l fofiowing it. 



11.53.12-13 


677 


dpo asmdn rndtarah iundhymtu / RV X.7.10 and the form is 
as per Pan VI.1J18, the short a is retained after dpo (also 
'uydnoy Vr^no etc.) 

12. The following forms ai'c derived thus : 

Sagarbhyaji : ‘a brother of the whole blood, by the same 

father and mother'. Here sd’*santcna ‘common* but the affix— 
yan {~ya) h as per Pan. IV.4.114. 

sthdpadi or astkapadi (a misprint prob. for asfdpadi ?) 
Rlvyam ^seasonal’ riau bhavofn. This formation from rtu is as per 
Pan. VI.4.175 the final -u U changed to -va (similarly 
odstva < vdstu) 

Raji;fha : jju > hlha ‘the most straightforward &. 
delicalc’ vide Pan. VI.4.162 for the change of .r> ra — before 
ihe affixes — iyasy •• iflhu 

tri^paHcakam pancnkdni yalra Bahuvnhi comp, 

/{iranyaya —golden* abounding in gold' 

Hiranya + ya {m<yfaf) 

fliraftyayena is a part of the m<mfrrt birdoyayena savitd ralhena 

(RV.IJ.5.2) 

Tinram —(misprint ? oihcnvlse no Vcdic speciality) 
parame ryoman : instead of Vjwnni^ the Loc. sg. term is 
dropped as per supdm suluk j 

13. The explanation of the following irregular forms : 
urviyd (Sk. aiu-ni) But ~yd is affixed instead of - —aa, 

as per Vdrttika — lydfiydji etc. on Pan. VII. 1.39. 
sv(^ayd —(?) Is it a misprint for svapnayd ? 
vdravadhvdt^i^) Is it a misprint for vdroyadlxodl ? 

Aduka (?) The root y/duk is obvious but the special 
formation—not clear. 

Vadhi (?) The Vcdic special funii is Vadhiut & not Vadhi. 
We have in RV. 1.165.8, X.28.7 the fomt Vndhim from \/Va(ih. 
The Cl. Sk. form would l>e anddkifani. 

yajadhvainam <C yyadhvam + m/wt. 'f'hese arc joined after 
dropping — m of ^dkvoffi. 

limasi — incgular for itnak by Pan. VII. 1.46. 
sndM (as in sndivi maldd iva — AV. VI. 113. 3, 

VS.20.20). .Also —tvi for Class. Sk. — tvd vide Pan. VIII. 1.49 
(cf. pitvi < \''pk — 10 drink) 

gatvd pncdsthsbhih : Out of this asthabhili may be a 



678 


NUfodft hit ana 


mUprint for a^^habhih. Instr. pi. of asthin. The rest is anybody*s 
guess, (possibly gntvdya cd\tkabhih / ). 

14. {The following irregular forms arc explained). 
Gonani — Gen. PI. of go ‘a cow*—Pan. VII. 1.57 
Apdrihvaratab As per Pan. VII 2.31 y/ hru is subscU 

tuted for y/hvor {Bkvddi 978) liefore a participial aflix. 
cMuri or Aturi (? f prob. n misprint. 

Grasiia ppp. of \/gras — (Cl. Sk. treated as sef (cf. 

^abhila) vide Pan. VI 1*2.34. 

Pa^a — Nothing special. 

Dadkat as in dadkad ratndni ddiu^e RV.IV. 15.3. It is the 
Vcd. subjunctive of y/dhd. 

BabhQiha —Perfect 2nd p. sg. of y/bkd in Vedic, vide 
Pan. VII.2.64, 

Pramindnii is prob. a misprint for praminanti ibr classical 
SK profukmti ~ mi is shortened to— mi — as per Pan. 
VII.1.81 

Avivfdhai — Aor 3rd p. sg. oiy/vrdh - As per Pan. VJl. 
4*8., in Vedic [Chondas), r substituted invariably for penulti¬ 
mate f or r of a causative stem in the Reduplicative Aorist. 

15. (The following forms arc derived as follows :) 
mittayu Tricndly-msndcd'. .\s per Pan. VI1.4.35, rules of 
lengthening or the substitution of --i for the final vowel of the 
stem before the affix Kyac is not applicable in the Vedic. 

Diirasyu — du}la ivi'earotf & ‘Wbhing to do harm*. As 
per Pan. VII.4.36, dusfa becomes duras — before the affix— 
kyac. [The NP. gives duras. d which is prob. a mis-print). 

hdtvd: Abs. of yAJ‘toabandon’ \/hd. (hi)optionally 

in Vedic (Pan- ^'il•4.44). 

Sudhita : ‘wcU-pIacrJ’ ppp. of Su —v'dha. Pan. 
VII.4.45 sanctions >PPP Sudiiitay Vasudkila, 

nemadhiia. 

Dadhorii should have licen dddharii. As per Pao- VI1.4.6.5, 
in Vedic the Claus. Aor. 3 p. .sg. of y/dhr becomes dOdharti 
cf. dardharti, dardkarfi sanctioned in the same Sutra. 

Svavadbhih : Instr. pi. of Svavas. As per Vdrt. on Pan. 

Vll.4.45,_ t is substituted for - -r m the case of Svnvas. ‘He 

whose protection is good (derived fi'om Su — \/av) ‘to protect 
wcir. 



11.53.16-17 


679 


Sasuvii. - Pcrf. - 3 p. 5g. of J?ivc birth to’ 

Formation as per Fan. VI 1.4.74. 

Dkisva — Imp. Up. sg. of \/dh/i — as per Pan. VIl 4.45 
(but Cl. Sk. form is dhalsva)* 

16. (the following forms are explained thus:) 

prapraj'd as in praprayaui agnih (RV’.VII.II.4) shows the 
reduplication of the prefix pra — as per Fan. \'U1.I.6 Panini 
sanctions pra^ Miniy upa and ut as pAdapurann^ (llie completers 
of the iooi of a verse). 

HarivaU — Here v is suKsiiiuted for m of the affix • • maty 
as the stem Hari ciuU in ?. Pan. \'1I1.2- 1.‘) sanctions this 
change ibr stems ending in — i —i or 

Aks^waUl^ {a misprint for <ik$af,wantalt ) vide RV. X, 71.7 
{ak.'nnvanlaJi karndvanfait sakh^h) 

A-■ k.^nn •• :••»( *noi injuring'. As per Pap. V1I1,2.16. 
The augment— rtuf is added lo the |iossessivT affix, after stems 
ending in — nrt. 

Supathi — lara : Supnthiti + iatn Sw^alAi-tnrrt (as per 
Fan. VIII.2.7) and -w ««/ is augmeiUi^rl ct> /ora by Pan. 
Vlil.2.l7. 

Ifathi’^lari 'rafhin - tori j>rofki (Fan. VI11.2.7) & 
lengthened to •ralhi + fari as per V3rtiika on VIII.2.17. nasai 
(? Is it nasoUd -^na V Pan. VHI. 2.61 sanctions 

nasatta and nisatta. 

.\jnnar : The original word is amnoi 'unawares*. Accord¬ 
ing to Pan. VI11.2.70, it Incomes nmnar before Sandhi c^g. 
amnareva. 

Bhuvaratko : Pan. Vlll.2.71. states that \n Chand(Lfi 
_ fu or —r<? replace the final of the word Bhuvas. 

17. (the special formalioas recorded in this verse) 

Brahyodeh : Acc. to Pan. Vin.2.91 the first syllabic 
of brUhit pr€,ya, staUy^afy vaufdfy and d^hu is pluia or prolated. 
Thus vtC say : agnaye 'nubruZhi / (By the next SCiira) both the 
syllables become prolated or Flnta as in *03ird3vaya) ' when the 
(the chief sacrificial) priest gives m-dcr lo the Agni- 
dhra priest (who is to kindle the fire.). 

DdSvdn — p.pf. from y/ddi -• ’to honour' y'rfo/ + h'vasu 
but here the reduplication and the augment - arc prolii- 
bited as per Pan. VI. 1.12. 



680 


Ndrada PurSno 


Svaldvdn — nom. sg. of sva-tav/it ‘inherently powerful*. 
This formation takes place in caseofra^u but is obscure, 
(a misprint probably for Pdju ? ) 

Tribhhfvam <,tribhis + ivam; As per Pan. VII,3,103— S 
coming within the (Vedic) metrical fool ls changed — .V before 
the t — of tvam and of iatakfuh. 

nrbkislutah < nrbhis -I- stulah. Here ending —/ of nrbhU 
is changed to—f— as per Pan. V111.3.J05 the cerebralization 
of St - > |f/ • in ,^tutak and shma in (<C go + stoma) 

is allowed. 

18* 19. (The following forms arc derived as explained 
below). 

Abhifurtah — per Pa^i. VIII, 3.107, the s — > — of 
the particle — su is permissible when it stands in the beginning 
of a second word and preceded by a word ending in f etc. (in 
the Vedic) e.g. madhustkdnam r madhusfkdnom. 

fltdvdha — obscure. Is it a mispriiii for ^id^dha, mentioned 
by Pan. in Saheh firlanartdbhydffi ca ? (Pan. VI11.3.109). 

nyosiditt — Here — s — > - — in this form (though 

* • s is preceded by J) is permissible as per Pan. VIII.3.119. 

Nnna^d(i — As per Pan. Vni.4.26, in the Vedic na of a 
second term b changed to na when preceded by r — even though 
there b a hiatus (AvagraAa) between the two terms. 

Optionals are of four types : sometimes it shows a tendency 
to add, sometimes to withhold, sometimes both are optional 
and sometimes a new substitute is added. Such is the word 
fonnation in the Vedic. 

\/ bhQ (I. conj.), v' Va {II conj). — These are 
the dhdtus (roots indicating different conjugations). They 
are remembered as being Parasmaipadi. 

20*. Thirty-six roots {dhdtus) beginning with \/edh — 
‘to prosper’— arc Uddtta (of acute accent) and Atmanepadi. 


* ver s es from 20 onwards are based on Pd^iniva dhdtupdtho and the verses 
are practically quotations from it. For example, after listing 36 dhdtus from 
fdh —'to prosper' to \/kottk—'io boast\ Pin. Dhitupitha remarks : 

tdhddaya uddUd anuddtiftob dtmantbkdfdh. And after listing 37 (No. 36 tu 
74} dkiius from *to move constantly* to to purify or lo get 

purtfted', the Dh&tupi|ha concludes : Mdayo vddtia uddikiob parasmat*Mdsd(i. 
NP. repeats or paraphrases in vme these remarks of PSnini's*DhJtupdtha. 



11.53.21.30 


681 


And chirtyeighi dhdtus beginning with v as > Mo go constantly' 
or ‘to obtain’ arc Parasmaipadi. 

21. Forty two dhdtus beginnit^ with 

spoken of as belonging to Atznanepada. Fifty dhdtus begin* 
ning with y/phakk^^ Mo move slowly’ are laid down as uddtUt 
i. e. Pa rasmai-padi. 

22. Twentyone roots beginning with \/varc - ‘to shine’ 
are spoken as AnuddlUt or Aimampadif while the group of forty* 
two dhdtus beginning with \^gup^ Mo protect’ are said to be 
ufidtlet [parasmaipadi ). 

23. Grammarians have stated that ten Dhatus beginning 
with y/ghiri —Mo take, to grasp’ (cf. Pki. y/genha^) ztc anuddttet 
{Atm^ pada)^ while twcniy*scven roots’ beginning with y/oft* 
(Mo breathe’ are also UddtUt (Parasmaipada). 

24. Grammarians have regarded thirty* foui'^ Dhdtus 
beginning with \/a)p — Mo go’ as Anuddttel (Atm. pada), while 
scvcnty*lwo (in all) Dhatus'^ with y/mavy^^ Mo hind’ a.s its first 
are Parasmai-padis. 

25. y/dhdo — Mo run’ is declared as the only root 
which b svariUi while fiftytwo Dhdtus beginning with y/ksudh}^ 
— Mo be hungry’ arc spoken as AnuddlUt (Atm. padi). 

26. Eighty Dhdtus '’beginning with \/ghus — Mo make 
noise’, Mo proclaim* are regarded as Udattet (Parasmaipada) 
while iwcnty.two Dhdtus^* from y/dyut - Mo shine’ arc consi* 
dered as AnuddlUt (Atm. pada). 

27 In the group beginnit^ with y/ghaf — the thirteen 
roots are spoken as and Anudattet (Atm. pada). There¬ 
after fiftytwo'* dhdtus from y/J^ —Mo burn’ arc regarded as 
Udattet [Parasmaipadi ). 

28. y/fdj —to shine b both Uddtla and SvarUa.^t While 

the three roots y/bhraj^ ^hkrdS^ -^bklds, arc spoken as Anudatta 
(Atm. pada), while Dhatus from -- Mo shout’ No. 851) 

onwards are UddtUt [ParasmaipaS). 

29. There only one Dhatu y/s<di — Mo bear’ (recorded 
as y/foh in the Dhatupatha b Anudattet and y/ram — Mo play* 
is Aim. padi. Thereafter three dhdtus beginning with y/^d 
(or \/sad —) arc uddtUt, while four Dhatus e.g. >Jkuc — and 
others arc Parasmaipadi. 

30. Thereafter thirtyfivc Dhdtus beginning with y/hikk- 



682 


y^rada Purdna 


“ - ‘10 mako an inclistinci sound* (Dbatupachn ibid Nos. 886— 
921 upto \/^uh - ‘to conceal) are or both the Padas.^® 

Similarly — ‘to serve’ and the four roots ^/bh^-, \/hr- , 

ydhr— and \/m—are also SvariUt. 

31. I'ortysix Dhatus^* from \/dhf —‘to drink’ arc said to 
be Pnrfimnipadit while eighteen*^ dhatui from \/smi ‘to smile’ 
are opined lo be -T/m. padi. 

32. 'Hiree roots beginning with \/PB ‘to purify (Dhalu 
nos. 991-993) arc described as AnudAUet (Atni, padi). \/hr— 
‘lo take away’ is Parasmai*padi> while the three roots s/gup-^ 
‘to protect’ (nos. 99.V998) arc Atm. padi. 

33. \/tahh • , y/labh--^ -i \/had —) these four 

roots are AnudHUet^ while \/Ksvid- ‘lo be wet* is Uddttet and 
fifieen roots from y/skambh -(Dliatupatha records y/skand—) 
are Parasmaipadi. 

34. '■ desire’ is Udattet (Parasmaipadl) 

while shine arc Ubhaya-padi 

(i.e. arc found both Par. & .\lm. pd). Nine roots beginning 
with y/pnr ‘lo cook’ (Dliatii nos. 1021 *1029 from ^/pac — 
to \/v<ih ‘in Pa^. Dhatupatba) are Svaritet. They arc 
regarded as Parasmaipadl, (and Atm. pd) as well. 

3.). 'rhrec more clhalus are SvariUt . y^/Vad- and 
y/iac " both meaning ‘to speak’ are Parasmaipadl. In this 
way, one thousand and six are said to be the roots of the group 
of Dhdius Ix'ginning with \^bhri (i.e. of ihe 1st conjugation). 

dhAi'us op I'HE 2NI) c:onjl:gation 

36. y'ad* ‘to cat’ and \/han — ‘to kill or to go’ arc 
spoken of as belonging lo Parasmaipada). And the four 
Dhatus beginning with y/dvif *io hate* (i.c. Dhata Nos. 3-6 
of Pdn. Dhdtupafha') are regarded as Svaritet (both Par. pada 
and Atm. pd.). 

37. Here, the Dhatii y/cakf ‘to s|>eak’ is regarded 3.s Aim. 

pd.**, while thirteen roots from y 8^* (Nas. 8-20 

in Pdn, Dhdtupdfha) arc AnitddtUt {Atm. pd). 

is a misprint as thU conjugaiioji is called and aisuch y/aii — 

& not (of (he Isi r<>nj.) can be the original. 

' **(he Dhatup&tha states uddtU tnvddUrd etmanep^ / 



11 . 53 . 38 - 4.1 


683 


38. O sa^jc ! grammarians have proclaimed y/sQ — 
lo give birth to and y/ii — ‘to sleep' as Atmanc-padis, while 
.teven Dhr*tus beginning with y/su (it should 1>e y/yu as per 
DMtupithA). 

39. O lord of sages ! Only one root vi^. \/urnii ‘lo 
cover’ is said to be ^varita (i.r. l>oth Par. pd iAim. pd), while 
three dhAtus beginning with \/ghu (a misprint for y/dyu as 
evidenced in the Dhntu-pdthn Dhatu No. 30) arc .spoken as 
Parasmaipadis.^ 

40. O Narada ! y/stu - ‘to praise' U the only root 
pronounced and remembered/as Par. pd. by the grammarhin^. 

41. Eighteen Dhatus beginning with s/rA *10 give’ 
(prob. from ^ya ‘10 go’ to v^vac Mo speak’, in the 
I)hatupa;ha) arc Par. pd. O Narada ! Only • *fo study' 
(ndhyayane) is declared ns Atm. pd.). 

42. Four Dhatus from y/ptd — Mo know' to \/rud - Mo 
weep’, nm. :>4-57 in the DhAtupAiha arc considered as Par. padi 

svap - Mo sleep' is pointed as Par. pci. 

43. y/Sv<Ls ■ Mo breathe’etc. {syamAdayah in the NP. 
is probably a misprint as ]>cr scries of roots in the Dhatupatha) 
have been told by me as Parasmai-padi. y/didhi Mo shine’ and 

— Mo go' (rarely used in Cl *Sk.) are Aimanepadt, () 

sage. 

44. Three roots beginning from y/'prih (prob. a 
misprint for y/praih- * 1st conj. arc Atm. and the Pan. Dhatu^ 
pAtha reads: '68 y/i^dsa^ 69 \/sasti svapm^ 70 y/vaia kAntau' a.s the 
three Dhatus in the serial list of roots of 2nd conj. arc pro- 
claimed as UdAtUt (Par. pd)** *** . Cajkorilr^^^ is a term for any 
intensive formed without the syllabic ya like carkarlti -^^y/kr —. 
y/hnu Mo cover’ is declared as Anudacta, O cxccUcnr sage. 

45. Thus seventythrcc roots have been said to l>e includ¬ 
ed in the 2nd conjugation {adadi g(u}a). 

(Now begins the list of the 3rd conjugation -juhotyAdaynh) 


*PHn. DhStupitha. 2nd con}, enumeratc> four dhntut vu. 
v/h/ and -y/jfw. NP. record^ the first-three in iKU venie and relegates 
y/sttt to the next {no. 40) vtne. 

uddltd kdAtltiah patesmai P4(i. 

***Thia H listed ai DhAtu No. 7t in the Dhittipdfh^. 



684 


Nofoda PurdjjtQ 


DHATUS of THIi III CONJUGATION 

The four roots from \/da ?) are regarded as para- 

smaipadi.*^ 

47. y/bhr is spariUl (both Par. pd & Aim. pd) & 'oh&k" 
(y/ha ‘to abandon*) is uddUet. y/nxd ‘to measure’ and ^/kd — 
‘to go’ arc Anudattet. ^/dh — to give — dha ‘to hold’, 
‘to contain’ arc symbolised as HC indicating iheir bring svarita 
(both Par. pad and Aim. pad). 

47. Three roots beginning with vanitir (prob. a misprint 
for tiyir in thearespokenof as (both Par. pd 

and Atm. pd.), while twelve dkdttu ^Tom^/ghr —to besprinkle*’ 
are regarded as Parasmaipadls. 

48a. Thus twenty two roots have been mentioned in the 
3rd conjugation {kuAdika gana). 

OHATUS of THF IV CONJUGATION 

48b. Tweniyfive Dhdtus beginning with \/div.~xo 
shine’ have been spoken of as being Parasmaipadi. 

49. O Narada ! There are two Atmanepadi Dhdtus 

viz. ‘to give birth to’ and y/dQ. ‘to trouble’. The seven 

Dhatus beginning with regarded as Atmanepadi. 

50. O Brahmana ! Roots beginning with y/di — ‘to 
perish’ ‘to die’ arc known here as Atmanepadi, while the four 
Dhatus beginning with y/sQ —‘to kill’ arc Parasmaipadi. 

51. O sage ! Fifteen roots beginning with y/jon — 
‘to be born* (Dhatus from 43-49) arc Atmanepadi while the 
five dhdtus beginning with y/mrf —‘to bear’ 'to endure’ are 
svaritet (both Par. & Atm. pd.) 

52. Eleven dhdtus from y/pa4— ‘to go’ (Root Nos. 63-74) 
arc considered as Atm. padls “while eight Dhatu« from y/radk 
‘to hurt’, ‘to injure’, arc known as Parasmaipadi.“ 

53. Fortysix Dhatus from \/i<on — ‘to pacify’ arc spoken 
of as UddtUi {Par. pd). Thus one hundred and forty Dhdtus 
are regarded as belonging to the divddi gana {IV conjugation). 

DHATUS OF THE V CONJUGATION (SVADI GANAj 

55. Nine roots beginning with \/ni — ‘to extract soma 
juice’ are described as being svmtet (both Par. & Atm. pd), 



11.53.56-63b 


685 


while seven roois sucli as dunn/i (yrfu - lo irouble) are Para- 
smaipadls. 

56-57a. The iwo roots \/d< — ’to pervade' and y/sitgh - 
'to mount over' are knowa as Anudallel {Atm, pd.), 
while fourteen Dhitus beginning whh y/ tik —‘lo go’» toassaiP 
are Parasmaipadi hen'. () excelicm Urahmana ! lliirty 
two dhdlus are spoken of as const {tilting the svadika gana (V 
conjugal ion).“ 

DHATUS OF THE VI CONJUGATION (TUDADJ CANA) 

57b, O excellent .sage ! Six dMtus^^ beginning whh 
y/iud — ‘‘to trouble’ arc said lo lie svrritef (l>oih Par. pd. & 
Atm. pd.) 

58. Vr? - • ho go’ is uddtUt (Par-ptl.), while nine roots 
from Vl/W~ho be plca.scd’ are Aim. pd-» cind one hundred and 
five Dhalus** t>eginnmg from \/vrair - ho cm’ air declared 
as VddiUl. 

39. O chief of sages ! Only one I^hMu y'gur ho 
make exenion’ is declared as VddiUt. Four root.s beginning 
with y/nu — ho praise arc considered as Parasmaipadi. 

60. The Dh^tiu y/ku - ho sound* U spoken of as Atim- 
ddUet {Atm. pd.). Here ends the Kutddx gam. y 'pr — ho be 
active* and \/mr — ho die* are Aimancpadis, while six Dhaius 
from y/pUy y/ri-- ho move ‘to go' arc Parasmaipadls. 

61. Two roots viz. y/dr. ho honour*, and \^dkj - \o 
exist, tu live’ arc spoken of as Atmanrpadis, while sixteen 
Dhatus from y/pT(Uch — ho ask’ arc Parasmaipadis. 

62. Thereafter, O sage, six roots beginning with y/mil — 
ho Join* are spoken of as svasitet (both Par. pd. and Atm. 
pd.) And Three Dhatus beginning with v'A^^-ho cut’ arc 
Parasmaipadis. 

63a. Thus there arc one hundred and fifty seven dkdius 
in the VI conjugation {ludddi gaaa). 

RCX>TS OF THE VII CONJUGATION 

63b. Nine roots beginning with \/rudh — ho obstruct 
arc svariUl (both Par. and Aim. pd.), Krii (Vc?{ane) is 
parpadi. 



6B6 


Js^arada Purdna 


64. Three Dhdtui fn>m y/indh —lo kindle (& y/khid — 
8l \/vid) arc sakl (o be AnudaHet (Aim. pd.) (Twelve Dhalus 
from) y/^if •' ‘to leave as reniaiiuler\ \/pi >— 'to reduce lo 
powder’ arc udattel. In this way, there are twenty five rof)l^ 
in the VII conjugaiion {rudhddi 

DHATUS of THU VIII CONJUGATION (I'ANADI 
GAN A) 

63. Seven Dhalus*^ lx!ginnin$i with ‘^o spread’ 

are proclaimed as being Svarila (both Par. & Atm. padls) 
\/v(m “ ‘to beg’, ‘to r'^qucsi' and y/maft — 'lo lliink’ are Atma- 
nepadi and y/'h— (tccimically called d^krtl) ‘to do’ is SratiUi 
(l)oih Par. and Atm. Pd. A 

G6a. In this way> ten dhatw have been proclaimed ns 
belonging to tlir eighth conjugation. 

DHATUSOFTHF IX CONJUGATION (KRYADI G.\NA) 

66b-67. Seven Dhatus^ loginning with y'An ‘to buy’ 
belong to Ixxli the Padas. Four dhaius beginning with 
y/stambh and which arc used (by Pamni) in the Sutras arc 
Parasinaipadl. O chief of sages, twoniy two dhJlu^ from y/krudh — 
‘to gel angry' (This is obviously a misprint lor y'‘knui'^’ 
as stated in (lie Dliiitupatha) are Udattet {Par. pd.) 

68. ‘to select’ is Atmanepadl. Twenty-one 

Dhatus from y/'Sranth - ‘to loosen' arc Parasmaipadi while 
X^grait— ‘to take’ is svaritet (both Par. pad! & Aim. padi). 

69a. In this way fifiytwo roots** have l>ecn enumerated 
in the IX conjugal ion by tlie learned. 

DHATUS OF THE X CONJUGATIOxN: (CURADI GANA) 

69B. One hundred and thirtysix Dhatus beginning from 
cur — ‘to steal' belong to (Ijoth) parasmaipada and Atma- 
nepada. 

70. O sage ! Eighteen (but actually thirty nine roots 
from 140 y/dt -- to 178 y/kusm--) Dhiitus arc Aimanepadl. 
O sage ! Roots (rom^y/carc — Uo study’ uplo \/dhr,\ (Dhaui 
nos. 318) are declared as l>elonging to both Parasmaipada 
and Atmanepada. 

71. Fortyeight Dhatus from y/kath — (Dhfitus 319-365) 



11.53.72-80 


687 


—known as adanta^y and irn Dhacus beginning from \/pad — 
(i.e. Dhatus 366-373) arc Atmancpadi. 

72. Here cighi rooisi beginning (txym Sutr *io cover’ 
arc spoken as belni^^ing to tx>th Pafasmaipada and Atmane^ 
pada by the wise. In the sense of a niot (verb) 

gets the aflix nie i —;) and is fonned in irnwi cases like the 
application of the -if/Ac. 

73-74. This allix - i is in the sense ‘docs lor the sake* 
of^ or 'telU the other*. In the sense of causative, this nic is added. 
Right roots beginning with x/Cura (nxK no. 305 onwards) 
iipto \/San^dma (root nn. 3t)0) are spoken as AnuddiUl by the 
learned grammarians. Sixteen Dhatu.s fn>in ‘to praise, 

are the illustritiom of adtuiia dh&tu^^ 

73. The meaning of "’optionally'* (J^odiulmn eitui uidaria- 
nam -^as stated in the Gof/a-^pdf/ia) h that ii includes all the re¬ 
maining dkdtu.s irrespective of their use in (Panini^s) Sutras, 
laukika Sanskrit and the C.1mndasa (Vedic) language. .M! 
dhatus belong to all coniugatiom and have dilTcrem meaniiv^s. 

76. In addition to these roots, dhdtus ending in the 

adixes beginuiug with son (I.e. the twelve affixes vi/.. ja/i, 
— kyac, —kdmyacy --kjaiK -dedra-kvipy —fuc. .raw, 

'-yak, — dya, ■ -yan and nin.) are also called roots, and also 
Denominatives (e.g. Garuddynte -acts like a Garuda). In 
this way innumerable numlx'r of Dhatus arc formed here. O 
Narada. Here it is explained in a nutshell. The details are 
given in the iTlcvant tiTatiscs. 

77. In Dhatus ending in the vowels, all Dhatus with the 

rxerption of those ending in -u and r and the roots \/yu~ 
yiu \/k}m, y'si, x/snUy \/nu, \/h/i, \/di> 

(of both Padasi—• are regarded as Anuddtta or Anif. 

78- Tlie following is the list of onr hundred and two 
Dhatus ending in con-sonants which are Anuddtla or Antf. 
y/Sakl, x/pac, x/^niu, \/ric, y poc, V^V, \''nV, \/pracch, y/lyaj, 
-v/ni;, y/bhaj, \/bkanj, \/bhujy \/bhTa\j, y/masj, y/yaj, \/yujy 
\/ruj, x^ranj, vi V ji, \/fvanjy y/jafij, x^srj 

79. y/ady x/kfudy ^/khidy \/chidy x^tudy \/nud, y/pad, 
(4ih conj), v/Wirf, y/ifid, vi*\'nady y/iady yjiod, y/md, yjskand, 
y/had, y/'kfudh, y/budhy 

81). y/bnndh, y/yudh, x'r^dlu x^vyadh, y/sudh, 



68R 


J^drada Purina 


y/sadh^ y/sidhy {IV conj.), y/han^ Vip> Vksip, \'chupy 

\/iapy y/iip, y/irp, y/dip, 

81. \/lip^ y/l^py y/iopy y/svap, y/srpy y/ydbky 

y/rabhi y/labhy y/gff’^ty \^n(imy \{yftmy y/ram^ (not rabhih i.e. 
y/rahh — as In the text of the NP.), y/krui, y/dams, y/diSy y/drt, 
y/mriy y'm. y/ruiy y/HS^ \/vis, y/spri, y/kK'‘- 

82 . y/tviu y/'tuy^ y/du$y conj.) y/pisy 

y/iiSy y/^^y y/ilisy \/gh<v,^ ( arf), \vaSy y/dah, y/dihy y/duhy 
y/nahy yjmihy y/ruhy {y/lihy \/v<th,) 

83b-85. Ca and oth<‘rs are callird Pfipitas.^^ The ‘pre*- 
posilions like prn —are known as galis {gavayah in the NP should 
have been gatayah)\ words which have been created in cUfTcr- 
ent quarters, regions and periods have a number of connota¬ 
tions. And^ O Brahmaiia , they arc characterised by all 
genders. Here Ganapdthay SUtrapUhn Dhatnpatha Anuntlsikn 
Fifka arc called Fdrdynm. 

O Narada ! All words whether laukika (curi'enl) or 
Vedic-' are permanent and imperishable. 

86a, 'Fhe vocabulary collected by grammarians is hunce 
intended for recitation. 

861).-88. The Ibrmation of ihe (already formed, perma¬ 
nent) words is briefly explained by (the study of) its original 
form (the noun base or root), terminations, substitutes, the 
augment, etc. 

In this manner a bit otNirukia has been briefly related to 
you. Wlio Ls capable of recounting it in its entirety, as it is 
infinite (limitless), O Narada ? 



CHAPTER FIFTYTHRU 


HfinUti komsali. 

7, \/kimi 'to kill* r 9c mcUihcsii by P&n« V|. 3* 109* 

BhfttiojI Dik^ita quotes this very verse la the NP. to elucidate' the above lutca 
of Panifli. If Bhaitoji Dik^iia U not presumed to have consulted thcNP. both 
S.K. {Siii/ih4nta Kaumudl) and the NP. used a common source. 

3. As a matter of fact though the form niitarky/t is sanctioned by P&p- 
11M, 123 the fomiaiion in exirrmely iriegwiar. 

fiif instead of the r^ular ky^) and the rout \/^r^ 

lK*comes \/lik and we get ni^farkjia. 

4. As a maitct of fact tlie change—AA^—h u accepted by modern 

linguists and Vedic y grbh- >class. Sk \/g!h. mure natural Unguis^ 

iically. 

j. In the \ etlic, the fullowing sevaiicen lellen arc implied in ck^ara* 
iomtiha (collection of letters via. tlMp<era (4 letters)* aslu Jtaufof (4 letters), 
Yf^voiAmahe (5 letters). ;4;<» (2 letien) and we/ (2 letters) *- 17 letters in all. 

(>. oide DhAiii Nos. 43r»*444(both inclusive) in ihe Dhatup&tha (conj. 1). 

7. Vide Dhatu Nos. 44.V474. (iW). 

H. oidf Dliatu Nos. 47.>308 (ibid). 

t). amtidayak i% a misprint in the NP. 

10. vidi Dhatu Nos. r>09.U0l (ibid). 

11. Dhatu Nos. 002 

12. TTie DhAtupdfho records y'denA/—to be kindlctl and not ^kfudh^ 
vide the group from dhatu Nos. 603»C53. 

13. vidt, ibid Dhatu nos. t>54*74l. 

14. tride, ibid Dhitu nos. 742*763. 

] 5, an affix attached to roots to show the verb-activity, 'fhe 

f/'otw siilra in the Dhaiupatha includes the nwts from ^ghaf —to y'tvar (nos. 
764-776) as fU for the purpose of adding the Krt affix — a e.g. ghafA, vyathA. 
(vara. 

16. tide, tbtd Dhatu Nm. {dl)(WH6 ?) 

17. Dhiui No. 847. 

18. A Diet, of Sk. Grammar (GOS 134, 1961) p. 409. 

19. Dhatupatha (ibid) Dhatu Nos. 927-972. 

20. vide ibid Dhdlii nos. 973-990. 

2). The text of this line b as ^olJcns^ : 

dAdaya dhaiavc vedab patasmai^pedino malah / T1ie 3rd conjugation is 
called i.e. y/hu JanAdaaajph b unplicd in didaye. V. 46a shows 

that here in v. 45b dhatui Vhu Vbhi» y/hH and y/pr are implied, the number 
'foui* seems to be implied in VedAit. 

22. \/rAdh—*10 prosper* is also found in the 'nh k 10th c'onjugaiion 

{SvddhCurAdike), 



690 


N&rada Purdna 


23. Thirief^n rootj from ^ridh to \/iidh in Pu^. L)hatupa(ha} 
are uddtUt {ludA^) in the NP.» a mistake Ik. Pan. Dhitupatha docs not 
support it). 

24. Actually the Dliaiupatha gives 3 j dhdlus. 

2x Viz. from —‘to trouble* to \/kr|. ‘to plough', to draw.' 

26. Viz. from N«. 12 v^Vrasc to No. \ \!i^hh/d —to plunge’, in Pin. 
Ditiipitha. 

27. i.e. Dhitus fjom (1) —lo (7)\/gAfti-* 

28. viz. Dh&tus from (!) ^kri^to (7) ^yu —'to join' or 'to bind'. 

29. Pinintyn Dhatupitha lists sixty one ruob in this conjugation. 

30. Pioini gives no ddinilion of a Ai^b, but states a number of pai ti¬ 
des with no grndcr, number or sense beginning with ca r ciday^^sattvi / 



CHAPTER FlfTYFOUR 


Maikmatics and Astronomy 


Saufindana said : 

1. I shall now sei out tlic auxilLary (of the Veda) called 
Jyotisa which had been enunciated by Brahma in days of yore 
and through the mere knowledge of which men can attain the 
fulfilment of their ordamc<l duties. 

2. O Brahmana ! the science of JyolUa, which has 
been expounded in four Inklis of verses, falb into three sections, 
devoted, respectively, to mathematics and astronomy 
horoscopy (Jdtaka) and natural astrology (San'ihitd). 

3-4a, Topics of MathnnalUs and ashonomy. In the Gunita 
section have ix*en Hei out the arithmetical operations (w/. I2h- 
.">9); computation nf ihr mean and true positions of Planets 
(rr. 6o-127); ‘the questions’ (on lime* place and direction)^ 
{w. ]28«'53a]; lunar and solar eclipses, (vr. I .'SSb-SSa); the 
diagrammatic representation thci'eof,* (gnonionic) shadow, 
(rr. 165b-67a); elevation of the lunar horns (rt;. 167b-6'J), 
(planetary) conjunction (ml 70-73) and the {t‘yati~)pdta.^ 
(ml74-87). 

4b. Topics oj lioTo^copy. In the Jdiaka section arc treat* 
c<l — the signs [rdsi) (of tJic /.odiac), their divisions (and 
properties); Nature of the planets (and their properties; (Mani¬ 
fold inferior) births, 

5. Conception; birth; Karly death; Longevity: Order 
of divisions (and subdivisions in one’s life): Vocations; Eight 
emplacements, (being those of die 7 planets and the lagna, in 
the horoscopic chart); ‘Royal’ jdanetary combinations; ‘Al- 
mosph eric ’ pi ane t a ry combii ux i iom; 

6. "Lunar* planetary combinations; ^Vscetic’ planetary 
combinations; Effect of the planets o'^cupying the different 
signs; Effect of planets aspccting one another; Effect of the 
planets being in tlic several 'houses’; Effect of mutual assoc la- 




692 


Ndradc Pur^)a 


lion (of planets ]; Miscellaneous matters (relating to the asso* 
ciation of planets) : 

7. Malefic combination (of planets; Female horoscopy; 
Death; Reconstruction of lost horoscopes; and EiTects ofdeca- 
natos. 

0. Topics of Natural astrology. The contents of the 
Sarhkitd section are: Effects of the motion of the planets (across 
the different signs) {w. 1-108); AMnlaksona (Characteristics of 
the year) (t^i;. l09-33a); Tithi (Lunar day) ]33b-56a); 
Vara (Weekday) {vv. I56b-67a); Nakfatra (Astcrism) (t'l'. 
167b-211a); Toga* {vv. 21 lb-19a); Tithyartha or h'araaa* {vv. 
219b-23). 

9. {Auspicious moment AluhSila) (t<t'.224-2a); Upagraha 
(Secondary atmospheric phenomena) {vv. 230-50a); {SaA^ 
krltnti (Sun's transit into a sign) (t^. 250b-70); Gocara (Current 
motion of the planets) {vv. 271-82); Candra-Tdrdbala (Astro¬ 
logical strength of the Moon and of the Asterisms) (vv. 283-89); 
Sarvalagna (Rising of the signs) (w. 290-312a); Artava (First 
menstruation) {vv. 312b-I7). 

10. Adkdna (Conception) (w.318-19); Fumsavana (Rite 
for the birth of a male child) (vv. 320-25); ydta^Ndmorkarma 
(Birth riles and Naming Ceremony) (i^e. 326- 30a); 
Annabhukti {Annaprdianay First feeding) {vv. 330b-34); Caula 
(Tomxirc) {vv. 335-43a); Ankuidrp<u,ia (Auspicious sowing) 
{vv. 343b- 47); AfauHjiba/idhanu (and Upanayanay Tying the 
girdle and commencing studies) (w.348-79), K^urikdbatidhanay 
(Girding the sword) {vv. 380-91a). 

11. Sasndvarlana (Return from studies) (yt/. 391b-94a); 
Vivdha (Marriage) {vv. 394b-523); Frati^thd (Installation of 
deities in temples) {w. 524-39a); Sadma (Building of human 
residences) (t;n.539b-619); 2‘dtfd (Travel for pilgrimage, war 
etc.) (t'7'*620- 712): Praveiasta (Return home) {vv. 713-20); 
Saifyovrsft (Immediate rain) {w. 72l-39a); Kurma^vibkdga 
(Division of the globe) (rr.739b-45); and Ulpdta (Portentuous 
phenomena) {rv. 64€-56a). I shall be setting out all these 
briefly. 

M/V1'HEMATK;S 

I2l>-14a. Noldlional places. Eka (cue), dala (ten), lata 



n.54.l4b-18b-2la 


693 


(hundred), sakasra (thousand), ajmia (ten thousand), lok,^(i 
(lakh), prayuta (ten lakhs/million), koli (crore), arbuda, abja^ 
kknrva, nikkarvat mahaprubna, iakku, jaladhiy cmtya^ madhya^ 
pardrdha —these arc the names (of the notational places), each 
succeeding one being ten times (the preceding). 

14b. Addition and subtraction. .Addition and subtraction 
(of numbers) can be done either in a forward or in a backward 
manner.* 

15a. MultipUcaiwn. In multiplication, the multiplicand 
igunya) is multiplied up to its last digit (by the multiplier) 
(and the products added together).^ 

15b. Division. O sage ! In division that is the quo* 
tient (phaia) which when mtiltipUcd by the divisor is completely 
subtrac table (from the dividend). 

16a. Square. The product of a number multiplied by 
itself is called varga (square); the learned call it also (by the 
term) krti. 

16b-18a. Square root. (Mark off the odd digits of the 
number whose square root Is required.) Having subtracted 
the (greatest possible) square from (he last odd place, keep 
that ‘root’ apart. Double that ‘root’ and divide the remainder 
and place the quotient alongside the previously obtained 
Voot’. Subtract, O Brahmana, the square of that and again 
divide as before by the (newly formed) ‘root*. O great sage, 
by repeating as above (till all the digits arc completed) the 
square root is obtained. 

]8b-21a. Cube and cube root. The product of the multi¬ 
plication thrice of the same number is called its gkana (cube). 
The method to derive the cube root [pada) is as follows : The 
first place (unit’s digit of the number whose cube root is requir* 
cd) is termed ‘odd’; the next two d^its (/.e., the tens and 
hundreds) are termed ‘even.’ (Mark off the digits of • the 
number into groups of three digits each in this manner, each 
group having one *odd’ and two ‘cven-s’). Subtract from the 
last (group having an) odd place the (greatest possible) cube; 
that is the cube root {mfUa) (of that group). Divide (the 
next) even place with thrice the square of the (previous) cube 
root and place the quotient aloimside the previous cube root. 
Square the new quotient and multiply it by three and by the 



694 


Mrada PurSnn 


last cube root and subtract it (from the next even place). 
Subtract} the cube (of the new cube root-digit) from the next 
odd place. Repeat the process and the cube root of the number 
is obtained. 

21b. Praciious. Two fractions arc leduced to a common 
denominator when their numerators and denominators are 
multiplied by the denominator of one by that of the other. 

22- Frewlions of fratdons. O sage ! Enquirers into 
science should understand that in fractions of fractions {bhdga^ 
prabkdga)^ the products of their numerators and of their deno¬ 
minators give tite correct figures (of the numerator and deno¬ 
minator of the resultant fraction). 

23- 24a. Associated and dissociaUd fractions. Associated 
fractions {bhigHnubandha) and dissociated fractions {bkdgd- 
pavdha) arc lliose in which a number is incteased or decreased 
(by a fraction of its own). Here, multiply the whole number 
by the denominator {ialasthahdra)y ascertain whether the frac¬ 
tion is positive or negative and accordingly add to or subtract 
from it the numerator. 

24U. Addition and subtraction of fractions. O sage ! 
(Addition and subtraction of fractions are effected by) adding 
together or subtractii^ one from the other their numerators 
(after reducing the fractions) to a common denominator. 

23a. Denominator of an integer. When a denominator 
is not attached to a number, take 1 as its denominator. 

25b-26. Multiplication and division of fractions. The pro¬ 
duct of the multiplication of two fractions is obtained by dividir^ 
the product of the numerators by the product of the denomi¬ 
nators. In the division of two fractions, the numerator and 
denominator of the divisor arc inverted and the process of 
multiplication applied. 

27. Square etc. of fractions. For the square, cube, square 
root and cube root of fractions, calculate the respcctivesquarcs 
etc. of the numerator and of the denominator. These for 
zero are always zero. 

28-29. Inverse operations. When the result (of certain 
operations) is *given* {drfya) and the original number is to be 
found {rdHprasiddhaye), calculate taking the denominator 
the numerator and the mimerator as the denominator, the 



11.54.30-35-36 


695 

square as <he square root ami the square root as the square, 
minus as plus and plus as minus. However, in such cases of 
inverse operation where a part (of an item) has been added to 
or subtracted from it, the denominator to which the numerator 
has been added to or subtracted from should be taken as the 
denominator, and the denominator as such should be taken as 
the numerator; the rest (of the calculations are to be done) 
as before. 

30. Operations with assumed numbers {Istakarma). VVlicn 
an intended number {uddift<^-r6ii) has been multiplied, divided, 
has a part of its taken away from it or added to it (and ilie 
result is dr^ta ‘known’), the intended numl>cr can be found by 
multiplying tltat result by an assumed number and dividing 
by the resultant (obtained by subjecting the assume:! number 
to all the said operations). 

31. Operations with sums and differences. Tlie diflterence 
(of two numbers) when added to or subtracted from tlte sum 
(of those two numbers) and (the result) divided by two, will 
give the two numbers.* (This operation is called) Saftkrama. 
The difference of the squares (of two numbers) will give their 
sum.* (And from the said sum and difference!, the individual 
numbers (can be found as statcil above). 

32- 34. Methods to get perfect squares based on any assumed 
number (vargakarma). Multiply the .square of an assumed 
number by 8 igaja)y subtract 1, halve it and divide by the assum¬ 
ed number. This would be one (number). Square this 
number and add 1. Tins would be another such number.^* 

Or, 1 divided by twice the assumed number and the 
assumed number added is one (number). Tlie other number 
is 1. The sum or difference of these two numben reduced by 
one would be the squares oi' the two (desired) numbers. 

Or, multiply the square of the square and the cube of the 
assumed number and add 1 to the first. The two desired 
numbers arc obtained. I’hesc arc according to the methods to 
be adopted in arithmetic {tyakta^gmjita) and algebra {avyakta^ 

33- 36. Operation im*oloing the addition of a quantity to 
squares. When a resultant {dfftn) is obtained by adding to or 
subtracting from a square its root multiplied by a multiplicand, 




696 


Ndrado Purd}}(i 


that resiultant should be added to the square of half the multU 
plicand and the root of the result calculated. To this result 
half the multiplicand is added (when gunaghanamUla had been 
subtracted) and subtracted (when the gunaghanamflla had 
been added) and the result squared. (This wo^ld give the 
required number). (This is called) Guna-{Karma). 

When, however, the resultant {drSya) b less or more by a 
part of the (required) number, the resultant and the root are tn 
be appropriately reduced or increased and using them the 
required number is calculated as ben>re. 

37. Rule of three (In a Trairdiika) the Pramd^a (argument) 
and Icchd (requisition) aic to be of the same denomination and 
(are to be placed) at the beginning and at the end. Phala 
(fruit) (which would be of a dlAerent denomination) would 
be placed in the middle. Phala multiplied by Icchd and divided 
by Pramd^a (ddya) will yield the Icchd^phala. In the Inverse 
(rule of three), (the method is) reversed. 

38. Rule of five etc. In PatUardOka etc. the pramSi^ side 
and the phala side are properly set down. By dividing the 
product of the larger number (of quantities) by the product 
of the smaller number (of quantities) the result is obtained. 

39a. Capital and interest. Capital is obtained through 
calculation with an assumed number {istakarma-vidhi^ see verse 
30, above). That subtracted from the composite amount 
(of capital and interest) will give the interest {kaldnlora). 

39b*40d. Rate multiplied by time, and the interest 
multiplied by the invested time arc to be calculated and 
kept independently. Each divided by their sum and multi¬ 
plied by the composite amount, would yield results which are 
respectively the capital and the interest. 

40b-41a. (In the matter of the loan of different amounts 
for difFcrent periods, the individual income is identical), 
while arranging the sides (as in PancardSika etc., sec above, 
verse 38), if the product of the smaller number of quantities 
and the months he greater than the product of the larger 
number of quantities, the interest divided by the total number 
of months, would give the rate. 

41b. (In the case of investments by different people 
making up the capital), the investment by each {kftpa) multi- 


n.54.42a-46a 


697 


plied by the total income (miira) and divided by the total 
investment (kfepayoga)^ would give the (proportionate) income 
(pkala). 

42a. Time for /tiling a tank. (When different pipes 
individually take different limes to fill a tank» in order to find 
the time required to fill the tank if alt the pipes arc opened 
together), divide the denominators by the numerators of the 
individual fractions of time taken by each to fill the tank), 
find the sum (of the new fractions obtained) and (with that 
sum) divide I. The time to fill (the tank) U obtained. 

42b*‘43. Ceormtrual progression {Cuno(tQrafre4ki). The 
sum of the series in geometrical progression (mdnarh gunoUan) 
(is found thus): when the number of terms (gaocka) is odd, 
reduce it by I and multiply; when it is even, halve it and 
square. (Continue the process) till the number ends. Then, 
beginning from the last term (gacckdnta) perform backwards 
(vyasta) the operations of multiplication (g»tta) and squaring 
(varga) (in continuation). From the result subtract 1, divide 
the remainder by ‘gu^ka^T and multiply by the first member 
of the scries (^rJg-g/wj).'* 

44-43a. Triangles and quadrilaUrals. In the case of plane 
figures {k^etra)y like triangles and quadrilaterals {tri<a:ura!raka)y 
the following apply; The hypotenuse (A:<if7uz} is the square 
root of the sum of the squares of (he base [thuja) and altitude 
[kofi). The base would be the square root of the difference 
I>etween the squares of the hyp>otenuse and the altitude. And, 
the altitude would be the square root of the difference between 
the squares of the hypotenuse and the base.^* 

45b-46a. (The rational sides of a right angled triangle, 
as calculated from any two numbers would be : (1) The square 
of the difference of two (natural) numbers added to twice the 
product of the numbers, which is equal to the sums of their 
squares; (ii) the product of tbc sums and differences of the two 
numbers, which is equal to the difference of their squares, 
and (iii) twice the product of the numben.^* 

46b. Ciratmferenee of c eircU. O sage, the diameter of a 
circle multiplied by 22 (4<7ti) and divided by 7 [adri) will give 
the circumference of a circle. 



698 


y&rada Purdnn 


47-48. Relaiicn of Sine^ lUverscd sine (u\d DiameUr. Ex¬ 
perts in trigonometry say: Revered sine {iara) is given by 
multiplying together the sum and difference of the sine {jyd) 
and the diameter {tydsa)^ finding the square root thereof and 
halving the result. The sine {jyd) is given by (diameter- 
wi/Jitf-reversed sine) multiplied by the reversed sine, finding its 
root and doubling it. And, the diameter is obtained by 
squaring half sine, dividing it by the reversed sine and adding 
to the result the reversed tine.** 

49-50a. Sine of on arc. Let the (circumference minus 
arc) multiplied by the circumference be called ‘First’ (prdg). 
One fourth the square/of the circumference is multiplied by 5 
and the ‘First’ subtracted therefrom. With the result divide 
(Diameter ‘First’). O brahmana ! the result obtained would 
be the sine (of the relevant arc).’* 

jOb'Sla. Are from sine. One fourth the sine is multi¬ 
plied by the square of the circumference and divided by four 
times the diameter to which the sine is added. The result is 
subtracted from one fourth the square of the circumference and 
the square root (of the same is calculated). Thus, when 
subtracted from half the circumference, gives the arc.^’ 
3!b-52a. Measure of com heaped up in a cone. 

When coarse, medium and (ine grain are heaped, the 
heights {vedho) (of the cones so formed) would, respectively, 
be one-ninth {atika) onc-tenth and onc-eleventh (t/a) 

of the respective circiunfcrcnccs. The measure of the grain 
in cubic cubits {gluma^kora) would be given by the square of 
one-sixth {oiiga) multiplied by the height.’* 

52b-53a. AJeasure of water ia a tordc. The length of the 
(stretch of) water multiplied by its breadth and height in 
inches and divided by 3100 {kkakkendurama) will give the volume 
of water in drona measures.’* 

54b-55a. Measure of rubble. The height, breadth and 
length, in inches, O brahmana, of a heap of rubble, multiplied 
together and divided by 1150 ) would give its 

volume in drona measures. 

55b-56a. Measure of metal. In the case of metal pieces, 
the length, breadth and height, in inches, multiplied together 



II.5+.56b-6l 


699 


and divided by 585 {bAt)a-ibhd^m&rgaita) should I>e declared lo 
be the volume of the heap in dro^a measures < 

56t>57. Gnomon (uid the lighted lamp. O sage ! the 
gnomon** mtaltiplicd by the distance between the lamp and the 
gnomon and divided by the height of the tamp less the gnomon, 
gives the gnomonic shadow.^ 

Again, the gnomon multiplied by the distance between 
the gnomon and the lamp and divided by the gnomonic shadow, 
gives the height of the lamp.** 

58. The height of the lamp-mtatu-gnomon multiplied 
by the gnomonic shadow and divided by the gnomon will give 
the distance between the lamp and the gnomon.** 

58b*59a. Two gnomons and the lighted lamp. The dis< 
ranee between the shadow tips multiplied by the shadow and 
divided by the difference between the shadows gives the base 
(bhllmi of the relevant shadow).** 

59. The base multiplied by the gnomon, and divided by 
ilie shadow gives the height of the lamp by the rule of three.** 

ASTRONOMY 
Mean Planets {Ma^ya-graha) 

60. (Operational) mathematics has been set out con^ 
cisely, as above. Now, shall be set out in brief, (the compu- 
tation of) the mean planets etc. according to (astronomical) 
mathematics. 

61-62a. The aeon {yuga). O brahmana ! The measure 
of the (great) aeon {makdyugay caturyuga) is said to be 43,20,000 
{khacatufka-rada^amava) {divine) years.** Four tenths of it is 
said to be the krta^yuga; three tenths form the TTetd-yuga\ two 
tentlis the Dvdpaeayuga\ and one tenth the Koliyuga. 

62b. Seventyone yugas plus one krtayuga period form 
(the lime duration of) one Manu.*^ 

63. O foremost amoi^; brahmaQas ! fourteen Manus 
occur during the day-time of God Brahma. That much period, 
again, O foremost among brahmai>as t is said to be His night. 

64. O Narada ! the years tliat have gone by from 
the beginning of creation by Cod Brahma might be consoli¬ 
dated and the computation of planets could be commenced 



700 


}f&T(idc Pur&na 


from that beginning. Alternatively, the computation could 
he done from the beginning of any desired yuga. 

65. Revolutions of the planets. The number of eastward 
revolutions (bhaga^a) in zyuga mahi^yuga) or {entwyuga), 
of the Sun, Mercury (Budha) and Venus (Sukra) and of the 
lighroeca^^ of Mars, Saturn and Jupiter is 43,20,000. 

66. The number of revolutions of the Moonu 5,77,53,336; 
that of Mars is 22,96,832. 

67. The number of revolutions of the Rghrocca of Mer* 
cury {Budha) is 1,79,37,060. The revolutions of Jupiter are 
3,64,220. 

68. Tht number of revolutions of the iighroeca of Venus 
is 70,22,376. The revolutions of Saturn are 1,46,568. 

69. The number of revolutions of the Moon's mandocca 
(apogee) is 4,88,203 and the retrograde revolutions of the 
Moon's ascending node {pdta) arc 2,32,238. 

70. Terrestrial and Lunar daysV The lime from sunrise to 
sunrise is a terrestrial civil day {bh&ni^sdvana^vdsara). The 
number of terrestrial day.s in a (moAd'yuga) is 1,57,79,17,828. 
The number of lunar days {tithi^s) in the yuga is 1,60,30,00,080. 

71. Additive montks^^ and Subtradive daysV (In a mahd- 
yuga) there are 15,93,336 additive months {adkimdsa) and 
2,50,82,252 subtractive days (tilAi-kfaya). 

72. Solar months^^ and lunar months.^ There are (in a 
mahdyuga) 5,18,40,000 solar months {ravi^m&sa), and the num* 
ber of lunar months is 5,34,33,336. 

73-74. Mandoccas or Apogees of the planets.*^ The number 
of eastward revolutions of the Sun's apogee {Surya^mandocca) 
in a Kalpa period is 387; that of Mars 204; that of Mercury 368, 
that of Jupiter 900; that of Venus 535; and that of Saturn 39. 

74b-76a. Pdtas or Nodes of the planets Now, to the 
retrograde {vdnia) revolutions of the nodes (of the planets) in 
a Kalpa: Of Mars it is 214, of Mercury 488, of Jupiter 174, 
of Venus 903 and of Saturn 662. 

76b-79. Aharga^ or number of days from theepoch.^ The 
(lolar) years, called bkagarjia that have elapsed in the current 
yuga are converted into (solar) months (by multiplying them 
by 12) and added to the (lunar) months Madhuy {Centra)^ 
Sukta (bright fortnight), etc. which have elapsed (in the 



II.54.79b-84a 


701 


current year), and the result is written down separately (in two 
'places). It is then multiplied by the number of additive 
months (in ayuga) and divided by the number of solar months 
(in a yuga). The quotient got (which will be the elapsed 
additive months) is added to the result (in months) got before 
and converted into days (by multiplying by 30). The number 
of days elapsed (in the current month) is added to it and the 
result written down in two places. (In one place) it is multi¬ 
plied by the subtractive days {tithik^aya) (in the Yuga) and 
divided by the number of lunar days (in the Yuga), The quo¬ 
tient obtained would be the elapsed subtractive days. These 
(elapsed subtractive da>'$) arc subtracted from the result (kept 
as above, in the second place). *ritc result would be the number 
of elapsed terrestrial days(fromthe commencement of the yuga) 
to the previous midnight at Lanka.^ 

79b-80a. lards of Iha day ate. The Lords of the current 
day, month and year are reckoned, as counted from the Sun. 
Thus, (the ahargana) divided by 7 and (the remainder) counted 
from Sunday will give the name of the Lord of the day. (Again, 
the ahargana) is divided by the number of days in a month and 
that in a year («>., 30 and 360); the quotients arc then multi¬ 
plied, respectively, by 2 and 3, and the products increased by 1. 
The results arc divided by 7 and the remainders counted from 
the Sun will give the Lords of the present month and year, 
respectively. 

81b-82a. Measi planets. The number of revolutions of a 
planet (in a Mahdyuga ) multiplied by the (currently) elapsed 
terrestrial days and divided by the number of terrestrial days 
(in the yuga) will give the cUpsed revolutions of the planet 

(in signs, degrees clc.)* 

82b-83a. Mean apogees and nodes. In the same manner, 
can be computed the mean positions of the apogees with direct 
motion, mentioned before. The nodes, too. (should ^ com¬ 
puted) similarly, but the results have to be subtracted from the 
circle {eakra, 180® or 12 signs) because of their retrograde 

motion). 

83b-S4a. MaasurmenU of tht Barth. The diameter of 
the Earth is 1600 yojanas.^ The square there is to be multiplied 



^02 Nitrada Pur&na 

by 10, and the square root of the product will give the circum¬ 
ference of the Earth. 

84b. The Earth’s circumference multiplied by the sine 
colatitude {lambajyd) (of a given place) and divided by the 
radius {trijivd)^^ is the exact circumference of the Earth at that 
place. 

85«86a< Dddnlara correction to due terrestrial longitude. 
The Diidniora {i.e., the distance of the place, in yojanas, along 
the said local circumference, from Zero or Lahka-Ujjain meri¬ 
dian) is multiplied by the daily motion of the planet (in minutes) 
and divided by the local circumferenct of the Earth. The 
quotient, which would be in minutes {kald)j should be subtract¬ 
ed from the mean planet (at Lanka, vide verse 81b-82a, above) 
if the place is east of the meridian, and added if it is to the west 
of the meridian. The result would be the mean position of 
the planet at the given place. 

86b-87a. TIu central meridian. On the central meridian, 
which extends from the capital of the demons (Lanka) to the 
divine mountain (Meru), are (the chics of) Avantika (Ujjain), 
Rohitaka and the one near the *Tank’ (Kuruk^tra). 

87b-88a. Btgiming of the weekdo)’ (VdrapravrUi ). A 
weekday (at a place) commences (at midnight at that place, 
which would ]ye) midnight (at Lanka meridian, vide verse 79) 
to which the detdntara^ndfis (time-difference due to terrestrial 
longitude) arc added (if the place is) to the cast and subtracted 
from (if the place is) to the west (of the meridian). 

86b-89a. Mean-position of a planet at any time. The desired 
time in nddt^s (after the local midnight as calculated above) 
multiplied by the mean daily motion of the planet and divided 
by 60 gives a result in terras of minutes. Hiis, when added 
(to the mean position at midnight) if the time taken after mid¬ 
night and subtracted from it before midnight, will give the 
position (of the planet) at the desired time. 

89b-91a. Vikfepa or CeUsHal latitude of the Moon and the 
planets.^ Tlic Moon is deflected by its node towards north and 
south from the limit of its declination, the maximum deviation 
being 1/80 of a circle (i.e. 4®30*). Jupiter (is similarly de¬ 
flected) by twice one-ninth 2/9) thereof (i.r., of the deflec¬ 
tion of the Moon (i. r., 2/9 of 4^30*-1®), Mars ihricc {i.e., 



II.54.91b-98a 


703 


3/9 of 4®30^1® 30’) and Mcrcuiy, Vcnm and Saturn arc de¬ 
flected four times (t.e., 4/9 of 4*30*=^ 2®). 

TRUE PLANETS (SPHUTA-GRAHA) 

91b-93a. Primary Sines. The eighth part of the minutes 
contained in a sign {rSSi) is the first sine {jydrdka).^^ That 
divided by itself, the quotient subtracted from the sine and the 
remainder added to the sine will give the second sine. In 
ihe same manner, divide, successively, the sines found by the 
first sine, subtract (the sum of) the quotients from the divisor 
and add the remainder to the previous sine. The result will be 
(he next sine. Thus the 24 sines arc to be calculated successively.^* 

93b-94a, Krdnii or declinaticn. The sine of Maximum 
declination (Parama^apnkraniqfyd) is 1397.** When any sine is 
multiplied by this and divided by trijivd (sine 90®, t.r., 3438), 
the arc of the result would be the decimation (of the planet 
required). 

94b-95a. Sines re. planetary positions. When (the* longi¬ 
tude of) the planet is subtracted from that of its mandoeca 
(higher apsis of the equation of the centre) or from its iigftroccn 
(higher apsis of the equation of conjunction), the remainder 
is its kendra anamoly); the pada (quadrant) (of the kendra is 
noted, and from that) its base-sine (bfaijo^jyd) and pi'rpcndi- 
cular-sinc {ko/i-jyd) arc found.** 

93b-96a. In an odd (vifoma) quadrant the base-sine is 
reckoned from the part gone by {gata) and the perpcndicular- 
sine from the part yet to be covei'cd {gamya). In an even 
quadrant {sama)^ the base-sine is reckoned from the part yet 
to be covered and the perpendicular-sine from the part gone 
by. 

96b-98a. Derivation of sines of arcs. (To derive the sine 
of any arc, e.g.^ the kcndra-winitt-planct, convert the arc) to 
minutes and divide by 225 [taitva-loeana)\ the result would 
be the number of the preceding tabular sine {jyd-pindoka}. 
Multiply the remainder (in minutes) by the difference of the 
preceding and following tabular sines and divide by 225 {iattva- 
locana). The quotient obtained is added to the preceding 
tabular sine; the result would give the sine (of the arc taken). 



704 Ndfcda PuT&na 

The same procedure u to be adopted also for versed sines 
{utkramQjy&). 

100b-101 a.*® Derivation of ares from sines. Subtract from 
the given sine the next less tabular sine; multiply the remainder 
by 223 {tattvdivi) and divide by the difference between the next 
lower and next higher tabular sines. /\dd the quotient to the 
product of the serial number of the next less sine and 225. 
The result would be the arc (of the sine taken). 

101 b< 103a. Manda^paridki {Epieycle of the apsis or the 
equation of the centre). The number of degrees of the Sun’s 
mandaparidhi is 14, and that of the Moon 32, at the end of the 
even quadrants; at tlie end of ihc odd quadrants, they are 20 
minutes less (in each case). 

(In the case of the other planets, iliry arc), at the end of 
even quadrants, 7.3 for Mars, 30 (for Mercury), 33 (for Jupiter), 
!2 (for Venus) and 49 (for Saturn). At the end of the odd 
quadrants, (they arc) 72 for Mars, 28 (for Mercury), 32 for 
Jupiter, 11 (for Venus) and 48 (for Saturn). 

103b-105a. Sighraparidhi or Epicycles of (he equation of 
conjunction. The Sigkrtiparidhis at the end of the even quadrants 
are 235 for Mars, 133 (for Mercur)*), 70 (for Jupiter), 202 
(for Venus) and 39 (for Saturn). At the end of the odd 
quadrants they arc 232 for Mars, 132 (for Mercury), 72 
(for Jupiter) 260 (for Venus) and 40 (for Saturn). 

105b-106a. Sphutc^aridbi or corrected epitycle. The basc- 
sine {bhujajyd) should be multiplied by the difference of the 
epicycles at (he odd and even quadrants and divided by the 
Radius {trijyd) and the result, (which would be in minutes), 
should be applied to the even epicycle {Tugma-vrtta): (these 
minutes arc) additive if the even epicycle is less than the 
odd epicycle and subtractive otherwise. The corrected 
{sphufa) epicycle (is thus obtained). 

106b-107a. Mandaphala or Equation of the centre. The 
base-sine {bhujajyd) and perpendicular sine [kofijyd) should be 
multiplied by the corrected epicycle and divided by the number 
of degrees in a circle (360). (TTic result would be the corres¬ 
ponding bhujdphala and kctipkala^ respectively, in minutes). 
The arc corresponding to the base-sine {bhujajyd) would be 
the equation of the centre {mandaphala) in minutes etc. 


II.54.107b-I6 


703 


107b-106. .^ighraphala or Equation of conjunclion. When 
the ktndra is in the half-orbit beginning with capricorn (maAtx- 
rddi)^ the result from the perpendicular-sine {kofi^phala) of the 
distance from the conjunction {kendra) is to be added to Radius 
[trijiva) and subtracted when in that beginning with Cancer 
[karkyddi). The square of this sum or difference is added to the 
result from the base-sine {bhujdphala). The square root of their 
sum is called calakania (variable hypotenuse). 

1 lOb-111.^^ The result from the base-sine [bhujdphala) is 
multiplied by radius and divided by the variable hypotenuse 
[calakari^a), 'Fhe arc corresponding to the quotient is in 
minutes and will be the equation of conjunction {taighrya'‘Phala). 
This (the $aighryaphala) is to be employed in the first and 
fourth process of correction for Mars and other planets. 

112. Computation of True planets. For the Sun and the 
Moon, mandakar^a atone is required. That for Mars etc. is 
now stated: (First) that for conjunction, then that for the apsis, 
again that for apsis and for conjunction—the four in succession 
(half the corrections being applied of the first two and the 
entire correction of the last two). 

113. When the kendra is in the half or bit beginning with 
Aries (Ajadi) the equation is additive [dhana) for all planets, 
both in the correction for conjunction and for the apsis; 
they are all subtractive in the half orbit beginning with Libra 
(Tulddi). 

114. Bhujdnlara correction for the equation of lime. The 
daily motion (bhukti) of a planet multiplied by the sun’s result 
from the base-sine and divided by the number of minutes in 
a circle [bhacakra). The result, which would be in minutes, 
is applied to the True planet got (verses 112-13 above) in the 
same direction as (the equation applied to) the Sun. 

113-16. Mean daily motion. The equation of a planet’s 
daily motion is to be calculated like that for the Mean planet 
in the process for the apsis. The daily motion is multiplied 
by the difference of the tabular sines corresponding to the 
base-sine [doriydniara) of anamoly and then divided by 225 
[tattvanetra). The result is multiplied the corresponding 
epicycle of the apsis {rnandaparidhi) and divided by the number 
of degrees in a circle (bkagofin); (the result) is additive when 



706 Xdfoda Purana 

in the half-orbit l^cginiiing with cancer» and subtractive when 
in the half-orbit beginning with Capricorn. 

117-18. Subtract the daily motion of the planet corrected 
for the apsis h orn the daily motion of its conjunction [iighra). 
Multiply the remainder by the difference between the last 
hypotenuse {antya-kan^n) and the radius and divide by the 
variable hypotenuse (calakarna)^ verses !07b-108). The result 
is to be added to the daily motion when the hypotenuse is 
greater than the radius and subtractive when it is less; (in the 
latter case, if the result) is greater (than the daily motion) 
subtract the latter from it; the remainder will be the retrograde 
(vakra) daily motion (of (he planet). 

110-120a. Reiroptssion of planets. Mars and other planets 
would (commence to be in retrograde motion (vakri) when 
the degrees of their kendra in the fourth process (verse 112) 
arc, respectively, (Mars) 164, (Mercui*)') 144, (Jupiter; 130, 
(Vemis) 163 and (Saturn) 113. They cease to be retrograde 
from when the degrees (of their kendras) aie equal to tlic above- 
said numbers subtracted from (the degrees in) a circle. 

120b-12la. Length of day and night. Sine declination 
(krdntijyH) multiplied by the equinoctial shadow [vifuvadbk^Y'' 
and divided by 12 is the Earth-sine {kfitijyd).^'^ This multiplied 
by Radius {trxjyd) and divided by the‘day-radius’ {dina-vydsay^ 
(gives the sine of the a.scensional difference, cora). The corres¬ 
pond ic arc (in minutes) would l>e the ascensional difference 
in prdnas'^ {edrdsavah ). 

121b-122. The said arc added to and subtracted from 
the fourth part of the day and night, separately, will give the 
duration of half day and lialf night respectively, wlien the 
declination is north {udak-krdnti). The reverse would be the 
case when the declination is south {ydmya-krdnii). Double 
these (half days and nights) >yDuld give fihe lengths of) the day 
and night, respectively. 

123. Position of a planet in an asterism,^^ (Since 27 naksatra^s 
or bkani^s or asterisms make up the full ecliptic of 360“), the 
extent in it of one asteiism (bha-bhoga) is 800 minutes (or 
13* 20’). (Ami, since the Moon gains in longitude over the 
Sun one circle or 360* in 30 lunar days or tithis)^ the extent of 
a tithi {tithi-bhoga) is 720 minutes. The asterisms crossed by a 



II.54.124-I31 


707 


planet is got by dividing the longitude of the True planet by 
800. (The remainder divided) by the daily motion of the 
planet will give the days etc. (traversed by the planet in the 
next asterism). 

124. Toga ai a givtn The sum of the true longi¬ 

tudes of the Sun and the Moon at the required time, reduced 
to minutes> if divided by 800, will give the number of Togas 
which have elapsed. The portion gone {gala) and to go 
{gamya) in the current Toga multiplied by 60 and divided by 
the sum of the daily motion of the Sun and the Moon will give 
the corresponding ndiikds thereof. 

125. Tithi at a desirsd txme^ Subtract the longitude of 
the Sun in minutes from the longitude of the Moon in minutes 
and divide by the extent of a tithi {iithibhoga^ 720’); the 
result will be the tithis elapsed. Tht nd^is gone or to go in 
the current tithi at the desired time are derived by multiplying 
the remainder by 60 and dividing by the difference between 
the daily motion of the Sun and Moon at the desired 
time. 

126*127. The Kasana at thi desired The tithis elapsed 

after the first half of the first tithi of the bright fortnight arc 
multiplied by two and divided by seven {ndga). The remainder, 
counted as fiava, B^ava, Kaulaka, Taitila^ Gara, Vanij and 
Vis(i, would give the elapsed karat^. The katanas from the 
latter half of the fourteenth tithi of the dark fortnight (to the 
first half of the first tiihu of the bright fortnght) are 
Ndgdy Catusp&t and Kirfistughna, 

ON DIRECTION, PLAGE AND TIME 

128. Setting the gnomon. On a stone slab, levelled with 
water, or on hard level plaster, describe a circle with any radius 
measured in gnonomonic digits. 

129-131. At its centre fix the gnomon, of twelve digits 
of the measure of the gnomonic digiu used above. Mark 
the two points where the (gnomonic) shadow meets the circum¬ 
ference of the circle, before and after noon; these two points are 
to be called the west and east points, (respectively). Midway 
between them, draw, (using a pair of compasses), by means 
of a fish-figure (ftW), a north-south line. Also, Midway bet- 



708 


Mrada Purd^ 


ween the north and south directions, draw, by means of a fish« 
figure, an east^west line. In the same manner, by means of 
fish-figures (maisjta), draw the intermediate directions between 
the four cardinal directions. 

132. Draw a square circumscribing (the circle), along 
with the (eight) lines emanating from the centre. Any given 
shadow is reckoned by the digits of its base-sine {bkujd-sUtra) 
projected on the square. 

133. Priru vertical etc. The cast-west line is called the 
prime vertical {sama^‘man4cUa)\ it is termed also the equatorial 
horizon (six o'clock circle, unman4(^a) and equinoctial circle 
(celestial equator, vUuvanman4<da). 

134. Agrd {Amplitude). (In the circle) draw another 
cast-west line through the cxiremiiy of the equinoctial shadow 
{visuvadbhd) \ the interval between any given shadow and 
the line of the equinoctial shadow is termed the amplitude 
{agra). 

135. The square root of the sum of the squares of the 
gnomon and of the shadow is the hypotenuse {karna). If, from 
the square of the latter, the square of the gnomon be subtracted, 
the square roo of the remainder is the shadow; the gnomon is 
found by the converse process. 

136. Precession of the eguinoxes {Ayanacalana), at any desired 
time. In a Tuga, the circle of asterisms librates eastward thirty 
score (i.^., 600) times. This (number) multiplied by the 
terrestrial days elapsed (at the desired time) and divided by 
the number of days in a Tuga gives the elapsed liberations, 
(signs, degrees) etc. 

137. Derive the sine (of the ayana^^sphufa thus got), 
multiply it by three and divide by ten. The result will be the 
amount of the precession of the equinoxes (at the desired tune). 
The longitude of the planets should be corrected (by adding 
to or subtracting from the longitudes) the said precession. It 
is from this (corrected longitude of the planets) that their 
decimation {krdnti), gnomonic shadow (ckdyd), ascensional 
difference (cara) etc. are to be calculated. 

138. Latitude and co-latitude from shadow. The radius 
multiplied separately by the gnomon (12) and the equinoctial 
shadow {chdyd) and divided by the equinoctial hypotenuse 



11.54.139-144 


709 


{vifuvatkarrmy^ will give the co&iae and sine, respectively, of the 
latitude. The arcs of these sines will be the co-latitude and 
latitude. These two will always be inclined to the south. 

139. Zenith distance of the Sun. The Zenith distance of 
the Sun (at any time) would be the sum of the latitude of 
the place and the Sun’s declination, when both are in the 
same direction; and, their difference when in opposite 
directions. From the Zenith distance, its sine and cosine are to 
be found. 

140. The shadow and its hypotenuse from distance. 

The sine (of the Zenith distance, found as above) and the Radius‘s 
multiplied by the length of the gnomon in digits (i.r., 12) and 
divided by the cosine (of the Zenith distance), give, respectively, 
the shadow of the gnomon and its hypotenuse at midday 
(ahardala ). 

141. Sun^s declination and longitude from latitude of a place 
and zenith distance. Find the difference between the degrees of 
the latitude (of the place) and those of the Sun’s zenith dis¬ 
tance at noon when both are in the same direction and their 
sum, otherwise. The sun’s declination (apakrama) would be 
detained. 

141b-143a. Multiply sine declination by the Radius and 
divide by the maximum declination of the Sun {i.e., 1397 mi¬ 
nutes). (Taking the quotient as the sine) find its arc. This 
arc will be the longitude of the Sun (in the first quarter of the 
ecliptic) beginning with Aries. When the Sun is (in the se¬ 
cond quarter) beginning with Cancer, subtract (the arc) from 
6 signs {cakrardha). When (in the third quarter beginning with 
Libra), add (the arc) to 6 signs (bhdrdha). When (in the 
fourth quarter) beginning with Capricorn subtract (the arc) 
from 12 signs (cakra); in each case, the result will be) the true 
loi^itude (sphula) of the Sun at midday. 

143b. Mean Sun. Apply to this the equation of the 
apsis {mandaphaia} repeatedly in the opposite sign and the Sun’s 
mean longitude will be got. 

144. Ahordtrdsu of a planet. The diurnal motion (in 
minutes) of any planet (on any day) 1$ to be multiplied by the 
number of prdnas {asus or respirations, of time) contained in the 
rising periods 'of the sign {rUi) occupied by the planet and 



710 


MfodQ Purd^ 


divided by 1800. The quotient added to the number of prtayis 
in a circle is termed the day*night duration in prib^as of the 
planet (on that day). 

145-146. Ri^ht asetnsions of Uu Sig^ at Lahkd, (Towards 
finding the right ascensions of the ends of the first three signs, 
Aries, Taurus and Gemini, find the declinations of the said ends), 
multiply the day-radius of three signs {tribkadyukart^dha) and 
divide by their own respective day-radii (svdkoT&tT&Tdha)^ in 
order, the sines of oue, of two and of three signs. The quotients 
when converted into arc and subtracted, each from the one 
following, give, beginning with Aries, the times of rising (in 
prdnas) (of the three signs) at Lanka. They are, respectively, 
1670, 1795 and 1935. 

147a. Right ascensions at any place. The above, diminish-* 
ed each by its portion of ascensional difference {carakhat^da), 
as calculated for a place, give the times of rising at that 
place. 

147b-148a. For the three signs beginning with Cancer, 
invert the times of rising at Laiika and add the portions of 
ascensional difference of the respective signs inverted. The 
above six, in inverse order, will be the times for the other six 
commencing with Libra. 

148b-149a. Udaya^Lagna {rising point of the ecliptic) at 
any time. The ascensional equivalents of the parts of the sign 
(occupied by the planet) which are gone (bhukta) and to come 
(bhogya) are to be calculated from the longitude of the Sun at 
the given time. They will be given by the number of degrees 
traversed and to be travened, multiplied by the ascensional 
equivalent (udaydsavafi) of the sign and divided by 30. 

149b-150a. From the desired time in nddikds(^ reckon¬ 
ed from sunrise) reduced to ptbyss^ subtract the equivalent in 
prOnas of the part of the sign to come, and also the ascensional 
equivalents of the further signs, in succession. In the same 
manner, subtract the equivalents of the part which has gone 
by and of the signs which have to go, in inverse order. 

I50b-151a. If there be a remainder, multiply by 30 and 
divide by the equivalent of the unsubtracted sign; subtract 
or add the quotient, appropriately, to the whole signs. The 



IL54.151b-I56b 


711 


result would be the point of the ecliptic at the horizon at that 
time. 

lSlb*152a. Madhjfolagna (Point of th$ icliptk at ihi mm* 
dian). From the east or west hour*ang]e of the Sun in 
(nata^n&4i)y calculate as above using the equivalents in right 
ascension (laAkodaydsavaf^) and apply the result as an additive 
or subtractive equation to the Sun’s longitude. The point of 
the ecliptic upon the meridian (Madhya4agna) at that moment 
would result. 

132b*153*a. Ttm^ from Lagna, (In order to find the 
instant when a given point of the ecliptic would be upon the 
horizon), add together the ascensional equivalents, in prdnas^ 
of : (I) the part of the sign to be traversed by the given point 
(on the ecliptic) if it is less (than the longitude of the Sun), 
(2) of the part travened if it is greater (than the longitude of 
the Sun), and (3) of the intervening signs. The sum (in 
pr^as) will give the instant (for the given lagna). 

SOLAR AND LUNAR ECLIPSES 

153b-154d. Possibility of a lunar eclipse. (Compute the 
True Sun, Moon and Node at the syzygies). If sine (Sun* 
minus-Node) is less than 14 (Indra), there b a possibility of 
an eclipse. The said sine in minutes b to be multiplied by 11 
(Siva) and divided by 7 (saila). The result b called &ara 
in digits (afigulas)^ and would be directed towards the hemi¬ 
sphere in which (Sun-minus-Node) lies. 

154b. Bclipsif and the eclipsed. (In the solar eclipse, 
which occurs only at new moon), the Moon obscures the Sun; 
and in the lunar eclipse, (which occurs only at full moon), 
the shadow of the Earth obscures the Moon. 

154b-155a. Half the (angular) diameters of the eclipsed 
and the eclipser minus the iara bcalled c/tanne (Aa), (the eclipsed 
portion, reckoned in digits).^ Subtract, (if possible), the 
eclipsed body fiom the ekanna; the result would be kka<chasma 
(empty space eclipse). 

1551^ 156b. Computation of the Iwuxr eclipse. Half the 
angular diameters is to be added to the iara^ the sum multi¬ 
plied by ten and divided by choma. The square root (of the 
product) b found and a sixth of it b subtracted from it and 



712 


N&rada Purona 


divided by the ai^lar diameter of the Moon {glau^vapufi). The 
result will give the half-duration of the eclipse {sthityardha) 
in ghafikd etc. 

lS6b-158a. The sthityardha (is placed at two places). 
Sine Sun-minus-Node in degrees is doubled and the number 
taken as palas. They are subtracted from or added to the 
sthityardha if Sim-minu$*Node is less than 6 signs or 12 signs, 
respectively, and vice versa if otherwise. The results got would 
be the true sthityardha (as reckoned) from the commencement 
and completion of the eclipse. The eclipsed portion (in digits) 
multiplied by 20 {nakha) and divided by the angular diameter 
of the eclipsed body will give the results called Vi{fh)iopaka-s, 

158b-159. Cmputation of the solar eclipse, (In the solar 
eclipse), the mid*eclipse occurs at the moment of conjunction. 
Calculate the tfibhona4agna (rising point of the ecliptic-minus- 
three signs) of the Sun for the moment of conjunction {parvdnta) 
and keep it apart. (For the tribhona-lagna) calculate the 
parallax in latitude in degrees {natdrhia) by combining, appro¬ 
priately, the declination {krdnti) and latitude [aksa). Divide 
it by 22 and square the result. If the square is less than 2, 
halve it and add to the square; if the square is more than 2, 
subtract 2 from it, halve the result and add to the square. The 
result thus got is added to 12 and the sum is called ^divisori 
{hara ). 

160. Find the difference between tribkona^lagna and the 
Sun, reduce it by a tenth thereof, multiply by 14 {purandara) 
and divide by the 'divisor* (found in verse 159). The result 
would be the lambana (parallax in longitude, in nddikds). 
If tribkona^agna is more than 12 (arka), the lambana is positive 
and, if otherwise, negative. 

161. The lambana-nd^ikds are multiplied by 13 (viiva); 
the result is to be reckoned in terms of minutes and added to or 
subtracted from Sun-minus-Node appropriately and (from its 
sine) its fora is determined {vide verse 154a). The lambana 
therefrom is multiplied by six. After appropriate addition and 
subtraction thereof, re. iribhona^lagnaf the natdfhSas are again 
calculated. 

162-163a. A tenth part of these natdrfifas are subtracted 



IL 34.163b-168 


713 


from 18 and the result multiplied by the said tenth part. The 
product is subtracted from 18 minutes and divided by 6. The 
result will give parallax in longitude (n^h) in the same direction 
of the (previous) natdrhias. Appropriate application of this 
subtractively or additively in accordance with opposite directions 
or the same direction of the two* will render theaccurate. 

163b-163a. Using the said Sara^ the (exact) eclipsed 
portion {ckanna) and half duration of the eclipse arc to be 
found (as before). The half-duration is multiplied by 6; 
the result, which would be in degrees, is kept at two places and 
the Iribhona-lagna subtracted from or added to it, respectively, 
and the lambana calculated from the two* as before. The results 
being appropriately applied, the exact (hrst and second) half 
durations are obtained. These subtracted from and added to, 
as the case may be to the mid-eclipse {madhya-kdla)^ will give 
the exact times of the commencement and the conclusion of 
the eclipse. 

MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS 

]63b-166a. Heliacal insibility of the plantU^'^. The kdlamla^ 
(degrees of time) of the planets beginning with the Moon arc : 
12 (Moon), 17 (Mars), 13 (Mercury), 11 (Jupiter), 9 (Venus) 
and 15 (Saturn). The heliacal setting and rising of these 
planets occur, respectively, at times got by subtracting (the 
kdldfhlas) from sunrise and by adding them to sunset. 

166b-167a. Shadow of a planet Consider the reflection 
of a planet (in water or in a mirror) and ascertain the ocular 
altitude {drgauiyam lambam). The distance between the foot 
of the gnomon and the spot of the reflection, multiplied by 12 
(ravi) and divided by the ocular altitude, will give the measure 
of the shadow of the planet (in digits). 

167b-168. Elongation of the MoorCs horns. At sunset (on 
the desired day) the tiihi and its divisions {ndiikd^ vindiikd etc.) 
gone and to go are accurately determined. The tiihis are multi¬ 
plied by 16 and the square of the h/Att subtracted therefrom. 
The result is multiplied by the equinoctial shadow {ok^abhd) 
and divided by 15. The direction of the result is taken as north 
and corrected appropriately with the declination (in minutes) 
of the Sun and also by Sara of the Moon in minutes applied 



714 


Ndrada Purdf^a 


reversely, The result is divided by twice the tithis. The 
valana (deflection) in digits towards the direction of the correc* 
tion {i.e., the direction in which the Sun is with reference to the 
Moon) is got. 

169. Subtract from the tithi one-fifth of itself; (the 
measure of) the illuminated part of the Moon (phase, sita) 
is obtained. The horn of the Moon will be elongated in the 
direction of V(Uana, The measure in digits of the elongation 
shall be ascertained by means of a diagram. 

170-17Ia. exjunction of the planets. The numbers 5, 6, 
7, 9 and 5 (corresponding to the five planets Mars etc.) are 
multiplied by 7W^*minus-thc respective Hghrakawa and 
(placed at two places. One set is divided, respectively by 
21, 12, 6, 24 and 3 and the result is applied to other set, i.«., 
subtracted if the hypotenuse is larger than trijyd and added 
otherwise. The results divided by 3 will be the angular 
diameters of the discs of the several planets beginning from Mars. 

171b-I72a. Time of conjunction. (When it is necessary 
to determine when two planets will meet): If the two planets 
are both regular or retn^^rade, the difference in their longi¬ 
tudes is divided by the difference of their rates of motion; if 
one is regular and the other retrograde, (the difference of their 
longitudes) is divided by the sum of their rates of motion. The 
result in days etc. would give the time to pass for their con¬ 
junction. 

172b-173. Mutual non^bscuralion of planets in conjunction. 
(The two planets in conjunction) should be corrected by their 
respective parallaxes in latitude {nati) according to their Saras^ 
it being addition if in the same direction and subtraction other¬ 
wise. When the north-south difference of the two planets is 
less than half the sum of their diameters, there will be (visual) 
distinction between the two, (there being no obscuration). 
True [sphufa) results can, of course, be arrived by working with 
the parallax in longitude {lambana) etc. as in the case of the 
solar eclipse. 

VYATIPATA and VAIDHRTA : MALIGNANT 
SITUATIONS OF SUN AND MOON 

174. Vaidhrux.^ When the Sun and the Moon are in 



11.54.175-182 


715 


the same qyana, i,e,, on the same side ofcithersolstice, ifthesum 
(of their longitudes) is one circle (360) , and both have equal 
declinations, that situation is called Vaidhria, 

175. Vyctipdta, When the Sun and the Moon are on 
the opposite sides of either solstice and have equal minutes of 
declination, that situation is called Vyatipdta^ the sum (of their 
longitudes) being a half-circle. 

176. Time when declinations ore equal. When the longi¬ 
tudes of the Sun and the Moon coirected by the degrees 
of precession of the equinoxes as found by observation, 
is equal to 12 signs or 6 signs, respectively, compute their 
declinations. 

177. Then, if the declination of the Moon, which is in 
an odd quadrant, and had been corrected for its latitude {Vik^ 
tepa), is greater than the declination of the Sun, the situation of 
pdta is already past. 

178. If less, it is still to come. In an even quadrant, the 
reverse is the case. If the Moon’s declination is subtract!ble 
from its latitude, the rules as to the quadrant are to be reversed. 

179. Multiply the sines of the two declinations separately 
by Radius {trijyd) and divide by the sine of the maximum decli¬ 
nation {par^rdntij;^ viz., 1397) and find the arcs (of the two 
results). The diffeience (of the arcs) or half that difference 
is to be added to the Moon’s lot^itude when the pdta is yet to 
occur. 

180. It is to be subtracted from the Moon’s longitude 
when the pdia is past. The said (difference) when multiplied 
by the Sun’s daily motion and divided by the Moon’s daily 
motion, gives a correction, in minutes, to be duly applied to the 
longitude of the Sun, (beu^ subtracted from the Sun if the pdta 
is past and added to it if the pdta is yet to occur). 

181. A similar correction is to be applied, in the reverse 
order, to the Moon’s mode. This operation is repeated until 
the declinations (of the Sun and the Moon) arc equal. 

182. Mean time of the Pdta. The pdta occurs at the 
moment when the declinations arc equal. (To find out whe¬ 
ther a pdta is past or yet to come): If the Moon’s loi^fitudc at 
the pdta found by applying the correction to the Moon (vide 
verse 180) is less or greater than fthe Moon’s longitude)at 



716 


Ndrada Purih^ 


midnight (of that day), the pita is past or is yet to occur^ 
respectively. 

183. True time of Pdia. The minutes of the interval 
between the Moon*s longitude (at the Mean pita)^ as ascer¬ 
tained, and that at midnight, when multiplied by 60 and divided 
by the Moon's daily motion, will give the time of the pdta in 
nd4ikds. 

184. Half-duratum of the Pdta. Multiply half the sum of 
the diameters of the Sun and the Moon by 60 and divide by the 
difference of their daily motions. The result will be the half¬ 
duration, {sthityardka (of the pdto)^ in nadikd etc. 

185. Btginning^ Middle and End of the Pdta. The true 
time (of the pdta (vide verse 183) is the middle (moment of 
the pdta). That diminished by the half-duration (vide verse 
184) is the moment of its commencement and that increased 
by the half-duration is the moment of its end. 

186. Consequence of the Pdta. Ck)mpared to the beginning 
and the end, the middle moment of the is extremely harmful. 
It is like burning fire and is to be avoided in all (auspicious) 
rites. 

187. O brahmai^a I Thus has been stated, in brief, 
matters relating to mathematics and astronomy {ga^itu). I 
shall, now, set out horoscopy (jdtaka) commencing with (the 
statement of) the nomenclature of the rdSi-s (signs). 



CHAPTER HFTYFOUR 


NOTES 


1. Hindu texts on astronomy call this section as TripraJrta^c^ihydyat 
since it deals with 'problems* concerning the 'three* topics, viz , time, place 
and direction. 

2. Actually, however, ihk topic b not treated in the Furd$a. 

3. The two vyatif>atas, being malignant aspects of Sun and Moon, 
called Ldfa and VdMrtaf occur at the moments when the sum of the longitudes 
of the Sun and the Moon is equal to 180^ and 360^, respectively. These 
moments are considered to be highly inauspicious {vi-ati’pdta)- 

4. For the constitution and list of see below, note under verse 
2lib. See also ch. 54. Verse 124 and footnote. 

5. For the nature of and the list thereof, see below, note under 

verse 219b. See alio ch. 54, verses 126*27 and footnote. 

6. The idea is that the operation could start from the unit digits 
from the right end of the numbers, as is the general practice, or from 

the highest digits of the numbers at the lef^ end. 

7. For the detailed working, see LfUp(Uf of Dhaskaracarya, (edn. 
Hoshiarpur, 1975). So also, for the arithmetical operations set out below. 

8. Written in modern convention, this would be 

(a+b)+ (a—b) {a+ b) — (a—b) , 

-2-‘i-2- 

9. *•—b* 


a—b 


a+b 


10. 1. Verses 32-34 give three methods to derive, on the basis of 

any assumed number, sets of two numbers which when squared and added 
together or one subtracted from the other, and reduced by 1, give perfect 
squares. 

1/2 


Method 1. The numbers are 


2x 



Sum of their squares mwui l=64x*—2+4“g^2)* 


Diff. of their squares mintis ls»6^+6+g^4 —32x*- (8**,—2+ 5^) 




8x» 


I 


Method U. The numbers are : 

Sum of their squares mam (x++ 1 *—1 




Diff. of their squares mmus 1= I*— 

Method ///. The numbers are : (8x^+1) and 8x® 

Sum of their Squares minui (8x4-1- |)i-f (8x4+4x4)1 

Diff. of their Squares mtmu !• (8x4+I)i--(8x3}t^l-{ex4-4xt)t 
Thus, all the results obtained are perfect squares. 


718 


X&rada Puf^ 


11. Here, the flat two linei give the method to calculate the 

Uftt term of the lerta and the third line, the fum of the leries. Thus, in a 
gemetricaJ teriei, if m u the fint member (mttkha, f is the common 

rado r ii the ntimber terms (lacchd) and f the sum of the series 

(d/umOf sarvaihana) : 

Tht last term —n z gt 

(s-l) 

For detailed working, see LfUvaitf pp, rd., 125 (pp. 256-64). 

12. Thus, in a right angled triangle, if a b the aldtude, 6 the base» and 
h the hypotenuse, a*+bs->M. 

]3< The three sides would thus be i. (a —b)*+2ab *a*+b*; 
ii. (a+b)(a-b)««at—bt; iii. 2ab, for (at-bS]>(4'2ab)« «(aa4bi)a. 

14. Thus the circumference of a circle is 22/7d. 


Sum of the series 


15. Thus: iara^ 1/2 (Qdffrjyd) 

2 X ipra^ 

idrd 


jya- 

Vyisa* 


16. If a is the arc, e drcumihrencc, d diameter and j rine; 
Tint* - (c-4) a 


17. Arc 


--V-- 


5 S.c«-r4 

4d+s 


16. DiHerent heights for different grains are suggested for the 
reason that when made into a conical heap, coarse grain would pile up 
higher while fine grain would slip down and so pile up only to a lesser height. 

19. Dropp is one of the bigger measures of volume used in ancient 
and mediaeval India. 

20. The gnomon in general use in ancient India was a strong, 
straight, cylindmal rod, made of metal or of wood, 12 inches in height, 
and pointed at the tip. In use, it was fized lirmly on a hard, level surface 

at the centre of a graduated circle. 




11.54 NoUs 


L 


719 


22. Height of the lamp, 

GCxBC 
-GS- 

23. Lamp to gnomon, 


24. If LB, the lamp, 

GC and G’ C, the two 
gnomons, 

CS and C S', the two 
shadows 

BS and BS', the two 
basa, 

^ „ SS* X CS 

Base BS * 


BS'» 


(C*S’ 
SS’ X CS' 
(C*s’—CS) 



2S. X.acnpLB^ 


) 


BS X GC 


BS* X G*C 

-CT“ 


26. A 'divine* year U equal Co 360 'mortal' yean or 

siderial yean of corrent astroaotnical parlance. 

27. Manu U one of Che mythical progenicors of man and the time 
mentioned here is called a moaMniare. 14 moAMrUorer constitute a longer 
Puranic duration of time mentioned in the next verse, which is termed Kalpu^ 

28. By Sighncca is meant the farthest point from the centre of the 
earth in the orbit of the planet, or the higher apsis of the epicycle related to 
the equation of conjunction. 

29. A lunar day {tUMi) b equal to <M)e-tbirtielh of a lunar month 
{cdndrQ^mdsa) which is the interval between two conjunctions (or oppositions) 
of the Moon, being the period of the moon's synodical revolution, and b 
reckoned either from new moon to new moon or from full moon to full moon. 


30. A lunar month, extending over 29.5306, days, being ihoner 
than a solar month of 30.4380 days, the number of lunar mcoths in about 
three solar years would be one snore than thsU of the solar months. Hib 
extra lunar month b called aJhimi^a (additive or intercalary month). 

31. A lunar day (liAi) being smaller than a terrestrial day (MadMe)i 

if the two begin simultaneously at a susnse, the lunar day will end earlier. 
Thu difference will increase day by day and when it b equal to one day (24 
hri.), it constitutes one or subtractive day. 

32. The solar month (r<ure«ndr«), being one^twelfth of a solar year 
(jotfd-rjr/d) or siderial year {nak^etra^ti^fa), k the time required by the Sun 
to pass through on^ rdH (sign or 30*) of the Zodiac and b equal to 30.4380 
terrestrial days. 

S3. A lunar month b equal to 30 lunar days {Hthis) 

and b equal to 29.5306 terrestrial days. 



720 


Ndrada Purdria 


34. Mandocca is equivalent to the higher Apsb. The mandoccas of 
the Sun and the Moon are the same as their Apogees (points on the 
orbit farthest from the planet), while the Tfuutdouas of the other planets are 
equivalent to their Aphelions (pointt on the orbit farthest from the Sun). 

35. Fdta (node) is the point at which the orbit of a planet intersects 
the ecliptic. 

36. The (lit. 'total of days*) or bhudina at any time is the 

number of (terrestrial) days that have elapsed upto the previous mid* 
night from the time of the comnicncement of the epoch, which latter is gene* 
rally taken as the current Tuga, 

37. Lanka is one of the cardinal hypothetical cities on the Earth's 
equator where the meridian of the Indian city of Ujjain cuts it. In Indian 
astronomy, days are reckoned from midnight (or sunrise, according to differ¬ 
ent systems) at the meridian of Lanka. For a discussion on the position 
of Laiik^, see Aryabhatfyo» Ed. with Tr., (Delhi 1976), pp. 123-25. See also 
below, verses S6b-87a. 

38. I. A Tojanat according to thb, will be about 4.95 miles or 7.56 km. 

Thus, if r is the radius of the Earth, Grcumference^2rSx\/Tb« 

2rx ^/\0. Here ^iO is taken as n as per the formula, rir. 2 n r. This 
worlu out of 5059.556 jfojanas. 

39. TrijMy called also trij/df tribh^jfdy trigupc, trirdHpg^ b sine 3 
rdJu (or 90) and b equal to the radius of the circle. 

40. Vikf€pa (celestial latitude) b the deviation of the planets from 
the plane of the ecliptic. 

41. Thus : The cycle=360% rdH or sign « 1/12 x 360^^30^ 1/8 
sign a 3H5’ or 225\ This b the first of the 24 signs contained in a quarter 
(90^ or 3 signes). 

42. The second sine, being the sine for the second section {khap^) 
225'+225'=450% would be : 225/225=1; 450-1=449*. 

The third sine, being the sine for the third section (AiW?!^), 225'225'+ 
225=675% would be : Present quotient 449/225 = 2; the sum of the quotients^ 
2+1^3; the sum reduced from the first sine 225=225 - 3 = 222. The 
result added/to the second sine 449+222=671, the third sine. 

The process b repeated. The several sines calculated thus are given 
below :— 


J/o. 

Kha^d^ in minuUs 

Sine 

J^o. 

Khaada in Minuies 

Sine 

0 

0 

000 




1 

225 

225 

13 

2925 

2585 

2 

450 

449 

14 

3150 

2728 

3 

675 

671 

15 

3375 

2659 

4 

900 

890 

16 

3600 

2978 

5 

1125 

1105 

17 

3625 

3064 

6 

1350 

1315 

18 

4050 

3177 

7 

1575 

1520 

19 

4275 

3256 

8 

1600 

1719 

20 

4500 

3321 

9 

2025 

1910 

21 

4725 

3372 

10 

2250 

2093 

22 

4950 

3409 

11 

2475 

2267 

23 

5175 

3431 

12 

2700 

2431 

24 

5400 

3438 



11.54. Notes 


721 


43. In Hindu aitronomy* the maximum deciinatjon (obliquity of 
4 he ecliptic) is taken as 24'; and )397 represents sine 24^ 

44. While the mandoceas of the Sun and the Moon are the same as 
as their apogees, that of the other Janets are equal to their aphelions. For 
details on the concept of and computations with mMdouas and iighroccos in 
Hindu astronomy, see £. Burgess, TrMsUtum ^ thg SiirycsiJdhOnta, ed. 
by P. Gangooly, Calcutta, 1935, pp. 53«56. 

45. The Venkatesvara Press edn. of ^dreda PimJtai used for this 
translation, repeats, here, haplographically, two verses, thus erratically in¬ 
creasing serial number of the verses by two. While the repeated verses 
are dropped in the translation the increased serial number ii retained so that 
there might not be any discrepancy in the number of the verves in the text 
edition and the present translation. 

46. The Venkatesvara Press edition of Stvado used for this 

translation repeats here haplographically three earlier lines, increasing the 
serial numbering of the verses correspc^dingly. Here, the changed verse 
number is adopted according to the edition; the repeated lines are not 
translated. 

47. Vifuvod-bhd or Equinoctial shadow at a place is the shadow 
of the Sun cast by a gnomon of 12 digits at Midday on the day of the Vernal 
cquippx (March 21) or Autumnal equinox (Sept.23) at that place. 

48. Kfilijyd (Earth-sine) is the sine of the arc of the diurnal circle 
intercepted between the horizon and the six o'clock line. 

49. Dinc^vydsa-dalo (day-radius), called also ('day-sine*) is the 

radius of the diurnal circle, in contrast to lry>d which is the radius of the 
*great circle* or the 'tabular radius*. 

50. Prdxia or Am (‘rcsiwraiion’) is the period of time required for one 
respiration and is /equal to A seconds. 

51. 'Ihc ecliptic is divided into 27 asterisms or lunar mansions of 
equal extent of 13®20’ or 800* each, called A^i, Bharapi etc. The nak^atra 
forms one of (he members of the fivc-member, almanac {PaMnga) of the 
Hindus, the other four members being, Vdra (weekday), tithi (lunar day), 
Toga and Aflrepa, for which see below. 

52. Toga, one of the members of the fivc-membered Hindu almanac, 
is used only for astrological purposes. It is a period of time of variable length 
during which the joint motion of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon 
amounts to 13^20* or 800*, being the extent of a lunar mansion. They arc 27 
in number, and arc mentioned in Hindu almanacs for each day. They have 
individual names, as follows;— 

1 Vi?kambha, 2. Priii; 3. Ayusman; 4. Saubhagya; 5. Sobhana, 

6. Atigawia, 7. Sukarma, 8. Dhrti; 9. SuU; Ip. Gapija; il. Vrddbi; 

12. Dhruva; 13. VyaghaU; 14. Har?ana; IS. Vajra, 16. Siddhi, 
17. Vyatipiu, 18. Variya*; 19. Parigha, 20. Siva, 21. Siddha; 22. 
Sidhyaj 23. Subha; 24. Sukla, 25. Brahman, 26. Indra, and 27. 

Vaidhtti. 



722 


}f&fada FurOs^ 


53. The kara^ is tlio ftn e&ti(y made use <sS only in astrology and 
forxni a member of the five*membered {pckUnia)^ HitkIu almanac. Each Kora$d 
ectcnda over half a tithi. The four dhfwa (*fixed*) karattas vU; ^oAwii, 
Catu^pdi and Xtflbfi^iu occupy the four halA^ttAu u stated above, and the 
other seven kdra^as repeat eight dmea through the next 56 half«/tt^u, when 
the cycle of 60 karaitai in a lunar monib is completed. The cycle is then 
repeated. 


54. VifUBOlkarpat or equinoctial hypotenuse, it the hypotenuse of 
the equinoctial shadow found by calculating the square root of the sum of 
the squares of the equinoctial ^shadow and the gnomon. 

55. By *Radius* (with capital *R*) is meant the radius of the great 
circle or the tabular radius. In Sanskrit k is called trU/d, trijlvif trihhdjjti 
etc., meaning the tine of three sines or 90^ 

56. It might be noted that if the iara is larger and cannot be 
subtracted from half the (angular) diameters of the eclipsed and the eclipier, 
there will be no thama (eclipsed portion) and so no eclipse. 

57. For a little time before sunrise and after sunset, the planets, 
near the Sun, would be invisible m account of the sun’s brilliance. The 
times afler sunset and before sunnse they would be visible are indicated here. 

56. This section, called Pktidhikira (Section on p&ias) in treatises, 
treats of two astronomical situations called and Vaidhtta which are 

highly malignant in character. They are computed and \ised for astrological 
purposes, eie., to avoid auspicious acts being held at these situations. 



CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE 

Delimatum of Horoscopy 

Sanandana said : 

1. The twelve limbs ofKalapuruw, the Cosmic Being, 
viz, (1) head, (2) face, (3) arms, (4) heart, (5) breast, (6) 
entrails, (7) pelvis, (8) genital organ, (9) thighs, (10) knccs^ 
(11) shanks and (12) feet are (represented by) the twelve 
Signs of the Zodiac viz. Mtso (Aries), Vrsabha (Taurus), 
Mithuna (Gemini), Karkataka (Cancer), Sirhha (Leo), Kanyd 
(Virgo), Tuld (Libra), Vrieika (Scorpio), Dhanus (Sagittarius), 
Makara, (Capricorn), Kumbha (/Vquarius) and Mina (Pisces), 
respectively.* 

2. The lords of the twelve Signs (Rkiis) beginning with 
Mesa (Aries) arc in order (1) Mars, (2) Venus, (3) Mercury, 
(4) Moon, (5) Sun, (6) Mercury (7) Venus, (8) Mars, (9) 
Jupiter, (10) Saturn (11) Saturn, and (12) Jupiter. 

3. In the odd Signs of the zodiac the first Hora i.c. 15 
degree portion, is ruled by the Sun and the second by the Moon, 
while in the even signs the first is owned by the Moon and the 
next by the Sun. The lords of the three dccanates i.c. 10 
degree portions, in each Ra$i arc those of the same Sign, the 
fifth one from the first and the ninth from the first respectively. ^ 

4. In the odd Signs the lords of TrirhSdrhias (degree 
portions) are Mars who owns the first 5 degrees, Saturn who 
owns the next 5 degrees, Jupiter who owns the next 8 degrees, 
Mercury who owns the next 7 degrees, and Venus who owns the 
last 5 degrees. This order of ownership is reversed in the 
case of even Signs.^ 

5. The Navamsas (1/9 of a Sign or 3 degrees and 20 
minutes) of Me^a, Sithka and DIumus begin with Mefa itself; 
those of Vrsabka, Kanyd and Makara, with Makara; those of 
Mithuna, Tuld and Kumbha, with Tuld; and lastly those of 
Karkataka, VrJcika and Mina, with Karkafaka. The lords of the 
Dvddaidrhias (1/12 portions of a Rasi or 2^ degree portions) 
arc those of the 12 Signs beginning with the same Rasi. Thus 



724 


NUrada PuT&t},a 


the six sub-divisions of a Sign are based upon the Signs of the 
zodiac.^ 

6. Mt$a^ Vffabhat Mithuna, Karkafaka, Dkanus etnd Makara 
are termed Nocturnal Signs, and these Signs rise with their hind 
parts first. The remaining Signs arc called Diurnal^ while 
Pisces rises both ways. The Signs arc called Cruel and Gentle 
in order. They arc also named Male and Female respectively.® 

7. The three Signs beginning with Mesa, taken at a 
time, represent in order Male^ Female and Eunuch as well as 
Movable^ Fixed and Dual Rafis. The four Signs, Aries, Taurus, 
Gemini and Cancer, represent the four quarters, east, south, 
west and north respectively. The 12 Signs have their respect¬ 
ive haunts or abode.® 

8. The Exaltation Signs of the Seven planets headed by 
the Sun arc in order Me$a^ Vr^abhay Makaray Kanydy Karkafakay 
Mina and Tuld, Their highest exaltation points are in order 
the 2nd (?}, 3rd, 28th, 15th, 5th, 27th and 20th degrees in ihcir 
respective exaltation Signs.’ 

9. The Debilitation Rasts of the seven planets beginning 
with the Sun are the 7th ones from their resj)ectivc Exaltation 
Signs. The Vargottama Navdrhfas of the three Signs AlovabUy 
Fixed and Dualy repealed four times, arc in order tlic first, middle 
i.c. 3th, and the last one. The 12 Bhavas or houses beginning 
with the I^gna or Body constitute the whole personality of an 
individual.® 

10. The Mulatrikona Signs of the seven planets begin¬ 
ning with the Sun are in order Leo, Taurus, Aries, Virgo, 
Sagittarius, Libra and Aquarius. Caiurasra or Square houses 
are the 4th and 8th ones from a particular Sign, house (Bhava) 
or a planet. The Trikona or Triangular houses are the 5th and 
9th from the house of reference or the Lagna.® 

11. The triad of houses (that are termed inauspicious) 
consists of the 6th, 8tli and 12th from the Lagna. The Kendras 
of Angular houses arc the ascendant (1st), 4th, 7th and 10th. 
The Signs named Humany Watery (or Aquatic), Reptile and 
Quadruped arc strong in the above four Kendras respectively.'® 

12-13. The houses immediately following the Kendras 
are termed Panaphara; and those following the latter, Apoklima. 
The colours of the 12 Rasis beginning with Aries are in order 



11.55.14-22 


725 


(I) Red, (2) White, (3) Green, (4) Pink, (5) Brown, (6) 
Grey, (7) Variegated, (8) Black, (9) Yellow, (10) Saffron, 

(II) Deep Brown, and (12) Bright. 

14. The seven planets beginning with the Sun represent 

(1) the Soul of Kalapuru^ or Time, (2) His Mind^ (3) His 
Prowessi (4) His Speech, (5) His Wisdom and ffappirussy (6) 
His Sexual Passion, and (7) His Sorrow, in order. 

15. The Sun and the Moon are the Royal planets (King 
and queen]; Man, the commander of the army; Mercury, 
the royal prince; Jupiter and Venus, the ministers; and Saturn, 
the messenger. This is the opinion of the leading luminaries 
of astrology. 

16. The colours of the seven planets are in order (1) 
copper colour, (2) while, (3) deep red, (4) green, (5) yellow, 

(6) variegated, and (7) jet black. Their presiding Deities 
are in order (1) Rudra, (2) Goddess Durga, (3) Sesa, (4) 
Vi?9u, (5) Indra, (6) Indra’s consort Saci, and (7) Yama.^^ 

17. The lords of the 8 quarters arc in order (I) the Sun, 

(2) Venus, (3) Mars, (4) Rahu, (5) Saturn, (6) The Moon, 

(7) Mercury and (8) Jupiter. The following are termed 
Malefic planets : The weak Moon, the Sun, Saturn, and 
Mercury in association with a malehc planet. 

18. Mercury and Saturn are termed Eunuchs; the Moon 
and Venus, FmaU\ and the rest, Male. The abodes of Mars, 
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn arc in order Fire, Earth, 
Ether, Water and 

19. Venus, Jupiter, Mars and the Sun arc the rulers of 
the figoeda, Tajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvavedc respectively. 
They also preside over the four classes viz. Brahmanas, 
Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras in order. Saturn is said to be 
the leader of outcasts, and R^u, the lord of Mlecchas (bar¬ 
barians).^ 

20. The Sun, Moon and Jupiter are Sdtivika (pure) 
in nature; Mercury and Venus, Rdjasa (active or passionate); 
and Mars and Saturn, T&masa (daric, inert or ignorant). 

21-22. Their cbthes arc in order (1) thick, (2) new, 

(3) singed by fire, (4) soft, (5) fine (strong?) (6) silken and 
(7) rags. Their metab arc (1) copper, (2) silver, (3) copper, 

(4) lead, (5).gold, (6) bcU-melal, and (7) iron. These metals 



726 


J/dradc PuTd 


are to be deduced from the rulers of the decanates rising at the 
time. The six seasons viz. winter^ spring, sunimer, monsoon, 
autumn and dewy season are ruled over by Saturn, Venus, 
Mars, Moon, Mercury, and Jupiter respectively,** 

23. O Narada, Saturn aspects fully the 3rd and 10th 
houses, Jupiter the 5th and 9th, Mars the 4th and 8th houses 
counted from the one occupied hy them and all the planets 
cast their full aspect on the 7th house. 

24. The periods allotted to the seven planets from the 
Sun onwards are in order, a solstice (six months), —a Muhurta 
or moment, a day, two months, a month, a fortnight, and a 
year. Their tastes are in order pungent, bitter, salt, mixed, 
sweet, sour and astringent.^* 

25-26. The friends of a planet are the lords of the 2nd, 
4th, 5th, 8th, 9th and 12th Kiiis counted from the Mdlairi" 
kotia Riji of the planet concerned. Friends of the seven planets 
beginning with the Sun are : (1) Jupiter, (2) Jupiter and 
Mercury, (3) Venus and Mercury, (4) all planets except the 
Sun, (5) all except Man, (6) all except the Sun and the Moon, 
and (7) all except the Sun, Moon, and Mars. Planets that 
are posited in the 2nd, I2th, 11th, 3rd, 4th and 10th from one 
are his (temporary) friends.** 

27. O Sage (Narada), after ascertaining the natural 
friends, enemies and neutrals, the temporary friends also should 
be determined. A natural friend who happens to be a tempor¬ 
ary friend also, becomes an AdAimitra (an Intimate friend). 
Similarly, a natural friend would become a ntutral, if he has no 
temporary friendship. A natural enemy, who is a temporary 
friend, would become neutral. By the same argument a natural 
enemy would become a bitter enemy too.^^ 

28. A planet attains positional strength {Sthdna-bala) by 
its occupation of its exaltation house, Mulatrikona, own house 
and Navarhsa owned by itself. Murcury and Jupiter get 
directional strength (Digbala) when they are posited in the East; 
the Sun and Mars, in the South; Saturn, in the West; and the 
Moon and Venus, in the North.** 

29. Planets are said to be strong in their respective 
seasons, and in the uttardyatfa or Winter Solstice; while others 
get strength by retrograde motion. Planets in conjunction being 



IL55.30-36 


727 


to the north of others and possessed of brilliant rays are consU 
dered to be possessed of Cesfdbaia or Motional strength.^* 

30. The Tenoral strength {Kdlahala) of planets is 
explained by scholars thus : The Moon, Mars and Saturn are 
strong at night; Mercury is strong always; while the rest are 
strong by day. Malefics arc strong in the dark fortnight, while 
benches in the bright one.^ 

3U32. Among the planets, Saturn, Mars, Mercury, 
Jupiter, Venus, the Moon and the Sun, each succcedii^ planet 
is stronger than its predecessor. When malehcs are powerful 
and beneflcs devoid of strength; when there a eunuch planet 
occupies or aspects a Kendra, the birth of a sub-human being 
(say, animal or bird) takes place. The birth will correspond 
to the nature of the Aih^ of the Sun or the Moon (whichever 
is stronger). When malefics are in their own Arhias, and bene- 
Hes in those of malefics, the birth of sub-human beings is to be 
predicted.** 

33-34. Where the Lagna is weak, in addition, scholars 
should predict the birth of an animal. In the case of quadru¬ 
peds the 12 Rajis beginning with Me?a lepresent their (1) 
Head, (2) Face and Neck, (3) Fore-Legs and Shoulders, (4) 
Back, (5) Chest, (6) Sides, (7) Stomach, (8) Anus and 
Hind legs, (9) Genital Organ, (10) Testicles, (II) Haunches, 
and (12) Tail. 

35. The colour of the animal will have to be predicted 
from the strongest of the Rails represented by the Navariisa 
of the ascendant and those that arc occupied by planets. The 
lines on the back of the animal will correspond to the number 
of planets in the 7th house, or the number of planets aspecting 
that hoiise.** 

36. Birds are bom when the lord of the ascendant is 
posited in a Bird DteanaU^ and in the last Navirhia of a Riii, 
in conjunction with another plaint. Similar is the result when 
the ascendant is aspected by or is conjoined with Saturn or 
the Moon. The nature of bird, whether belonging to water 
or land, is to be deduced from that of the Naviihia of the 
ascendant. [Or it may be thus :—If the decanate of the as¬ 
cendant is connected with the Moon (by aspect or conjunction), 



728 


Ndrada Put&m 


the bird must be an aquatic one, while with Saturn, it is a 
land bird.]" 

37. When the Lagna, the Moon, Sun and Jupiter arc 
devoid of strength, the birth of trees should be predicted. The 
distinction between water and land trees is to be made on the 
basis of the Navazhia of the ascendant, as given previously. 

38. The number of trees that arc born on land or water 
corresponds to the one denoted by the number of Raib by 
which the lord of the Lagna is separated from the Lagna. 

39. When the lord of Che ascendant happens to be the 
Sun, the trees born are those that are strong internally (i.e. 
whose pith is strong); if it is Saturn, they would be worthless 
trees; if it is the Moon, they would be milky trees; if Man, 
thorny ones; if Jupiter, fruit^bearing ones; and if Mercury, 
fruitless ones. 

40. If the lord of the Lagna is Venus, the trees will be 
flower-bearing trees; if it is the Moon, glossy or juicy ones; if 
Mars, pungent ones. If the concerned planet be benefic 
posited in the Rail owned by a maleflc, the result would be a 
good tree growing on a bad soil. 

41. A retrograde planet will yield results similar to those 
of one posited in another’s (i.e. enemy’s) Aih^a.' In this 
world the menstrual flow of women takes place every month 
owing to the inter-action of the Moon and Man." 

42. When the Moon in her transit comes to an Upacaya 
house (3, 6, 10 or 11 from the Lagna) in the woman’s birth 
chart and is aspected by Jupiter, man unites with woman for 
impregnation. If the 7th house from the ascendant at the 
time of sexual union is occupied or aspected by malefics, the 
union takes place in a huff; if by benefics, with pleasure." 

43. O Foremost of Brahmins, men possessed of strong 
vitality (virility) would be able to beget issue, if, at the time of 
coitus, Venus, the Sun and Mercury be posited in their own 
Ra^is or Aihsas and Jupiter in a Triko^a house from the Lagna." 

44. If Mars and Saturn be posited in the 7th house 
from the Sun and Moon at the time of sexual union, the man 
and woman would fall ill. The couple would meet with their 
end, if the luminaries (the Sun in the ca s e of the man, and 
the Moon in that of the woman) should have Man and Saturn 



11.55 .45-52 


729 


in the 12th and 2nd places from them, or be aspected by one 
of these maleiics, or conjoined with them.*^ 

45. For day-births Venus and the Sun arc considered 
as mother and father respectively; and for night-births they are 
the Moon and Saturn respectively. When one pair acts as 
the parents, the other docs as maternal aunt and paternal 
uncle respectively. If these planets occupy even and odd 
houses respectively, they confer auspiciou*; results on the 
parents or aunt and uncle^ as the case may be.** 

46. If a weak benefic is posited in the Lagna and aspect¬ 
ed by a malefic, or if Saturn in exaltation is posited in the 
Lagna, being aspected by the weak Moon, and Mars, the wotnan 
will certainly meet with death ere long.** 

47. If the Lagna and the Moon, cither together or 
separately, are surrounded by malefics, then the pregnant 
woman will die. 

48. The same result will follow, if there are malefics in 
the 4th house counted from the Lagna and the Moon and Mars 
in the 8th house; or if the New Moon, and Mars and the Sun 
arc in the 4th and 12th houses respectively. 

49. If Mars and the Sun occupy the Lagna and the 7tli 
house respectively, the woman’s death takes place as a result 
of a surgical operation, or a weapon. Abortion is likely to take 
place in the particular month of pregnancy whose lord is 
eclipsed.*® 

50. If the Lagna at Adhdna (impregnation) or the Moon 
are conjoined with bcncfics, or if the bcnefics arc posited in 
the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th and 10th houses counted from either, 
and if the malefics be in the 3rd, 6th and 11th houses, without 
aspecting the Lagna or the Moon, as the case may be, the foetus 
will grow happily.*^ 

51. It should be predicted that a boy will be born, if 
the Sun, Moon, Jupiter and the Lagna, being possessed of 
strength, occupy odd Rasis and masculine Aih^s (odd ones); 
or if Jupiter and the Sun at least arc in odd places.** 

52. The wise should declare the birth of a female, when 
'the above (the Sun, Moon, Jupiter and the Lagna,) or Mars, 

the Moon and Venus, are posited in even Signs and even 
Navamias. 



Ndrada Purdrui 

53. If the planets (viz. Mars, Venus and the Moon) 
are posited in dual signs and Aihias, and are aspected by 
Mercury, twins will be born. Similarly, Saturn occupying 
an odd house other than the Lagna makes for a male birth.®* 

54-56. The pregnant woman gives birth to a eunuch 
under the following yogas (1) The Sun and Moon should 
aspect each other; (2) Mercury and Saturn should aspect 
each other; (3) Mars should aspect the Sun in an even Rasi; 
(4) Mars aspects the Lagna and the Moon that arc in odd 
Signs; (5) Mars aspects the Moon in an even Sign and 
Mercury in an odd sign; (6) Mars should aspect the odd 
Aihsa (of the Lagna?). If the Moon and Venus occupying 
even Rasis arc aspected by a male planet, and if the Lagna, 
Mercury, Mars and Jupiter occupy odd Ra^is, the result is the 
birth of twins. The same result will follow, if both the Lagna 
and Moon occupy cither even Signs or dual ones. So too when 
Mercury situated in his own Amia (or Rasi) aspects the dual 
Aihsas occupied by planets and the ascendant.** 

57-58. Triplets will have to be predicted on the basis of 
Mercury’s occupation of even and dual Vargas (Rasi and 
Arhsa). When the Lagna is the last Ariisa of Dhanus, and 
when strong planets occupying the Aih^ of the Lagna are 
aspected by strong Saturn and Mercury, there would be many 
children in the foetus. The lords of the 10 months of preg¬ 
nancy are Venus, Mars, Jupiter, the Sun, the Moon, Saturn, 
Mercury, lord of Lagna, the Sun and Moon respectively.*® 

59. The welfare of (he child in the womb in the different 
months depends on the condition of the lords of the respective 
months. If Mercury is posited in the 5th or 9th house, and 
the othen weak, the child will have two faces (i.e. heads)and 
(four) hands and feet.** 

60. When the malefics, the Sun, Mars and Saturn, are 
posited in the junctions of Rasis viz. the last parts of Karkata, 
Vr^eika and Mina, the child will be dumb and without feet.*^ 

61. Should Man and Saturn occupy a Sign or Arhsa 
owned by Jupiter, the child would have teeth at birth. Should 
the Moon occupying her own house (Karkauka) which is the 
Lagna at birth, be* aspected by Mars and Saturn, it would be 



11.55.62-70 


731 


hunch-backed. If the La^a be the last portion of Mina and 
aspected by the Moon, Mars and Saturn, it would be lame. 

62. If the Moon, conjoined with malehcs, be posited in 
a Raii-Sandhi (i.e. the last part of Karka, Vf^eika or Mina) 
without any bene6c aspect, the child would be a dullard or 
imbecile. When the Lagna is the last part of Makara, aspect¬ 
ed by Saturn, the Sun and Moon, the child would become a 
dwarf. If malefics occupy the second and third decanates, 
it will be bom without head and feet respectively.*® 

63. When the Lagna, which is Sirnha, is occupied hy 
the two luminaries and aspected by Mars and Saturn, the child 
will be blind. On the other hand, if the aspccting planets 
are both bencfic and malehc, the child will be blear-eyed, 

If under the above conditions the Sun and the Moon be in the 
12th house, its right and left eye respectively will be destroyed. 

64. Inauspicious planetary-combinations, though aspect¬ 
ed by bencfics, do not at all give up their maleficence. If 
at Niseka (impregnation) Saturn occupies the 7th house, and 
the ascending Navamsa belongs to Saturn, child-birth will 
take place after three years.*® 

65. It will be after 12 years, if the planet concerned is 
the Moon. In this manner the time of delivery should be 
considered.®® 

66-67. Note the Dvadasaihsa Rasi of the Moon at 
Adhana (impregnation). The delivery will take place when 
the Moon in transit passes though the Kiii that is removed by 
the number of Dvada^thsas fit>m the Dvadaiaihia Rasi. The 
distance in degrees travelled by the Moon in the particular 
Rail at birth, being doubled, would give the time of birth in 
Ghafls from Sun-rise.®®« 

68. The childs’ father will be away from home, if the 
Moon at birth does not aspect the rising Sign (Lagna) and if 
the Sun has fallen from the Zenith (i.e, 10th house). The 
father must be in a Ibreign country at the time, if the Sun is 
also in a movable Sign.®^ 

69-70. The same result should be declared by expert 
astrologers, if Saturn be in the Lagna, and Man in the 7th; 
or if the Moon be between Mercury and Venus; or if the Moon 
be posited in the Lagna owned by a malefic and in the decanate 



732 


Ni^rada Pur 


owned by Vricika, and if benefics be in the 2nd and 11th 
houses or if the Sun be aspected by the benefics. 

71. O Great Sage, twins will be delivered from the 
foetus, when the Sun is posited in a quadruped Sign, and the- 
other planets are possessed of strength. 

72. If Mars and Saturn occupy Simha*lagna and an 
Aitisa belonging to the Moon or Mercury, the child will have 
a cord around its limb signified by the Nav^sa Rail of tlie 
Lagna. The above tlung will happen if Jupiter does not 
aspect the Lagna, the Moon or the Lagna along with the two 
luminaries.^* 

73«73|. If the Sun or the Moon is conjoined with malehcs 
(in Vfsabha?), the child may be iliegitimate. If Mars and 
Saturn occupying Rasis owned by maleBcs and conjoined with 
malehcs, happen to be in the 5th or 9th from the Sun, the 
child father is imprisoned in hb own country or in a foreign 
land, according as the Rafi occupied by the Sun b fixed or 
movable.^* 

74-75^. When the full Moon occupies her own RaSi; 
Mercury the Lagna, and a beneBc the 4th house, birth takes 
place in a sailing boat. Similar is the result, when the Lagna 
IS a watery Sign and the Moon is posited in the 7th house. 
Undoubtedly, O Narada, birth takes place on water* when the 
fill] Moon occupying Gemini or Virgo, aspects the Lagna, 
or is posited in the Lagna, 2nd or 4th house.^ 

76. Delivery takes place clandestinely, if Saturn occupy¬ 
ing the 12th place from the Lagna or the Moon, is aspected 
by another malefic.** 

77-77|. Birth takes place in a pit or dungeon, if Saturn 
occupies the Lagna identical with Karka (Cancer] or Vricika 
(Scorpio) or aspects the Lagna or the Moon* or b conjoined 
with the Moon or Lagna. If the Lagna of birth b aspected by 
Mercury, the Sun and Moon, the places of delivery would be 
a place of sport, a temple, and a barren spot respectively.** 

77^-79. Birth takes place in a burial ground, if 
Mars should aspect the Lagna; in a rural place, if the Moon 
and Venus; in a sacrificial house, if Jupiter; in a house of 
ornaments and decorations, if the Sun; and in a house of fine 
arts; if Merctiry, in all cases, the aspecting planets being strongs 



II.S5.80-87 


733 


80. If the lord of the Lagna is posited in his own house 
or Amia» which is a fixed Sign, the birth takes place in the 
father’s house; and if it is a movable Sign, in transit (during 
a journey), the nature of the road being dcicrmiued by that 
of the RaSi concerned. The child b abandoned by the mother, 
if the Moon occupies the 7th house which is trine (5thor9lh) 
to Mars and Saturn.^’ 

81. However, if the ascendant b aspected by Jupiter, 
the child will live long and be rescued by somebody. On the 
other hand, if the ascendant occupied by the Moon b aspected 
by malehcs and if Mars occupies the 7th house, the abandoned 
child will die. 

82. If the trine (5th) from Mars and Saturn are aspec¬ 
ted (by a bcncfic), the child lives happily in the protection of 
a stranger. If the above house be occupied by a malefic, the 
child will die in a month and a half, even though rescued by 
others.^® 

83- 83J. O Sage, the birth takes place in the house of 
the father or mother, according as the planet owning the house 
is strong. If the ascendant is occupied by a debilitated 
benefic and the Moon and the Lagna arc neither together (i.e, 
the Moon docs not tenant the ascendant), nor aspected (by 
any planet), the birth takes place in a lonely place. 

84- 85. When the Moon is posited in the 4th house owned 
by Saturn or in an Aihfa of Saturn, or aspected by Saturn, the 
birth takes place in darkness or in dim light and the woman 
lies down on the floor. Similarly, the direction of the liousc 
or the lying-in-chamber should be guessed from the nature of 
the Ra^i, whether it is Sirfodaya (rising with its head) or Prftho* 
daya (rising with its hind part first). 

86-87. Trouble will have to be predicted for the mother, 
if there arc malefics in the 4th and 7th houses from the Moon. 
When the strongest (or aspecting) planet in the chart happens 
to be Saturn, Mars, the Moon, the Sun, Mercury, Venus or 
Jupiter, the house in which the child is bom should be an old 
house that has been renovated, a burnt one, a newly built one, 
a wooden house that is not very strong, one with many arclu* 
tectural embellishments, a new house adorned with paintings, 
or a strong and attractive one, as the case may be.®* 


734 


^drada Pur^t^ 


88. The house of birth or lying-in chamber is in the 
£ast, if the ascendant is TtUd, Mesa, Karka, Vrieika or Kumbha ; 
it is in the Air/A, if the Lagna is owned by Mercury or Jupiter j 
in Wistf if it is Vrsabha; and in the South, if it is Sirhha or 
Makara. 

89. The directions of the house are represented by two 
houses beginning with Mesa for each cardinal point and a dual 
house for an intermediate quarter. The legs of the cot are 
represented by the 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th houses respectively, 
as in the case of a house. 

90. The number of women in attendance in the lying-in 
chamber corresponds to that of the planets that arc situated 
between the Lagna and the Moon. The persons inside and 
outside the room are read from the planets in visible and invisible 
halves of the Zodiac.*® 

91. The child ^s body will correspond to the character¬ 
istics of the planet that occupies the Lagna, or of the one that is 
strongest in the chart. Its complexion will be like that of the 
Moon's ^avdrft^a. The delineation of the native's limbs from 
head to foot, should be done on the basis of the 12 Rasis commenc¬ 
ing from the ascendant (as explained below).*^ 

92-93. When any of the three decanates of a Kkii rises, 
the native's limbs are allotted to the different houses in the 
following manner :—(1) When the first decanate rues, those 
of the 12 houses counted from the Lagna onwards represent the 
head, eye, car, nostril, cheek, jaw and mouth on the right and 
left sides. Similarly, the second decanates of the houses repre¬ 
sent in order the neck, shoulder, side, heart, arm, chest and 
navel on the two sides. The last ones likewise represent the 
pelvis, the genital organ, anus, thighs, knees, shanks, and feet.** 

94-93. Whichever decanate Raji is occupied by male- 
fics, will have a wound or ulcer in the corresponding limb of 
the native; if the planet is bcnefic, the particular limb will 
have a mole or mark. The mark will be natural or inborn, 
when the conjoining planet is posited in its own Sign or Arhsa 
that is a fixed Riii; otherwise it will be an accidental one. 
If the planet concerned be Saturn, the wound would be one 
caused by wind or stone; if Mars, by poison, weapon or fire; 



11.55.96-105 


735 


if Mercury, by earth (i.c. mud); and if the Sun, by wood, 
animals or homed animals of the class of goats. ^ 

96- 96J. There will undoubtedly be a wound, caused 
by malefics, in the limb signified by the dccanate which is 
occupied by three planets. A dccanate that is aspected (by 
malefics) will cause a mole in the corresponding limb, while 
one occupied by benefics, a good mark.^ 

97- 100. The Sun has a square body, pink eyes, bilious 
constitution and sparse hair; the Moon has a round body, 
wind and phlegm in constitution, intelligence, measured (or 
slow) speech and attractive eyes; Mars is youthful, possessed 
of fierce eyes, fickle and bilious in constitution; Mercury has all 
the three humours in his constitution, practises jokes, appre¬ 
ciates tastes and speaks cogently (or with pun); Jupiter has 
pink hairs and eyes, a tall body, phlegmatic nature and great 
erudition and Wisdom; Venus has a charming body, attractive 
eyes, black and curly hair and enjoys Itappiness; and Saturn 
has tawny eyes, a bluish or black complexion, coarse hair 
and indolent nature.*^ 

101. Muscles, bone, blood, skin, semen, marrow and 
fat are ruled in order by Saturn, the Sun, Moon, Mercury, 
Venus, Jupiter and Mars. 

102. When the ascendant, the Moon and malefics arc 
all posited in the last portion of Rails, *when malifics occupy the 
Kendras from the Moon, when malefics and benefics occupy 
the first and second half respectively and when Scorpio is the 
rbing Sign, the child will die soon. 

103. If there be malefics both in the ascendant and in 
the 7th house and if the Moon, conjoined with malefics, be 
not aspected by benefics, the child would certainly meet with 
Us end.®* 

104-104^. When the weak Moon occupies the 12th house, 
malefics the ascendant and the 8th house, and benefics are 
not in Kendras; or when the Moon, not conjoined with benefics, 
occupies the Lagna, the 7th, 8th or 12th house, unaspected by 
benefics posited in Kendra etc., the child perishes.” 

lOfi-IOSJ. If the Moon be posited in the 6th or8th house 
and be aspected by malefics, the child will die soon after birth. 
On the other hand, if the Moon in the above yoga is aspected 



736 


Ndroda Purd^ 


by bcne6cs also, it will die in 8 years. The same result i.c. 
death in the 8th year, will follow, If the Moon is aspected both 
by maleiics and benches.^ 

106*106^. When the weak Moon is in the Lagna, or is 
hemmed in between malefics, or when malchcs occupy the 8th 
house or Kendras; or when the Moon is posited In the 4th, 
7th or 8th house, or when the Lagnn w surrounded by malchcs, 
the child will die likewise. 

107-108. The child will die along with its mother, if 
malefics occupy the 7th house from the Moon, provided there 
is no bcneiic aspect. The same prediction will have to be 
made, when the Moon occupies the end of a Rasi without any 
benehc aspect, and matefics, the 5th and 9th houses; or when 
the Moon occupies the Lagna and malehcs the 7th house. 

109. If the Moon is eclipsed at the time and maleiics 
occupy the 8th house, both the mother and child will die 
soon. The death will be due to a surgical operation, if the 
Sun be in the Lagna and strong malehcs in the 8th house.^ 

110. When Sign Cancer (Karka) rises along with the 
Moon and Jupiter in it, Mercury and Venus occupy Kendras, 
and the rest the 3rd, 6ih and 11th house, the child will indeed 
be blessed with an unlimited span of life. 

111. The maximum span of life is enjoyed by one, in 
whose birth Sign Pisces rises with its own Navariila, the Moon 
occupies Taurus (Vr^) and the 25th degree, and all the planets 
their exaltations.*®* 

112-114. A strong planet posited in the ascendant or 
a Kendra, aspected by benefics confers on the native both 
long life and wealth. One lives for 60 years, if the Moon is in 
her own or exaltation house, benefics in their own houses, and 
the lord of the Lagna, possessed of strength, in the Lagna itself. 
The longevity is of 70 years, when benefics are in the Kendras 
and the 8th house devoid of planets, and when Jupiter is strong 
(?). The native lives for 80 years, if benefics occupy their 
MUlatrikona houses, Jupiter his exaltation, and the lord of the 
ascendant is strong. One lives for 30 years only, when strong 
malefics occupy Kendras and the 8th house b free from planets.*^ 

115. When the lord'of the 8th occupies the 9th, and 
Jupiter occupying the 8th b aspected by malefics, the native 



II.55.I16-124 


737 


lives for 24 years. The longevity is of 27 years (or 12 years ?) 
if the lords of both the Lagna and the 8lh house occupy the 8th.^^ 

116. When the Lagna is occupied by a malefic and 
Jupiter, aspected by the Moon, and the 8th house is tenanted 
by some planet, the child will live for 20 years. The same age 
is to be predicted, when Saturn is in the Lagna or 9th house, 
Venus in a Kendra and the Moon in the 9th or 12th. 

117. The span of life is 100 years, when Jupiter occu¬ 
pies Cancer (Karka) or when Venm and Jupiter are in 
Kendras. It ts 40 years, when the lord of the 12th house occu¬ 
pies the Lagna, and the 8th house is devoid of benefics. 

118. If the lords of the Lagna and the 8th house exchange 
their positions, the child will live for five years only. When 
Jupiter and Venus arc combined in the Lagna, and Mercury 
and the Moon in the 8th house, it is 50 years. 

119- 119^. The above-mentioned spans of life are called 
those caused by Yoga or planetary dispositions. Now I shall 
explain the one-called Spmfa or one based on planetary strength 
or longitudes. When the Sun b most powerful in the chart, 
the Span b called Piniaja^ whereas when the Moon is very strong, 
it is called J/tsargaja; and when the ascendant is very strong, 
it is Ar^sdyuh, Now listen to their delineation. 

120- 122. The years contributed by the seven planets 
headed by the Sun, when they are in their highest exaltation, 
arc in order 19, 25, 15, 12, 15, 21 and 20, in the Pindayurdaya 
system, while in the Nbargaja one they are 20, I, 2, 9, 18, 20 
and 50 years respectively. Subtract a planet’s longitude 
from its highest exaltation figures. If the result is less than six 
Signs (Rasis), ic should be subtracted from 12 Rasis and its 
Arh^as be taken towards its contribution.^ 

123. A planet posited in an inimical house loses a part 
(i.e. 1/3) of its contribution except when it is retrograde. Simi¬ 
larly, one that is combust will lose half of its contribution. How¬ 
ever Venus and Saturn* do not lose anything on ihc score of 
eclipse. 

124-124^. When there b a possibility of reduction on 
two counts for a planet’s contribution, only the bigger one 
should be resorted to. When there is a malefic in the Lagna, 
the contribution of the Lagna should be reduced thus : Leave 



738 


Ndrada Purim 


off the number representing the Signs in the longitude of the 
ascendant and reduce the degrees etc. to minutes and multiply 
the result by the rectified contribution of that planet. Divide 
the product by the number of minutes in Bhaga^a (360^» 
which is 21,600). Now subtract the quotient from the recti* 
fied Ayus of that planet. The result will give the final rectified 
contribution of that malefic. 

123-127. *lhe contribution of a malefic (aspected by a 
benefic?) is completely left out, while that of the benefic is 
halved. These contributions of the several planets (and the 
Lagna) thus rectified should be multiplied by their respective 
multipliers (Gunakas) and divided by 360. The quotient will 
give the Ayus in years and the remainder being multiplied by 
12 and divided by the above divisor will give the months. I'he 
remainder should be multiplied by 30 and divided as before by 
360. The result will be days, and the remainder being multi¬ 
plied by 60 and divided as before will yield Gha{ls etc. • 

127^-]28|. The rectified contribution of the Lagna is 
got by leaving off the Rasis in its figures and converting the 
degrees etc. into minutes and dividing the result by 200. The 
quotient gives years, and the remainder being multiplied by 
12 and divided by 200, gives months etc. 

129- 129|. In the Amsayurdaya system the longitudes 
of the planets and the ascendant should be converted into 
minutes and divided by 40. The result will give the years 
etc. contributed by the planets etc. I shall now explain the 
rectification of the contributions. 

130- 131. Subtract the longitude of a planet from the 
figures for the ascendant. If the result is less than six Signs, 
there should be rectification, and not otherwise. Convert the 
balance thus got into degrees and divide it by 30. Then reduce 
the quotient by 1. The result in degrees is to be divided by 30. 
This result again reduced by one will be the multiplier. 

132. The contribution of a benefic should be leduccd 
to a half and that of a malefic to nil, without doubt. The contri¬ 
butions of planets when multiplied by the Gunaka give their 
nett Ayus. This is what is meant by rectification. 

133. The degrees etc. in the Ayus of a planet should 
be divided by 200. The quotient will give years, and the 



11.55.134-141 


739 


remainder multiplied by 12 andj divided by 200 will yield 
months, days etc. 

134. The contribution of the Lagna multiplied by 3 and 
divided by 10 gives its Ayus in years. The remainder should be 
multiplied by 12 and divided by 10. The result will give months 
and days. 

135- 135}. When the Lagna is very strong, its nett con¬ 
tribution would be the above result increased by so many years 
as there arc Rails in the Lagna. The degrees etc. multiplied 
by two and divided by 12 would give months, and the remainder 
being multiplied by 30 and divided as before, days etc. This 
is not done in the case of Fin4a and Nisorga systems. 

136- 137. The Daia (major period) of that planet which 
is the strongest among the three viz. Ascendant, the Sun and 
Moon, will operate in the beginning. Then will come the 
Dz,iks of those that are in Kendras. In case there are many 
planets posited in Kendras (quadrants), then the strongest 
of them will have precedence over others. If two planets are 
equal In strong, then that which contributes a greater number 
of years of Ayus, will operate lint. In the case of planets that 
are associated with the Sun. the faster-moving one will come 
first (i.c. the one which becomes visible first), 

138-140. The order of the Daias is the following : A 
planet whose $advargabala is a half (of its maximum), one 
whose Bala is 1/3, a planet which is situated in a trine, one in 
the 7th (therefrom), one in the 7th itself, one in the 4th house 
and one in the 4th or 8th from the previous (This translation 
is tentative). As in the previous Ayurdaya, here too the rules 
regarding the precedence of Da^ with regard to the planets 
posited in quadrants, their order in case of a tic, arc the same as 
noted already. The Gunakas (multipliers) for the various 
types of planets arc the following: for the Dasanatha (i.c. the planet 
whose Dasa comes first) it is 84 (or does it mean 4or 8accord¬ 
ing to his strength ?); for one in conjunction with another it is 
4; for one posited in a line, it is 28; for one posited in the 7th 
house, it is 12; and for one in the 4th or 8th house, it is 21. 

141. O Narada, the Dasa period being multiplied by 
these Gunakas and divided by the Guijaikya (the combined 
Gu^ta or product of the Gunakas) yields the nett result in years. 



740 


}f&Tada Purdna 


When the remainder is mulUpiied by 12 and divided by the 
above divisor, months etc. arc got. 

142. The sub*-divisions or minor periods of a Dasa arc 
VidaSas and UpadaJdj. When the lord of the sub-period happens 
to be an Adhimitra (fast friend) or is ])osiied in the former’s 
house, exaltation or in the Lagna, tlxe period should be increased 
in order by I, 4, 1 or 7 years(?). 

143. A bciichc occupying a house increases its prospeciR, 
provided he is aspected by another occupying a contributory 
house. On the oihci* hand, if he is posited in any other house, 
he Will destroy it, 

144. Wlialever substances are allotted to a planet, all 
that should be mentioned as occurring in the Da» of that planet 
by its occupation, aspect and conjunction, to the person concern¬ 
ed in his pioibsdon, life etc. 

145-146. If the lord of the sub-period—Vidasa or Upa- 
daii—Is nspected by an inimical planet, he will cause only dis¬ 
asters. On the other hand, one who is aspected by a benelic, 
or a friend and is posited in bcncfic or friendly Vargas, and is 
strong at the time (of the sub-period) is declared to be a des¬ 
troyer of all troubles. This applies also to one whose A?ta¬ 
ka varga results arc excellenl. 

147-148. A planet tlxat is posited in its exaltation house 
identical with an auspicious house counted from the Lagna, 
Moon or Sun, will yield the best results, wJiile one posited in 
its own house, Mulatrikorin or friendly bouse, moderately good 
effects. Tlie effect of one that is posited in an untoward house, 
will be undesirable. Tlxe effect, good or bad, will be inlense 
or othervs’ise, according as the planet is strong or otherwise. 

149. In a movable Lagna the effects of the three deca- 
nates, first, second and third, are good, middling and bad 
respectively; in a fixed one, they arc in order bad, good and 
middling; and in a dual one, middlii^, bad and good. 

150. The Lagna being aspected or joined by its own lord, 
Mercury or Jupiter confers excellent results on the native, while 
being hemmed in between malefics or being aspected or joined 
by malefics, it leads to his ruination. 

151-152. In the Sun’s A^^kavarga chart he produces 
beneficent influences on hoxxses, 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11, 



11.55.153-162 


741 


couated from his own position ^ he is good in these houses count¬ 
ed from the positions of Mars and Saturn also; he is good in 6, 
7, and 12 from Venus; he is good in 5, 6, 9 and 11 places from 
Jupiter; good in 3, 6, 10 and 11 from the Moon; he is good in 

3, 5, 6, 9, lOj 11 and 12 places counted from Mercury; and 
lastly in 3, 4, 6, 10, II and 12 places from the Ascendant. 

153-154. Tlic Moon is beneficial in places 1, 3, 6, 7, 10 
and 11 from himself; in 3, 6, 7, 8,10and 11 places from the Sun; 
in places 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10 and 11 from Mars; in 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 
10 and 11 places from Mercury; in 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 10 and 11 places 
from Jupiter; in 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10 and 11 places from Venus; in 
3) 5, 6 and 11 places from Saturn; and in 3, 6, 10 and 11 places 
from the ascendant. 

155-156. Mars is good in 3, 5, 6, 10 and 11 places from 
the Sun; in 3, 6, and II places from the Moon; in 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 
10 and 11 places from himself; in 3, 5, 6 and 11 places from 
Mercury; in 6, 10, 11 and 12 places from Jupiter; in 6, 8, 11 
and 12 places from Venus; in 1,4, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 places from 
Saturn; lastly in 1, 3, 6, 10 and 11 places from the Lagna. 

137-158. Mercury is beneficial in 1,3, 5, 6, 9, 10, I) and 
12 places from himself; in 5, 6, 9, N and 12 places from the Sun; 
in 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 11 places from the Moon; in 1,2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 

10 and 11 places from Mars and Saturn; in 6, 8, 11 and 12 places 
from Jupiter; in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9 and II places from Venus; 
and in 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 11 places from the Lagna. 

159-160. Jupiter is beneficial in I, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10and 

11 places from the Sun; in 2, 3, 7, 9 and 11 places from the 

Moon; in 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 10 and 11 places from Mars; in 1,2, 4, 5, 
6, 9, 10 and 11 places from Mercury; in 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10 and 
11 places from himself; in 3, 5, 6, and 12 places from Saturn; 
in 2, 5, 6, 9, 10 and 11 places from Venus; and finally in 1, 2, 

4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10 and 11 places from the Lagna. 

161-162. Venus is beneficial in 8, 11 and 12 places from 
the Sun; in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11 and 12 places from the Moon; 
in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9 and 11 places from the Lagna; in 1, 2, 3, 4, 

5, 8, 9, 10 and 11 places from himself; in 3, 5, 6, 9, 11 and 12 

places from Mars; in 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10 and 11 places from Saturn; 
in 3, 5, 6, 9 and 11 places from Mercury; and in 5, 8,9, 10 and 
11 places from Jupiter. 



742 


Ndrada PurA^ 


163-164. Saturn is auspicious in 2> 4, 7, 8» 10 and 11 
places from the Sun; in 3, 6 and 11 places from the Moon; in 
3, 5, 6 and 11 places from himself; in 6, 10» 11 and 12 places 
from Mars; in 5, 6, 11 and 12 places from Jupiter; in 6, 8, 9> 
lOf 11 and 12 places from Mercury; in 1» 3, 4, 6, 10 and 11 
places from the Lagna; and in 6, 11 and 12 places from Venus. 

165. In the above beneficial houses (mentioned in the 
A^akavarga charts of the planets) put vertical lines and in 
others mere dots. If these houses that contain benefic lines 
happen to be auspicious, when counted from one's natal sign 
i.e. Raii> and also to be owned by a benefic, friendly planet or 
the planet concerned or to be the planet's exaltation, the result 
must be wholly favourable, and in others it will be unfavourable.*^ 

166. The effects of benefic lines from 1 to 8, contained 
in a Kiiiy are in order (I) hardship, (2) loss of wealth, (3) 
trouble, (4) moderate effects, (5) acquisition of wealth and 
happiness, (6) influx of money, (7) happiness, and (8) accom¬ 
plishment of one's ambitions. 

167. The seven planets beginning with the Sun represent 
seven relations in order ; (1) Father, (2) Motker, (3) Enemy, (4) 
Friend, (5) Brother, (6) Wife, and (7) Servant When the As¬ 
cendant, its lord, the Moon and Sun are well-placed, the native 
will be blessed with wealth, fame and security.*^ 

168-169. When the }{av^itda (of the Lagna or 10th 
house) is owned by the Sun, the subject earns his living by 
(selling) grass, gold, horses, elephant-drivers, etc.,when it is 
owned by the Moon, through agriculture, marine products and 
women; when by Mars, through metals (or ores), weapons 
and adventures; when by Mercury, through poetry, fine arts 
(architecture etc.) and the like; when by Jupiter, through 
Gods (i.e. worshipping Gods), Brahmins and mines; when by 
Venus, through silver, cattle, gems etc.; and when by Saturn, 
through murderous deeds, wearisome tasks and mean activities. 

170. If Saturn, Jupiter and Mars are exalted at a birth 
and when the ascendant is strong, the native will become a 
great monarch. When the Lagna is Vargottama and when ilie 
Moon is aspected by four or more planets, the same effect will 
follow. 



11.55,171-179 


743 


171. When Mars is exalted, the Sun and Moon in 
Dhanus, and Saturn in the Lagna, the native becomes a landlord 
or king. The same effect takes place, when the exalted Sun is 
posited in the Lagna, Jupiter in the 10th house, and the Moon 
and Saturn in the 7th house. 

172. When Saturn or the Moon occupies the Lagna in 
exaltation, the Sun and Mercury the 6th house, Venus and 
Mars in Tula and Mesa respectively; or when Jupiter is in 
Karkafaka Lagna along with the Moon and Mars, one becomes 
a King. 

173. One becomes a King, if at one^s birth the Moon 
occupies Vrsabha-Lagru, and the Sun, Jupiter and Saturn in 
the 4th, 7th, and 10th hottses; or if Saturn occupies Makara- 
Lagna and the Moon and others the 3rd, 6th, 9th (?) and 1 Ith 
(?) houses.•• 

174. When Jupiter and the Moon arc together posited 
in Dhanus, Mars in Makara, and the exalted Sun or Venus in 
the Ascendant; or when the Karka-Iagna b occupied by Jupiter, 
Mesa by the Sun and the 11th house by Mercury, the Moon 
and Venus, the native becomes a King. 

175. When the Lagna happens to be Vr^abha, occupied 

by the Moon, Signs Kumbha and Makara are occupied 

by the Sun, Saturn and Mars respectively, a king is born.*^ 

176. When the Lagna is Mcm occupied by Mars, or 
when it (Lagoa) is Sirhha occupied by Jupiter, the native 
becomes a king. The same effect takes place, when Mars and 
the Sun occupy the 5th house, Jupiter, the Moon and Venus 
the 4th house, and Mercury the Lagna which is identical with 
Kanya. 

177. An illustrious king is ushered into the world, 
when the Lagna happens to be Makara occupied by Saturn, 
the Moon occupies Me^, the Sun Sirhha, and Venus and Jupiter 
Tula and Mithuna respectively.*® 

178. Under the above planetary configurations even an 
ordinary person’s son will become a king. On the other hand, 
O great Sage, under the following yogas only a king’s son can 
hope to be one such. 

179. One becomes a king, if three or more planets 
possessed of strength occupy their exaltation houses or Mula- 



744 


J^drada Purd^a 


trikous. The same event takes place, when the Sun is posited 
in Simha, the Moon in the ascendant identical with Mesa, 
Mars in Makara, Kumbha or Vrieika and Jupiter in Dhanus. 

180*180^. O Sage, when VeniK occupies the 4th house 
identical with his own Ra^i, and the Moon the 9th house, cither 
joined or aspcctcd by benefics, and the rest the 3rd, 1st (6lh?) 
and 11th houses, one becomes a ruler.•• 

18U181 4 . A virtuous king is bom, if Mercury occupies 
the Lagna in strength, a bcneBc (Jupiter) possessed of strength 
an auspicious house (or 9lh ?) and the rest the 9ih, 2nd and the 
Upacaya houses ( 3, 6, 10 and II). 

182-182}. One becomes a king with the Moon, Saturn 
and Jupiter occupying the 10th, llth and the ascendantres- 
:>rrlively, Mars and Mercury the 2nd house, and Venus and 
ill*' Sun the 4th house, at one’s birth. 

183. When the Moon occupies the ascendant identical 
with Vfsabha, Jupiter and Saturn the 2nd and 6(h respectively, 
and the rest the llth house, the person concerned becomes 
a ruler, 

184- I84J. Jupiter in the 4ih house, the Sun and the 
Moon in the 10th house, Saturn in the Lagna and the rest is in the 
llth house, produce kings. Similarly, Mars and Saturn in 
the Lagna, the Moon, Jupiter, Venas, the Sun and Mercury 
in the 4th, 7,th, 9th, 10th and llth respectively usher kings 
into the world’® 

185- 185}. One attains kingship or a kingdom during 
the major period (Dasa) of the planet posited in the ascen¬ 
dant or the 10th house, or of one that is very strong; whereas 
that of such planets as are posited in mimical houses, in debt- 
Iitation etc. is productive of great troubles. 

186- 187. If at a birth all the planets are posited in any 
two contiguous quadrants (Kendras) (L.e. 1 and 4, 4 and 7, 
7 and 10 or 10 and 1), the yoga named Gaddor Mace is generated. 
If all the planets occupy only the 1st and 7th houses, it will 
be called Sakata (carriage). The Toga called Vihaga (Bird) 
is caused by the planets occupying the 4th and 10th houses. 
SfAgdtaka is brought into effect by all the planets being posited 
in the 5th, 9th and 1st hottses. The Hala yoga is brought 



11.55.188-193 


745 


about by all the planets being posited in mutual trines begin¬ 
ning with any home other than the ascendant/' 

188. The yoga termed Vajra {Diamond or Thunderbolt) 
is caused by bcnefics being jwsited in the Isl and 7 th houses, 
and by malehcs in the 4ih and 10th houses. Tavnyoga [Barley) 
is the result of the bcncfics and malcfics exchanging the 
positions mentioned in the previous yoga (i.e. bcncfics should 
be in 4ih and 10th and iiMlcfics in the 1st i*.nd 7lh liouscs). 
Th ‘ Kamala {Utus) yoga U the cficct of all the planets occupying 
the Kendras in any manner. The Vapi {Well) yoga is the result 
of the planets occupying houses other than the Kendras (i.c. 

in Pat>ap!)aras or Apoklimas).’- 

189. The YQpayoga (Plough) b the effect of all the planets 

occupying the four houses beginning witli the Lagna. The 
^arayoga (Arrow) b caused by their slaying in the four conti¬ 
guous houses from the 4ih house. The Sakliyoga b caused, if 
they occupy ihc 7th> 8th, 9th and lOih houses. Danda (Pod) 
is caused by their occupying the 10th, 1 lih, 12th and 1st houses.^* 

190. Wlien all the planets occupy the seven coniiguous 
houses beginning with the Lagna, the yoga is called A'tfw (Boat); 
while the h'ufa yoga (Fraud) is caused by the plane is bring 
in the 7 houses beginning with the 4th house. The Chatra 
(umbrella) yoga results from ihc planets occupying the 7 houses 
l>cginning with the 7ih house. The Cipa (Bow) yoga b caused 
by the planet:; occupying the 7 houses beginning with the 
10th house. The Ardhendu (Crescent) yoga results from their 
occupying seven houses other than the above, i.c. beginning 
with any Panapkarc or Apokiima house 

191-192. Cakra (Wheel) yoga is formed by all the planets 
occupying all the odd houses; and Samudra (Ocean), the even 
houses. Seven yogas called (Vind (Lute), DSman (Garland), 
Pdfa (Noose), Kedd^a (Field), Sula (Spike), Yuga (Yoke) and 
Golakn (Sphere) are caused when all the seven planets arc 
posited in 7 Ra^is, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1 respectively. When all 
the planets arc in movable Rasis, the yoga called Rajju (Rope) 
is formed.’* 

193. When the planets arc only in fixed Rasis, MusaU 
(Stave) yoga is formed; in dual Raiis, Nala (Reed) yoga. 
The Mdld yoga (Wreath) b formed by the bcnefics (Jupiter, 



746 


J^drada PuTd$a 


Mercury and Venus) occupying the Kendras; by malcfics 
(the Sun, Mars and Saturn) therein, Sarpa (Serpent) yoga is 
formed. 

194. One bom under the Jlajju Toga becomes envious 
and fond of wandering; one of Musata yoga is blessed with 
wealth and honour; one bom under the Nali^ga becomes 
deficient in a limb and full of prominent veins; under the 
Mdld or Srak yoga, commands pleasures; and \xndtt Sarpayoga^ 
gets afflicted or becomes miserable.^* 

195. A person born under Vlndyoga is very clever and 
very much interested in music and dancing; one under 
Ddmayoga becomes wealthy and munificent; and under 
Pdiayoga^ possessed of wealth and character.’** 

196. One having Keddra yoga become an agriculturist; 
one with ^Qlayoga^ brave unharmed and poor; with^ugc yogCt 
with Gola yoga^ and slovenly. 

197. In Cakrayoga one becomes great that his feet are 
worshipped even by kings; in Samudrayoga, one enjoys the plea¬ 
sures of royally; in Ardhacandra, possesses a charming body; 
and in Cdmara, becomes happy and heroic.” 

198. Under Chatrayoga one helps one*$ friends; under 
KUlayoga, suffers imprisonment, and becomes a liar; under 
Kamalayoga, becomes famous and happy without doubt.’* 

199. Under Tupayoga one becomes charitable, performs 
sacrifices and controls his senses; under Sara yoga^ becomes 
murderous and a leader of hunters; under Sakli low^ mean, 
lethargic and poor; and under Da^do yoga, suffers from 
separation from his beloved. 

200. The yogas termed Sunaphd, Anaphd and Duradhara 
are formed when there is any planet, other than the Sun, in the 
2nd, 12th and both the houses respectively. In the absence of 
any of these three yogas, Kemadruma yoga is formed. 

201. A pei^n bom with the Smt^hd yoga at birth will 

enjoy the wealth earned by his own efforts, be charitable, 
wealthy and happy; and Anaphd yoga, one becomes healthy, 

famous, dressed attractively and of good character. 

202. Under Durdhata-yoga one enjoys pleasures, be¬ 
comes happy, wealthy, munificent and charitable; while under 


1L55.203-213 


747 


Kemadrumayoga, one becomes very dirty, miserable, mean 
and penniless. 

203‘*204* O Sage, if the Sun is conjoined with the Moon, 
the native will become a mechanic or mason; with Mars, a 
wanderer; with Mercury, famours, clever, learned and 
wealthy; with Jupiter, engaged in helping others; with Venus, 
earning one’s livelihood by means of weapons; and with Saturn, 
clever in metallurgy and pottery.’* 

205*206. O Sage, the Moon combined with Mars 
makes one a dealer in hammers, liquor and such other commo¬ 
dities, and hater of his mother; with Mercury, clever in econo¬ 
mics, polite and famous; with Jupiter of unsteady mind, leader 
of his family, valiant (heroic) and rich; with Venus, seeker of 
pleasures (?); and with Saturn, the son of a remarried woman.^® 

207. ^^a^s combined with Mercury makes one a single- 
combatant; with Jupiter, mayor of a city; with Venus, a gambler 
and fighter; and with Saturn, a liar and gambler. 

208. O Narada, Mercury combined with Jupiter makes 
one proficient in dance and music; with Venus, clever in magic; 
and with Saturn, greedy and cruel. 

209. Jupiter combined with Venus makes one learned; 
and with Saturn, a cook or potter. Venus conjoined with 
Saturn makes one have poor eye-sight, and earn wealth through 
his association with a woman.®* 

210-211. Among the planets Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, 
the Moon, Venus, Saturn and the Sun, if any four planets 
should combine in the 10th or 2nd house (?), a Buddhist monk, 
an Ajivaka monk, an aged mendicant, a wandering recluse,. 
and an ascetic living on rain-water respectively are brought 
into existence. In case the planets owning the concerned 
houses arc defeated in a planetary war, there will be a fall 
from asceticism. 

212-213. Should the planets be tiny or eclipsed, one 
would not actually don the ochre robes; on the other hand, 
should they be powerful, persons would be strongly attached to 
their respective ascetic orders. O Narada, one will become 
an ascetic, when the lord of the Lagna, being unaspcctcd by 
any planet, aspects Saturn; or when Saturn aspecu the lord of 
the ascendant.that ii eclipsed; or when Saturn, the Sun and 



748 ^drada Purd^ 

the lord of Lagna occupy the Aihia of Mars or the Sun; or 
when the Moon is ai>pcctcd by Saturn.®* 

214*215. One born under constellation becomes 

handsome, and endowed with ornaments; under effi¬ 

cient and truthful; under KrUikdy gluttonous and addicted to 
others’ wives; under Rohiniy of stable mind and sweet-tongued; 
under Mr^rJir^a, wealthy and enjoyer of pleasures; under 

cruel, roguish and sinful; under Punarvasuy Self-conirollcd, 
sickly and auspicious; and under Pufya, happy and a pod. 

2IG. One bom under Asle^d will be a villain, rogue and 
ungrateful; under Maghd, sinful and cater of all and sundry 
(gluttonous); under PSrvaphalguniy enjoys luxuries, becomes 
wealthy, a devotee, donor and swcet-iongucd,®* 

217. One born under UtUirnpha/guni becomes rich and 
commands luxuries; under Hdsta^ a thief, stubborn rtnd merci¬ 
less; under Citrdy possessed of colourful clothes, and fine eyes; 
under Svati, without piety or kindness. 

218. One bom under ViSdkhd becomes avaricious, 

clever and irascible; under Anurddhd, a wanderer and one who 
goes abroad; under Jye^fhdy devotetl to Dharma and content; 
and under proud, rich and happy.®® 

219. Under Purvdsd4hd one becomes proud, happy 
ond content; under Utterdsd^hd, humble and pious; under 
^ravanay wealthy, happy and famous; under Dhani,^lhdy charitable, 
heroic and rich. 

220. One born under Saiabhisaky destroys one’s enemies 
and gets addicted to some vice; under Purva^bhadrapadd, comes 
under the influence of women and becomes rich; under Uttard 
bhadrapaddy eloquent, liappy, and attractive; and under Jievatiy 
heroic, wealthy and pure. 

221. If a persons' natal sign (Janma-rasi—the one 
occupied by the Moon) happens to be Me^a (Aries), he becomes 
lustful, heroic and grateful; if Vrfabhc (Taurus), atiraciive, 
charitable and forgiving; if Mithuna (Gemini), proficient in 
gambling, Sastras (scriptures) and pleasing women; if Karkafa 
(Cancer), effeminate and shore. 

222. If the natal sign is Sirftha (Leo), one hates women, 
becomes short-tempered, proud, valiant, happy and of steady 



11.55.223-228 


74» 


mind; xtKanya (Virgo), pious, tender and wise; {{Tula (Libra), 
learned, tall and rich. 

223. If it is Vfieika (Scorpio), one becomes sickly, 
respectable and receives wounds; if Dhanus (Sagittarius), a 
poet, artist and wealthy; \{Makara (Capricorn), lazy, wanderer 
and possessing beautiful eyes; if Kumbha^ stealer of others* 
wealth and wives. 

224. When the natal Sign and its lord arc strong, and 
when the Moon also is possessed of strength, all good results 
will accrue to the native; otherwise they will be the opposite 
of what has been given above. The effects of the Sun’s occu¬ 
pying the 12 Signs beginning wiihMcsa are in order (1) fame, 
(2) hatred for women, (3) wealth, (4) cruelty or sharpness, 
(5) wisdom or learning, (6) poetic gift, (7) keeping a liquor 
shop, (8) riches, (9) respectability, (10) avarice, (II) penury, 
and (12) being without friends. 

225- 225Mars occupying Sirfiha at birth makes one 
poor; Karkafa^ wealthy; his own house, gluttonous; Milhuna 
or Kanjfdj grateful; Dhanus or Mina, famous; Vna or Tw/J, having 
illicit connection with other women; Makaroy blessed with many 
sons and affluence; and Kumbha, grief-stricken, wicked and a 
liar. 

226- 227f Mercury occupying the houses of the seven 
planeLs beginning with the Sun makes one (1) hateful in the 
eyes of women, (2) hater of one’s own kinsmen, (3) observing 
vows (?) (4) blessed with intelligence and wealth, (5) having 
honour and riches, (6) blessed with sons, and (7) getting gold 
from women (?) respectively. In the case of Jupiter the above 
results arc : (1) commander of an army, (2) blessed with wife, 
wealth and children, (3) having efficient friends (?), (4) com¬ 
manding a vast followii^ or good clothes, (5) governor of a 
province, (6) having wealth and happiness, and owner of much 

gold (?).“ 

228-228^. The effects of Venus occupying the houses 
of the planets are in order (1) acquiring wealth through women, 
(2) riches and freedom from grief, (3) hating one’s kith and 
kin, (4) wealth and sin, (5) wealth and intelligence, (6) 
uniform fanijp, and (7) defeat at the hands of woman.®’ 



750 


Niroia 


229- 229^. The effects of Saturn occupyuig the Risb 
owned by the seven planets are in order : (I) Deficient in 
limbs (or with deformed limbs) and poor, (2) motherless, (3) 
having many friends (?) (4) afflicted by the three-fold 
calamities, (5) blessed with children, wife and wealth and (6) 
a king and (7) leader of a village or town.^ 

230- 231. The Moon occupying when aspected 

by Mars and five other planets, produces the following effects 
in order : (1) kingship, (2) learning, (3) virtues, (4) mayor¬ 
ship of a city, (5) penury and (6) poverty; in Vr;abha^ (1) 
poverty, (2) thievish propensities, (3) kingship, (4) learning 
(5) messengership and (6) sickness; m Mithuna, (1) living 
by working on metals, (2) kingship, (3) scholarship, (4) fearless, 
(5) weaver, and (6) penniless. 

232. The Moon occupying her own house, produces 
the following effects in order, when aspected by the six planets, 
Mars and others : (1) a warrior, (2) poet, (3) learned man, 
(4) a respected teacher (or king?), (5) metallurgist, and (6) 
suffering from eye-disease; and sign Simha, (1) astrologer, 
(2) wealthy, (3) respected teacher or king, (4) king, (5) 
barber, and (6) a great king.^ 

233. The Moon tenanting Kany& and being aspected 
by the above planets, produces the following effects in order : 

(1) a pure and virtuous person, (2) a king, (3) an army- 
commander, (4) a skilful person, (5) a landlord and (6) a king; 
Tuld, (1) a king, (2) a goldsmith, (3) a merchant, (4) a 
king, (5) a goldsmith, and (6) merchant.^ 

234. The effects of the Moon's stay in Vrieika under 
the aspects of the six planets are— (1) father of twins, (2) 
fond of water (?), (3) a king, (4) of defective limbs, (5)wcalihy, 
and (6) a king; in Dhanus^ they are : (1) protector of kinsmen, 

(2) a Ung, (3) leader of men, (4) of virtuous mind, (5) showy 
person, and (6) a cheat. 

235. In Makara the effects arc—(1) king, (2) scholar 
(or ornamented?) (3) a friendly penon, (4) a sacrificcr 
(or teacher), (5) a king, and (6) taking a boy In adoption (?); 
in Kumbha and Mina they arc—(1) humorous, (2) learned, 

(3) a king, (4) learned, (5) a virtuous person, and (6) in- 
tel^nt person.** 



11.55.236*243 


751 


236. The Moon confers beneficial results, when she is 
joined or aspected by planets that are posited in the KSkil or 
Aih^a of the lord of the Lagna. The same result will follow, 
if she is combined with or aspected by those that are posited 
in a Rail that is owned by a friend of the lord of the Lagna* 
decanate. 

237*238. The results of the Moon's being placed in the 
various Dvddaldrhias (1/12 of a Sign) have already been enun¬ 
ciated. Those of her J^avdrkia placements will now be ex¬ 
plained: When the Moon is posited in the J^avdfhJa Kkii owned 
by Mars (i.c. Moa or Vrieika), the native becomes a police¬ 
man (or watchman), interested m killing, single combat, 
and quarrels, and wealthy; when in one of Venus {Vrfabha or 
Tuld)i foolish and addicted to others* spouses; when in one 
of Mercury {Mithuna or Kanyd), a poet, happy, dancer (actor), 
thief, learned and an artist (or artisan).^ 

239. When the Moon b in her own Amsa i.e. Karka^ 
one becomes short In stature, wealthy, ascetic and greedy; 
when in that of the Sun, i.c. SirhhOf hol-tcmpcrcd, owner of 
treasures, a minuter, king, cruel and childless.** 

240. When the Moon is in an Amsa of Jupiter {Dhanus 
or Mina) the person concerned becomes an expert in comics, 
endowed with a strong physique, a minuter and religious-* 
minded (or virtuous); when she b in one of Saturn (i.e. 
Makar a or Kumbha)^ he will have very few children, be 
wretched (distressed), indigent and associated with a 
wicked woman.•• 

241-242. When the Sun b aspected by the Moon and 
other planets, the results are the same as for the Moon being 
aspected by others (vide Siokas 230-235). When a planet 
b posited in Vargoltamdthiay own house or in another's house, 
the good results enumerated will be fuU-fledged, middling or 
very meagre, as the case may be : If the owner of the Arh^ 
(occupied by a planet) b strong, he bestows very good results, 
according to the effects of the (Raii occupied and the aspects he 
receives from othen. 

243. If the Sun should occupy the Lagna at birth 
the native would become a hero, stubborn, of defective eyes 



752 


N&rada Pur Ana 


and merciless; If the Lagna is Mesa, he will sufler from cataract 
in the eye and be wealthy; if it be Simha, night-blind. 

244. If the Sun occupies the ascendant Identical with 
Karka (Cancer), the native will be mean, poor and blear-eyed; 
if the second house, very wealthy, punished by the ruler and 
suffering from some facial disease.” 

245. The Sun in the 3rd house makes one learned and 
full of prowess; in the 4fh house, depressed (or unhappy) and 
afflicted; in the 5th, bereft of wealth and issue; and in the 6th 
house, powerful and victorious over his focs.^’ 

246- 246|. The Sun in the 7th house makes one under 
the thumb of a woman; in the 8th, have few children and poor 
eye-sight; in the 9th, blessed with children, wealth and happi¬ 
ness; in the 10th, full of heroism and learning; in the 11 th, 
endowed with wealth and honour; and in the 12th, fallen from 
position, and poor.*** 

247- 249. The Moon occupying the Lagna makes o.xt 
dumb, deaf, blind and a servant; but if the ascendant is Cancer, 
Aries or Taurus, one becomes rich; in the second house, a reli¬ 
gious student or rich; in the thirdf cruel; in the fourth^ endowed 
with a virtuous disposition, in the fifth, father of girls and indo¬ 
lent; In the sixth, of poor digestion and sexual urge, and cruel, 
and envious; in the seventh, an administrator (?), and learned; 
in the eighth, afflicted with diseases; and in the ninth, endowed 
with friends and riches.” 

250. The Moon in the tenth house confers virtues or piety, 
intelligence and riches; in the eleventh, fame, intelligence and 
wealth; and in the twelfth, meanness and loss of limbs. These 
arc the results mentioned by the wise for the Moon's stay in 
the various houses at a person's birth. 

251. Mars occupying the Lagna at birth causes wounds 
in the body; the second house, makes one cat forbidden or rotten 
food; the third house, perform virtuous deeds; thehouse, 
sinful activities; and the remamii^ houses, as in the case of the 
Sun. 

252. Mercury gives the following effects in the first 
eight houses beginning with the ascendant : (1) Learned; (2) 
Wealthy; (3) Leader of men; (4) Scholar; (5) Minister; (6) 
Having Enemies; (7) Appreciator of virtues; and (8) a 



11 . 55 . 253-262 


753 


paragon of virtues. In the remaining four houses the eflects 
are similar to those of the Sun.'®® 

253. Jupiter produces the following cflccts in the 12 
houses :— (1) Learned; (2) of pleasant speech; (3) MLscrly; 
(4) Happy; (5) Wise; (6) Vanquisher of foes; (7) Intelligent; 
(8) Mean; (9) Ascetic; (10) Blessed and Wealthy; (11) 

Greedy, and (12) Wicked.'®' 

254. Venus causes the following effects in the first five 
houses : (1) Passionate and Happy; (2) Quarrelsome; (3) 
Anxious for sexual pleasure; (4) Happy; and (5) Having many 
daughters; and in other houses he gives the same results as 
Jupiter.'®* 

255- 2r)5^. Saturn occupying the ascendant at birth 
makes one penniless, sickly, voluptuous, slovenly, sickly 
during childhood and indolent; but if it is his<'xalt.itjc>n, one 
becomes virtuously disposed, a king or adminUirntor of a village, 
learned and of attractive physique. In other places he is similar 
to the Sun. 

256- 257. A planet in exaltation yields its results in full \ 
in MtUntrikona^ (hreefourth.; in the liouse of a bcncfic as well 
as in ics own house, a half; in the house of a friendly planet, 
onefonrth; in an enemy’s liousr, vny littU; and in itsdebiliiation 
and when it is eclipsed, the result is nil. 

258-259. When one or more planets are posited in (heir 
own houses, Mulatrikona, exaltation or friendly houses the 
person becomes a worthy scion of his family, leader of the 
family and respected by his kinsmen; wealthy, happy, enjoycr 
of pleasures and a king; or enjoyer of others* wealth, protector 
of friends and relatives (or protected by friends and kinsmen), 
leader of a group:; commander or king, as the case may be.'®* 

260-261. When bcncfic planets are px>sitcd in odd houses 
and in the Sun’s Hora the native becomes famous, very enter¬ 
prising, brilliant or valiant, iiilclUgcnt, wealthy and strong; 
and when the benefits arc posited in even Signs and in the 
Moon’s Hora, he becomes lustrous, tender, atiraciive, enjoycr 
of luxuries, and wise.'®' 

262. Malcfics occupying even houses and the Hora of 
the Sun, will produce moderate results, while bencfics occupy- 



754 


N&rada Purdna 


mg odd Rijis and the Sun*s Hori, will not yield the results 
expected of them (i.e. mentioned above 

263. If the Moon at a birth occupies a decanate (Drek* 
kana) owned by a friendly p]anet> the native becomes hand¬ 
some, and virtuous while in any other decanate, he gets the 
qualities and form appropriate to the owner of the decanate. 

264-26S. When the planets arc posited in decanates 
that are designated as (I) Serpent, (2) Weapon, (3) Quadru¬ 
ped, and (4) Aquatic, the native becomes In order: (1) Cruel, 
murderous, cohabiting with revered women and wanderer; 
(2) thief, gluttonous, wealthy, intelligent, a king, impotent 
and destroyer of enemies; (3) a slave and one labouring under 
somebody without payment; and sinful, murderous and foolish.^^^* 

266-267. The effects of VargoUama Dvdd<tidrHJas in the 
Signs, Mefa etc, are the same as ibr the Raiis themselves. When 
Mars occupies his own TnWMia, the native will have wife, 
strength, ornaments, prowess, daring spirit, and brilliance, 
or will be hostile to his wife and attached to other women 

268- 2681. When Saturn occupies his own TrimtdMai 
the person becomes miserable, untidy and endowed with follow¬ 
ers. When Jupiter occupies his own TrirtiSdrfUaf one gets happi¬ 
ness, intelligence, wealth, fame, brilliance, respect of the people, 
enj oymen is, horses and elephants (?). ’ 

269- 270|. When Mercury occupies his own TrirfddMa, 
one will be blessed with a highly developed intelligence, profi¬ 
ciency in fine arts, poetry, architecture and disputations; he will 
also be deceitful and well-versed in the Sastras and be clever 
in adventurous deeds. When Venus occupies his own Trirti^ 
idrfUa^ one will have many children, happiness, health, enjoy¬ 
ments, an attractive personality and riches; he will have a 
tender body and uncontrolled senses. 

2 71 >2 71J. When the luminaries are conjoined with Mars 
and other planets, the following effects are produced:( 1) Heroic 
and obdurate; (2) Abnormal and a killer; (3) virtuous; (4) 
Happy and Learned; and (5) Attractive in action and body. 

272-273. Planets that are posited in Kendras identical 
with their own house, AiUUtrikoM or Exaliaticn, are considered 
to be Mutual Kdrakas (Signlhcaton), especially Che one that 
is in the 10th house. A birth is h^hly auspicious, if the ascendant 



II. 55. 274-281 


755 


is in Vargottamdrhia and if there are planets in the VeSi house 
{2nd house from the Sun).*” 

274. When Kendras (Quadrants) as well as the houses 
of the K&rakas (SigniHcators) are not vacant, Jupiur and the 
lords of the ascendant and the lunar Si^, posited in kendras^ 
confer beneficial results in the middle of their periods. 

275. Planets posited in Rasis that rise with their hind 
part foremost, in those that rise both ways—and in (hose that 
rise with their head first produce effects at the end and in the 
middle and in the beginning of their periods respectively. 
The Sun and Mars confer their results at the beginning, while 
Jupiter and Venus in the middle.**® 

275J. The Sun and the Moon yield their results at the 
end, while Mercury docs it always. 

276- 276J. If the 5th and the 7th houses counted from 
the ascendant or the Moon, be aspected or joined by their own 
lords or by bcnefics, there would be all^^round progress and 
prosperity for the twoBhavas (i.e. issue and wife or husband); 
otherwise their progress would be hindered.*** 

277- 278. If the Sun be posited in Minay Saturn in the 
7th therefrom would destroy the wife; while Mars in the 5th 
from the Sun would kill the issue. Malefics in the 12th and 
2nd houses or in the 4th and 8th houses from Venus would 
destroy the wife with fire, provided he is neither conjoined with 
nor aspected by bcncfics.*** 

279-280. [ In addition to the yoga mentioned in the 

previous verse ], if the Moon and the Sun occupy the 12th and 
8 th houses (or 6th ?), the man too will die along with his wife. 
The nature of the wife is determined from the planets occupying 
the 7th house. When the luminaries are situated in the 7th or 
9th or 5th house, the wife would be a handicapped person. When 
the Sun and Venus are together in Kona or in the Lagna, or 
when Venus is in Sandhi either in the 7th or 12th house, the 
native’s wife would be barren.**® 

281. If the 5th house is not occupied by benefics, if the 
ascendant, 7th and 12th houses are occupied by malefics, and 
if the weak Moon be in the 5th house, the native will have 
neither wife nor children.**® 



756 


Ndroda Purdna 


282. If Saturn be in the 10th house and aspects Venus 
posited in the 7th house» the person would be committing adub 
tery. Should the two viz. Venm and Saturn, be combined 
with the Moon, the man would be adulterous along with his 
wife. 

283. When the Moon and Venus are in the 7th house, 
the man, his wife or at least hb son will have undeveloped 
organs. This defect will not arise, If they are aspected by 
benches. 

284. One becomes the destroyer of one's family (lineage), 
if the Moon, Venus and a malefic occupy the lOih, 7th and 
4th house respectively. One will become an artist (artisan 
or architect), if the rising decanate is occupied by Mercury 
and aspected by Saturn occupying a kendra.^^^ 

285. One should be said to be born of a slave woman, 
if the decanate be owned by Saturn, and if Venus be in (he 12th 
house, being debilitated. The result would follow, if both the 
luminaries be in the 7th house and be aspected by Saiurn.^^^ 

286. Mars and Saturn occupying the 7th house and 
being aspected by another malefic, produce rheumatism; 
while a malefic occupying the Afh^ of Karka or VrSeika in a 
Jeendraf would cause venereal disease. 

287. One is afflicted with leprosy, if the Lagna atid the 
Moon are hemmed in between malcfics, and the Sun is posited 
in the 7th house. One would be of defective limbs, if the Moon 
be in the 10th house, Mars in the 7th, and Saturn in the 2nd 
house from the Sun. 

288‘2B9}. If the Sun and Moon are posited in mutual 
Rajis or Amsas, one will suffer from colic; and if the luminaries 
are combined, one will be lean in body. If the Sun, Moon, 
Mars and Saturn are posited in the 8th, 6th, 2iid and 12th 
house respectively, one is deprived of one's eye-sight by the 
afilictlon caused by a wandeiing spirit known as Bdlagraha 
(which attacks children). Malcfics in the 5th house, unaspect- 
ed by benefics, make one deaf; while the same in the 7th house 
cause bad (ugly) tccth.*^’ 

29C)«291. When the ascendant is occupied by Jupiter 
and the 7th house by Saturn, the native will be afflicted by 
rheumatism. One becomes mad, if Man occupies the 4th 



11. 55. 292*299 


757 


or 7lh house and Jupiter or Saturn^ the ascendant; or if Mars 
occupies the 5th house, Mercury the 7th and the Mt>on, the 
I2th house. 

292. Malcfics occupyii^ the 2nd, 5th, 9th and 12th 
houses cause bondage corresponding to the type of decaciate 
occupied by them. When the decanates happen to be Serpent^ 
Fitters and Pfeosi and are aspected by stror^ inalehcs, a person 
suffers bondage.'^* 

293*293|. When the Moon and Saturn are together and 
aspected by Mars, the native will be afflicted with epilepsy, 
be foul-mouthed and consumptive. When the Sun, Mars 
and Saturn occupy the 10th house, are aspected by bencfics 
and are of bright orbs, natives become servants of the highest, 
moderate and low order, according to the strength of the 
planets. 

294-295. Whatever effects have been declared for male 
births should be applied to female births, as far as they are 
applicable to them; and such effects should be declared in the 
case of their husbands; and in the case of death, it should be 
taken to apply to their husbands. Their physical features 
should be read from the Moon and ascendant; and paramours 
from the malefics occupying the 7th house.**® 

296. If both the ascendant and the Moon occupy even 
houses, the woman concerned wall be of normal conduct; and 
if they are aspected by benches, she will be of excellent charac¬ 
ter and will possess many ornaments (or will be charming). 

297. If the two (Lagoa and the Moon) be in Odd 
Signs, the woman would be masculine in physical features and 
mental disposition. If the two be aspected by malcfics, they 
would be wicked (sinful) and devoid of all virtues. 

298. When Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus 
are posited in a Sign belonging to Mars inagirrs horoscope, 
she will be in order (1) spoiled in girlhood, (2) a slave, (3) 
virtuous, (4) cunning, and (5) immoral. 

299. When the Lagna and the Moon are in odd SignSj 
the girl will have the character and physical features corres¬ 
ponding to those of the planet owning the Sign, or be wicked. 
She will be sinful and devoid of virtues, when these two are 
aspected by malcfics.**^ 



758 


N&rada Pufd^a 


300. When the five planets mentioned above (via. 
Mars, Satum^ Jupiter, Mercury and Venus) are posited in a 
Kkii owned by Venus, the respective efTects would be (1) 
foul-tongued, (2) one remarried, (3) virtuous, (4) a scholar 
and (5) famous. In a house owned by Mercury the effects 
are : (1) deceitful, (2) impotent, (3) a devout wife, (4) virtuous, 
and (5) of wandering habit or fickle*mindcd.^** 

301. When these planets are in Gemini {Mitkma)^ she 
will be (1} a harlot, (2) killer of her husband, (3) virtuous, 
(4) artisan (artiste) and (5)^noble. In Sifftka the effects are : 

(1) talkative, (2) a concubine, (3) passionate, (4) of mascu* 
line disposition* and (5) ugly? (or unapproachable?).^” 

302. In a house of Jupiter they are : (1) very virtuous, 

(2) having very little Sex life, (3) apprectator of merits, 
(4) learned, and (5) devout wife. In a house of Saturn the 
effects are : (1) a slave, (2) attached to a low-bom person, 

(3) virtuous or devoted wife, (4) wicked, and (5) barren. 

303-304. The above-mentioned effects for the Signs 
of the five planets are also applicable to the TrirfiMfhias or de- 
canate of the stronger of the two viz. Lagna and the Moon, 
happening to be that of one of the five planets viz. Mars, Saturn, 
Jupiter, Mercury and Saturn. It Venus and Saturn should 
occupy each other*8 Navamia or if Venus be in Kumbha J^avOMa, 
the woman concerned would get highly infiamed by sexual 
passion and have sexual coi^ess with members of her own 
sex. If the 7th house be vacant and weak, the husband would 
be a despicable person; and if Mercury and Saturn,without 
receiving any benefic aspect, be posited there, he would be 
a eunuch. If the 7th house be a movable Sign (and its lord 
in a movable Sign), the husband would always be in a foreign 
country. 

305-306. If Stm be in the 7th house^ she would be desert¬ 
ed by her husband; if Mars, a virgin widow; if Saturn, aspected 
by a malefic, she remains a spinster throughout her life; if 
powerful malefics, a widow; and if both malefics and benefics, 
a widow who is remarried.^” 

307. When a weak malefic occupies the 7th house, the 
woman is abandoned by her husband, unless the malefic is 



IL55.308-3i7 


759 


aspected by benefics. When Venus and Mars occupy each 
other’s Amias» the woman becomes another’s mistress.^** 

308-309. When the Moon (also) b in the 7th house 
(in addition to Mars and Venus), she goes astray with the 
approval of her husband. If the Lagna be a Sign owned by 
Saturn or Mars and be occupied by the Moon and Venus, she 
would be a harlot. If in this yoga tliere is abo malefic aspect 
on the Lagna, she goes astray aloi^ with her mother. If the 
Amia of the 7th house is owned by Mars and aspectcd by 
Saturn, her genital organ will be diseased. On the other hand, 
if the Aihia belongs to a bcncfic, she would be loved by her 
husband. 

310-311. If the 7th house or its Amia is owned by Saturn, 
the husband will be a foolbh old fellow; if by Mars, he will be 
hoMempered and libidinous; if by Mercury, learned and skilful; 
if by Jupiter, virtuoxis and self^controlled; if by the Moon, 
lustful and tender; if by Venus, attractive and charming;and 
if by the Sun, one doing very gentle deeds.**’ 

312. When Venus and the Moon occupy the Lagna, 
she becomes happy but envious; and when Mercury and the 
Moon, proficient in fine aru, happy and virtuous. 

313. If Venus and Mercury should occupy the ascendant, 
the woman would be exceedingly charming, attractive and skilled 
in fine arts. When there arc three benefics in the Lagna, she 
will command immense wealth and happiness as well as virtues. 

314. A woman would be widowed during the Daia 
(major period) of the malefic planet occupying the 8th house 
or of the planet occupying the Amsa of the lord of the 8th house. 
Still she henelf will predecease her husband, in case there are 
benefics in the second house. 

315*317. A woman will have few children, if at her birth 
the Moon occupies Kanjdt Vrseikay Sirfika or Vr^abha identical 
with the 5th house. A woman becomes ugly, if the Lagna is 
an odd Ra^i, Saturn moderately strong, the Moon, Mercury 
and Venus weak, and the rest strong. She becomes famow. 
learned in many S&stras and a philosopher, when the Lagna is 
an even Sign and Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury strong. 
She takes to asceticism of the type corresponding to the planet 
posited in the house, when there is a malefic in the 7th hoxise. 



760 


Puri^ 


31&*319» All these things (mentioned above regarding 
a girl’s horoscope) should be considered before marriage or 
electing a partner or at a query regarding the same. (Now 
about the cause of death of a person) > death should be declared 
to be caused by the vitiation of the pacicular physical consti* 
cuents belonging to the strongest of the planets aspccting the 
8 th house. If the seven planets beginning with the Sun are 
poshed in strength in the 8th house, the causes of death are in 
Older : (1) Fire, (2) Water, (3) Wound caused by a weapon, 
(4) Fever, (3) Disease, (6) Excessive thirst and (7) Inordinate 
hunger.^** 

320«321. If the 8th house (as well as its lord) be in a 
movable, fixed or dual house, the end occurs in a far-off place 
from one’s own house, or on the way, as the case may be. When 
the Sun and Man occupy the 2nd and 4(h house respectively, 
the death is caused by a fall from the top of a mountain, and 
when Saturn, the Moon and Mars are in the 4th, 7th and 10th 
houses in order, by a fall into a wcll.^** 

322. One dies at the hands of one’s own kinsmen, if the 
two luminaries occupy Virgo {Kar^) and receive malefic aspect. 
A person gets a watery grave, if the luminaries occupy the as¬ 
cendant that is a dual Sign.^^ 

323. If the Moon occupying a Sign owned by Mars 
is hemmed in between malefics, death is by fire or weapon; and 
if she be in Makara and Saturn in Karka , by dropsy. 

324. If the Moon be in Kanya under the above men¬ 
tioned condition, death would be through vitiation of blood 
or swelling in the body; and if it be Saturn, it is due to fire, 
hanging or a fall. If there be malefics both in the 5th and 9th 
houses without receiving any bcnefic aspect, death would take 
place in captivity.^^ 

325-327. If the decanatc of the 8th house happens to 
be Noosi, Sirpmt or FVfiirr, death will be in prison. If the Moon 
along with malefics be in Firgo {Ktmyd) which is the 7th house, 
Venus in M^a and the Sun in the ascendant, death would take 
place at home as a result of womens’ intrigues. If the Sun or 
Man be in the 4th hoxise, Saturn in the 10th and the weak Moon 
conjoined with malefics in the Lagna, 5th or 9tb house, death 
would be through impalement (?). Death would be in the 


11.55.326-336 


761 


battle-field, if the Sim be in the 4th and Mars in the 1 Olh aspect- 
ed by the weak Moon. One will be beaten to death with 
clubs, if the 1st, 10th, 8lh and 4th arc occupied by the weak 
Moon, Mars, Sacum and the Sun respectively.*” 

328. If the above four planets viz. weak Moon, Mars, 
Saturn and the Sun be posited in the I Olh, 9th, 1st and 5th 
house, death is due to suflTocation by smoke, fire, imprisoiunent 
or beating*”. 

329. When the 4th, 7lh and 10th houses are occupied 
by Mars, the Sun and Saturn respectively, death is due to wea¬ 
pons, fire or king's displeasure. When Saturn, the Moon and 
Mars are in the 2nd, 4th and lOlh houses rcspcciivcly, it is due 
to wounds or worms or a foil from a tree.’” 

330. If the Sun be in the 2nd house and Mars in the 4th, 
death is due to a fall from a vehicle; if, in the above yoga, Mars 
be in the 7th house along with the weak Moon, it is by the des¬ 
truction of a machine.*” 

331. When Mars, Saturn and the Moon arc in Libra, 
Aries and a sign belonging to Saturn respectively, or when the 
weak Moon, the Sun and Mars arc in the 10th, 7th and 4ih 
house respectively, it is in the midst of tilth and night-soil. 

332. If the weak Moon be aspected by the powerful 
Mars, and Saturn be in the 8th house, the cause of death will 
be some disease of the privities, worms (basllU), weapons, fire or 
wood. 

333. When Saturn is in the 7th, the Sun in the 8th, 
and the weak Moon conjoined with Mars in a house of Saturn; 
or when the Sun, Mars, Saturn, and the Moon arc posited in 
the 1st, 5th, 11th, and 7ih respectively, the native will die as 
a result of a fall from the top of a mountain or tree.*” 

334-335. Death will be caused by the stronger of the two 
planets viz. the lord of the 22nd decanate and the lord of the 
8 th house, through, his characteristic disease or agency. Death 
of a person will take place in a place corresponding to the lord 
of the Amfo occupied by the asc^ant, this being influenced by 
the aspect and conjunction of other planets.*” 

336. The period of unconsciousness of the dying person 
will correspond to the Amfos of the Lagna that have not yet 
risen. If it (Lagna) is aspected by its lord, the period in to be 



762 


J^drada Purd^a 


^ioubled^ if by a beneiic, to be trebled; and ifbymorebenefics, 
it should be increased proportionately through one’s intelli* 
gcncc.^^ 

337. If the decanate of the 8th house be the dead 
body would be burnt to ashes; if Aquatic^ thrown to the waters, 
and if Serpent^ dried by being exposed to the Sun and wind. 
These results are to be read from the 8th house counted from 
the Moon as well.^^ 

338. If Jupiter be in the 8ih house, the departed soul 
would go to the world of Gods; if the Moon or Venus, to the 
world of the Mams; if the Sun or Mars, to that of mortals (?); 
and if Saturn or Mercury, to the infernal regions.**® 

339. The previous world of a soul can be read from the 
lord of the decanate occupied by the stronger of the two via. 
the Sun and the Moon. I'he world must have been very high 
or exalted, if the concerned luminary is in its exaltation; mode¬ 
rate, if in its own house; and low, if in debilitation.*** 

340. If the lord of the decanate of the 6th or 8th house 
occupies the 7th house, or if Jupiter occupies the 6lh, a kendra 
or 8th house, or if he is in his exaltation, identical with the 
Lagna or the 12th house or in a bcnefic Aihia, possessed of 
strength, the soul attains emancipation.*** 

341. When neither the time of impregnation nor that 
of birth is known, the life of querists has to be predicted from 
the ascendant at the query. The sobtices of birth has tn be 
deduced from the two halves or Horas of the ascendant, the 
first standing for the winter solstice, and the second for the 
summer one.*** 

342. The age of the person (who asks for a Pfaffajaiaka 
as a result of his not knowing his date and time of birth) should 
be read from the ages of the lords of the Trines counted from the 
Lagna, or from the (lord of) Amia (or decanate) occupied by 
Jupiter. The season of birth would be summer, if the Sun 
be in the Lagna. Similarly, the presence of otlier planets in 
it would indicate other seasons. Or it may be read from the 

Sign occupied by the Sun.*** 

343. The Moon, Mercury and Jupiter arc to be inter¬ 
changed with Venus, Mars and Saturn respectively, if neces- 
aary. If the decanate of the pUnet concerned that deter- 



11 . 55 . 344-351 


763 


mines the season is the initial one of the Sign> the month of 
the season (Rtu) should be the first. The lunar day should 
be found out proportionately.*" 

344, If the Lagna of query be a noetumal Sign, the ascen¬ 
dant at birth must be a diumal one, and vice versa; and the time 
elapsed from sunrise or sunset should be read from the degrees 
elapsed. If the lord of the Lagna be in a Trikona or be possessed 
of great strength, the Lagna of birth would correspond to the 
star ruling at the time of query (?).*" 

345*347. Subtract the longitude of the Moon from 
the position of the ascendant at query. The natal ascendant 
would be so far removed from the Moon nt query as is repre* 
sented by the balance. Multiply Vr$abha and Sirhha by 10; 
Mitkuna and Vrteika by 8; Af^;a and Tuld by 7; MakaramA 
Kanyd by 5; and the remaining Rasis viz. Karka^ DhanuSt 
Kumbha and Mina by their respective numbers. Jupiter, Mars, 
Venus and Mercury arc to be increased (?) by 3, 1, 11 and 
11 respectively. The calculation of the lunar mansion [Nitya^ 
naksaira) as well as of the Aharga/m (the total number of days 
elapsed), is done by multiplying it by 7 and dividing by 27. 
The remainder will give the J{ak$atra in question.**’ 

348. By adding to or subtracting from the above shown 
result, 9, double the figure. You get the year, season and month. 
The fortnight and lunar day arc got by multiplying it by 8. 
The same being multiplied by 7 will yield the day, night and 
asterism; and being multiplied by 5, the degree of the ascen¬ 
dant as well as the time of birth in Gha(is}^ 

349. The following arc the characteristics of the 
first, second and third decanates of Mesa (Aries): (1) It is a man 
holding an axe, dark in complexion, with red eyes, and capable 
of protecting others. (2) It is a woman wearing red garments, 
pot-like in shape, with canine face, ugly feet and sore (?) eyes. 
(3) It is a man, of brown complexion, blind, cruel, wearing 
red cloths, and who has broken his vow or promise.*** 

350-351. Those of the decanates of Taurus {Vfsabka) 
arc : (I) A man oppressed by hunger and thirst, wearing 
singed clothes, and with his trimmed hair hanging. (2) Man, 
hungry, dirty, with a goat-like face, but clever in agriculture 



764 


NUrada PurdM 


etc. (3) Man with an elephantine body, impatient (hurrying), 
pink in complexion, and with a perplexed 

332*352^. Those of the decanates of Gemini (Mithuna), 
arc : (1) A woman engaged in needle-work, beautiful, chaste, 
issueless and with raised hands. (2) A man in a garden 
wearing armour, holding a bow, intent on sport, and with an 
aquiline face. (3) A man well-versed in dance and other fine 
arts, holding a bow, and possessing a vast treasure of gems like 
Varuna. 

353-354, The characterbtics of the decanates of Cancer 
(Karka) are : (1} A man with an elephantine face and neck, or 
with hog's face, standing in a forest and shooting arrows (or 
hunting Sarabhas and snakes). (2) A woman, who is very 
coarse from head downwards (or who is coarse and has a snake 
on her head), and who shrieks holding the branch of a Palasa 
tree. (3) A man with a fiat face, having a serpent coiling 
round his body, and sailing in a boat for the sake of a woman.'^^ 

335. The characteristics of the decanates of Leo 
{Sirhha) are ; (1) A monkey (or a man with a dog) who has 
caught an eagle and jackal, cries aloud on (or near) a silk- 
cotton tree. (2) A man, holding a bow, wearing the skin of 
an antelope, roars aloud like a lion, and is sickly. (3) A man 
with a beard, with a bear's face, acting like a monkey, and des¬ 
troying (for) fruits and meat.'” 

356-357. Those of the decanates of Virgo (Kanjfd) are : 
(1) A girl in unclean clothes, wearing lots of fiowers on her 
locks, (2) A bowman, harming and causing loss to others, 
dark, a writer, and hairy. (3) A very tall woman of golden 
complexion, wearii^ clean, washed clothes, holding a pot in 
her hand, in a temple.*** 

358. The characteristics of the decanates of Libra 
(Tula) are : (1) A man ei^aged in weighing with a balance 
and measuring commodities in a shop, thinking of the prices 
of articles (or costly things); (2) A man expressed by hunger 
and thirst, holding a pot, with an aquiline face, and accompanied 
by wife and children. (3) An archer, wearing a golden armour, 
behaving like a Kinnara (a semidivine being with a horse'a 
face), and pursuing an animal (or deer). 

359-360. The decanates of Scorpio {Vfidka) are repre- 



11.55.361-366 


765 


seated by (1) a woman seated on a Hon (?) going to a well, 
with many snakes curling round her legs; (2) a woman, having 
husband and wealth (or for the sake of her husband), 
with the form of a tortoise, with her body covered with serpents, 
and yearning for happiness; and (3) a man having the face of a 
tortoise and hunting lions, dogs, hogs and deer.^^ 

361- 361. Those of Sagittarius {Dkanus) are represented 
by (1) a boy with the body of a dog (or a man with a tail and 
horse's body), holding a bow, and protecting ascetics and 
sacriRcial performances; (2) a middle-aged woman seated 
on a sear bedecked with Campaka-flowen, and opening a lion's 
mouth (or, looking after elephants); and (3) a man with the 
complexion of Campaka, seated on a straw seat, holding a rod 
in a forest of Ku^a grass (or, having a piece of silk over his 
face).^** 

362- 363. The decanates of Capricorn {M<ikara) are the 
following:—(1) A man with an aquiline face, holding an axe (?], 
and eager for oils, wine and food. (2) A woman who has been 
burnt (?), holding iron, and having ornaments, valuable things 
or pots and dirty things. (3) A manful) of treasures or pots, 
with hairy ears, dark in complexion, wearing a crown, and 
holding fruits and machines in hb hands. 

364-365* The decanates of Aquarius {Kumbha) are the 
following:—(I) A man seated in boat, with hb hands adorn* 
ed with ail kinds of gems, who b anxious for collecting orna¬ 
ments and decorative articles; (2) a woman sailing in a boat 
towards the shore, whose face u like the Campaka flower (in 
colour), and who is followed by her retinue; and (3) a naked 
man coiled by a serpent sitting in a cavern and weeping, as he b 
troubled by robbers and Are. These are the 36 decanates that 
have been delineated in proper sequence. 

366. O great Sage, in thb manner horoscopy has been 
expounded to you succinctly. Now you will know the 
branch of astrology known as SarfthUa^Skajuiha (a compilation 
of ail useful thinking which is highly benefleial for worldly 
activities* 



CMAFTEJL FirrynvE 


1. In Sanskrit the word KdU is used in many senses. It means time, 
the God of Death, the Cosmic Being, the Supreme Lord etc. It is derived thus: 
VTBWftr irftr 

I* ‘^CTTfPWHUpft ^ VIW: I 

iftroftfir wjw. \ flftnrftfd -wt CTW: I tp^?nW 

Wmfir m VTW: i' The Bhigavaca has the following to say : 
ffir^ w^i-flwOwtr: I snrr: wt i* 'Time u 

called K&la, because it coniroU the life and death of all beings; it does not 
leave even the minutest part t^time. Kali; it seizes or gathers together all 
beings; it drives beings; It invests all beings with weal and woe; it contracts 
their span of life; or it leads them to abode of Death. 

Varihamihira loo says : "f?WT^*FTfi! f TtTpT WIH ." “Tlie use of 

Greek words such as Kriya and Xsphujit, indicates that the chapters bearing 
on astrology are not very ancient. They may even be post^Varkhamihira. 
The printed teat reads which is palpaUy wrong. 

2. There was a dispute about the origin of the word Hori. Burgess 
fint thought that it was borrowed ih>m the Greeks, but later he changed his 
view. Fiowever, the word DrekJidfia or Drtfk^ u evidently a Greek word. 
In each Sign there are two Horas and three decanates. In Mesa, Mithuna, 
Sixtiha and other odd Riiis the first half or IS degree portion is presided over 
by the Sun, tvhile the noct half by the Moon. In the even Signs i.e. Vfsabha, 
Karka|aka, Kanyk etc. they are ruled by the Moon and the Sun res- 
pectivciy. There are three decanates in each Sign, the dimension of each 
being 10 degrees. In each Rail the first part or decanate is owned by the 
same Rksi and its Iwd; the second by the Rkii that is 5th from it; and the 
third by the Riii that is 9th from the original. For example, take Sign 
Cancer. Its three decanates are callM respectivdy Cancer, Scor|MO and 
Pisces. Their lords too are in order the Moca, Mars and JujMter. 

3. TriihMUa is 1/30 of a Rkii which consists of 30 degrees. So 
one TririUdmJa means one degre e . But to Hindu astrology each degree is 
not given a ruler. On the other hand these 30 d eg r ees are distributed among 
Che non-luminaries. In the odd Signs, Me^a, Mithuna etc., Man, Saturn, 
Jupiter, Mercury and Venus own in order 5®, 5®, 8®, 7® and 5®. In the even 
Signs, Taurus, Ca n cfr etc. This oixler is reversed. In other words, the first 
5® are ruled by Venus, the next 7® by Nfocury, the next S® by Jupiter 'the 
next 5® by Saturn and the last 5® by Mars. 

4. There are two printing mistakea in the text viz. for 

Mw, and ffif for The AkaksUai, (3®*20' portions of a Rkii) 

of each Sign bear the names of nine Signs and are owned by their lords. 




Notes 


767 


The first Nftviihsa of Aries is owned by Aries itself and its lord is that of 
Aries viz. Man; the second by Taurus whose loid is Venus; the third by 
Gemini ruled by Mercury; the fourth by Cancer and the Moon; the 5th by 
Leo and the Sun; the sixth by Virgo and Mercury; the 7th by Libra and 
Venus; the 8th by Scorpio and Man; and lastly the 9tb by Sagittarixu and 
Jupiter. This method should be followed in the c-jt sf of Leo and Sagittarius 
also. So it will be seen that for Mtga, SMui and Dhanus the first MartAmia 
is Meja and the last one DKanus. Similarly in the case of Vx^abhay Konyd and 
Mdcara the first Navirhu is Mdutra itself and tlie last one Kuiyk. In the 
case of Miihuna^ TuU and Xumbha the first and last ones are TiifJ and Mithuna 
respectively. In respect of the last group of Korkafakay Vxidka and A/lne, 
They are Karkafaka and MUui respectively. Herr it can be seen that every 
R&ii participates in the JVatdmfa scheroe in one way or other. Itj / triad 
of Signs the first owns the first Naviihsa, the second the middle onc» and the 
third the last Navirhsa. Thus Taurtis, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius own 
their middle or iiAh Navluhias; and Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces 
own their last Navaitiias. If a planet is posited in one and the same KMi 
and Navdmie it is said to be in VarioUamMia. 

5« The first quarter the verse is wrongly printed and should 
read The statement made here to the effect that 

Sign Mithuna is Piffhodqya (rising with its back first} is not corroborated 
by ancient authorities. On the other hand it rises bothways, because the 
male and female face each other. (See TundamenlaJs of Astrology', Page 9). 
^irfo<iq)ra or those that rise with their heads foremost are Simha, Ao^, TuM, 
Vt^ika and Kumbha. 

6. In this verse the 12 Raib are distinguished on the basis of their 
sex, xuiture, quarters they own and their habitats. For the Tint two 3 Risis 
are taken at a time and the process repeated. Thus we get four signs under 
each : Me^a, Karkataka, TuUt and Makara are MaU and MovabU; Vf^abha, 
Simha, VtSeika and Kumbha, FmaU and FixeJ; and lastly Mithuna, Kofr^, Dham 
and Msna, Eunuch and Dual. Next four Signs are taken together at a time to 
repre sen t the four cardinal points. For showing eight quarters we have to 
consider Mcfa and Vrrahha—as forming the East and Mithuna the South-East 
and so on. For knowing the habitats of the Signs one has to understand, 
their forms. For example, Aries is r epresen ted by a Earn, Taurus by a BuU, 
Gemini by a human couple, and so on. So the habitats of the 12 Signs are 
in ^der (1) Forest or Plateau, (2) Field or Meadow, (3) Bed chamber or 
village, (4) Pond, (5) Mountain cave, (6) Land with water and vegetation, 
(7) Market-place, (8) Hole, (9)Baale-fi^ (10) Forest with plenty water, 
(U) Place of potters, axul (2) Water. 

7. The octant reading .. • gives the Znd degree 

as the Sun*s higher ecaltadon point in Ahes, %vfaich is definitely %vrong. It 
is well known that that point is the lOch degree It is posuble that the manu- 
irript was illegible here. 

8. The Vargottama Aihias have already been explained under 
vene 5 supra. The Debilitation Signs of the planets are Libra, Seexpio,. 



768 


^fdrada Ptirjna 


Gancer, Piicei, Ca^mcom, Virgo and Anes. Here the readings 
If^T fmr and require emendatkA as WTl4^ WT?T Om and 

Here Murti ihould coonote the ascendant (Lagtt). 

9. The reading iwftonfwmw...' ihould be corrected as 

Hie wads Muiatik^^ and Trik^ are to be 
distinguished. The former are certain Signs where the planeb find special 
kinship and strength, while the latter are those reckoned from a particular 
Rkti or Lagna. 

10. The word here stands for the three untoward houses : 

fT^iRWf W WWPrftwfNj:* J It is to be r em embered that 

many of the words such as Kendra, Panai^iara, Apoldima, Rippha 
etc., are of foreign origin. Kendra means right angle i.e. the four 
kendras at a distance of 90^ from one another. MiAurta, AVvpd, Trfid, 
the Bnt half of Dhanus, and Kwnkha are termed human Signs; Signs Karkafaka, 
Vticikct Makar A and Mlna^ Watery \ Karkalaka^ Vfkika and Mina^ RtptUi; and 
Mifa, Vftabhay Sirkhcy the letter half of Dhanus and the Brst half of Makara 
Qyadrxkptd. Human signs are strong when they occupy the ascendant (Lagna); 
Watery ones, the 4ih house; RepiiU ones, the 7th house; and the Qyadruptd 
ones, the 10th house. 

The reading ’tjm'. should be corrected as 'sjW: 

U. The readings of the text in the second line are hopelessly 
corrupt. Hence the meanings given above regarding the presiding Deities 
of the Sun, Moon, Man and Saturn are only tentative. For another list of 
deities please refer to fundamentals cf Astrology, page 14. 


12. The reading in the text, 1 
It may be read as ; 


u wrong. 


etc. 


19. According to Varihamihira and others both Jupiter and Venus 
rule over the Brihmai>a class; the Sun and Mars over the Kyatriyas. The 
reading should be read as 4^917. 

14. The reading makes no seme. It must be ^ 

(s^) ^ (strong) There is no word for the raiments of Venus 

in this verse. is a misprint for 9^. Similarly is wrong. 

It should be tTVT 9^' 

15. Here bitter and salt tastes are asigned to the Moon and Aferj 
respectively. It should have been salt and bitter respectively. 


16. According to the rule enunciated here the Sun must have 
Jupiter, who owns the 5th and 8th houses fh>m his M01atrikoi>a, Mars owning 
4th and 9th; and the Moon owning the 12ch house, as his friends. However, 
the author gives only Jupiter. Similaiiy, for the Moon, the Sun and Mercury 
become friends. For Mars they are the Sun, Moon and Jupiter; for Mercury, 
the Sun and Venus; for Jupiter, the Sun, Moon and Man; for Venus, Mercury 
and Saturn; and for Satuni, Mercury and Venus. The reading 

should be emended as and 8l*Wll as 9199^. 

17. The reading in the Bnt half b woefully corrupt and hence it b 
impocible to correct. The muthoe*s intention has been atplained in the 



JfoliS 


769 


trvuUtion. In the second line HWTW should be rad «s Jusi 

AS nituTAl friends are determined by the rule given in the previous verse» 
even so the following rule will hdp us to find out the natural enemies 
of the planets. Here too the calculation b to be done from the planet’s 
M^trikotia R&il. The lords of the 3rd» Sth, 7th, 10th and 11th houses 
counted from the Mulatrlko^a of the planet concerned, are hb natural enemies, 
provided they come twice in ihb reckoning (in the case of those owning 2 
houses). There b an exception to ihb rule : A planet, though a naiiifoienemy 
of another, according to this rule, bccomca only a mutrol, if hb exalution house 
b owned by that planet. For example, for Mars, Saturn becomes a natural 
enemy, since the latter owns 2 houses viz. lOih and Uih from hb Mulatrikona, 
Mefa. Still he b only a neutral, as the exaltation sign of Man, Makara, is 
owned by Saturn. 

18. The reading ^ should be corrected as Tlie 

directional stnmgth b otherwbe stated tlim : Jupiter and Mercury are strong 
in the Lagna; the Sun and Mars in the lOih house; Saturn in the 7ih house; 
and Venus and the Moon in the 4th house. 

19. Planeii* strength b measured in respect of six things viz. Kdta, 

Ceffd. itfcd, Dik, Ayana and Sthdna (i.e. time, motion, exaltation, direction, 
declination and position). Here the word conjunction U used hy the author 
in the sense of iVar. The Sommer Solstice ot Dakfindyana gives strength lo 
Mercury, Saturn and the Moon, while the rest get »inrngih in the winter 
Solstice. The non^luminaries gel strength when they arc retrograde. The 
leading in the text, b corrupt. It may be read as ; 


20. In astrological works Venus b said to be strong at night. 

21. The reading must be changed to and 

to 

22. should be read as 

23. The reading should be read as ^ may 

have to be changed to artr:; b to be read as The 

last dccanatc of Taurus b called Vih^ or Bird. The first of Suhha 
and Kumbha and the middle of Tula arc called Grdhrdsya or Vulture faced. 

24. The pan of thb verse relating to mcn-ses reminds of a similar 

verse by Varihamihira : ^ J I 

25. The fim half of ihb verse b rather unimclligibic. It b fell 
that it b nothing but a paraphrase ctfthe second half of the vctk quoted above. 

26. should be read as Trikafia or trines are 

the Lagna, 5th and 9th houses. 

27. should be read as and as 


28. The reading ^ Tfffw b ulicHy corrupt. It may be corrected 

as fT BTW. ^ 

29. The rcKliflg, m should be corrected as 



770 


Ndrada Purdij^a 


30. Pregnancy lasts f<^ 10 months based on the sidereal calendar. 
Each of the months is ruled by a i^anet. The condition of the foetus will 
depend on the strength etc. of the planet ruling the month. The following 
are the rulers of the JO months in ofder : Venus, Mars, Jupiter, the 5un, 
Moon, Saturn, Mercury, the planet that owm the Lagna at impregnation, 
the Moon, and lastly the Sun. 

31. In the teat we find the reading ^ *nrt TTrfwW: which 
cannot he accepted as genuine. The original reading must have been 
iTsff 7 wtfgRf:, which means that the foetus would be happy, if Uie 
malefies do not aspect the Lagna or the Moon. 

32. In astrology the strength of Navamsas and their lords plays 
an important role. In this verse two criteria are mentioned for determining 
the sex of the child. These rules can be applied to a nativity, query or impreg¬ 
nation chart. 


33. The second half looks like a copy of Vardhamihira*s line : 

fggspiffW: Here the counting is done not 

from Me^a, but from the L^a which is first house. It is not clear as to what 
is meant by the word It may also mean, in their respective Arhias. 

34. In verse 54 Tfr* is wrong for Similarly, the 

reading should be rectified as sWfswnft. In vene 56 

stands for 

35. The reading should be read as There 

is a difiertnee between thb work and othm on astrology regarding the 
lordship of the last two months. 

36. The word *weak' here includes the condition of eclipse. The 

reading should be corrected as nfOTiTim?r: I 

37. The reading ahoxild be corrected as SfgnnTT^ 

I The second half b utterly unintellipble owing to its gambled 


words. 

38. The last line being corrupt docs not make construction easy. 
The reading is gTTT^ I It may be read as : 

The meaning given above for this portion 
is tentative. Elsewhere the conditions are given thus: When the rising 
decanate is occupied by Mars (the other conditions being the same for 
dwarfness), it will be headless, armlcas or devoid of fttu according as the 
decanate is the first, second or third (See 'Tundameotads of Astrology** 


page 118). 

39. There appears to be some mistake in the reading gtgT, 

whose sense is against astrcd^cal conventioos. Hence we may have to 
change the reading aa fiStflgT: 


40. should be changed to 


40a. In vene 66 the word gigr makes no sense. It must be 
grWT: according to the conteit. Let us say that the Moon at conception 
occupies Vffabha and her longitude is 1^25^*46*. Ihe DvidalAdiia of the 



^foUs 


771 


Moon u the nth counted from So the Moon's DvidAiamia Ri^ii 

h^pefu to be Mina. Now counting will have to be made from this 
i.e. Mina. 11 R&sis should be counted from Mina, which comes to Makara. 
So we must say that delivery is likely to occur when the Moon passes through 
Makara Rati. 


41. From vene $5 to 68 only single lines i.e. 2 quarters* are taken 

as full verses without any rhyme or reason. There Is a metrical flaw too in 
the second line. The reading # makes no sense. It may be 

corrected as Similarly IR^ should be read as iRk. 

42. The reading is wrong. It should be 

HTwUl ITTWffW. 

43. The reading WRt' should be read as 

It is suspected that the %vord *ft in this reading may 
mean Vf^abha. In the second line the substantive of the dual, 
is missing. The author must have the two inale6cs« Mars and Saturn, in mind. 
The reading, is wrong. It must be read as 

should be read as fm WZ'. 

44. should be as 

The reading, startiPFinr: ^ ^ WT* may have to be corrected as 

?T. 

45. The reading ^ should be corrected as and vz 

as 3R7. 


46. 'wlfd* should be read as It is strange (hat the 

author gives ^barren ground* as the effect of the Moon's aspect. It ought to 
be a good place of decoration or recreadon. 

47. The reading is unintelligible. If shoidd be 

read as Here too the word aRg in for is wrongly spelt 

as ^ 


48. The meaning given here is tentative. The word may 

mean, at birth, in the Lagna, in the I Ith house or the 5th So we can trana* 
late it thus as well: 'When Mars smd Saturn occupy the 11 th and when the 
ascendant is (or these two planets are) aspected by a beneBc....' Tlie 

reading RT^: should be emended as .m#: H7^:. The 

plural usage here is archaic. 

49. The reading Z should be emended as and ^ 

as ^ T**r. 

50. In the Zodiac one half is above the horizon and the other 
below it. So they are called Drtjf^rdha (visible half) and AdrSy^iha (invisible 
half). The 8th, 9th, 10th, Ulh, 12tb. and the portion of the Lagna that 
has risen come under the Visihlt Hdf. The 7th is called the Astardii or Setting 
Sign. Even in this Sign ihere are two parts as in the Lagna. 

51. According to V^uhamihira the colour or complexion corres* 

ponds to, that of the lord of the Moon’s Navim^ 

Rkii. It is posaible that thb author too means the same thing. 





772 


Ndrcda Purina 


52. Suppose the fuit decanAte of Me$a rises. Then the hnt ones 
of the 12 houses will represent in order the head, the right eye, right ear, right 
nostril, right cheek, right jaw, mouth, left jaw, left cheek, left nostril, left ear 
and the left eye. 

53. The reading should be rectified as Similarly ^ 

needs to be changed to and into 

54. The reading should be corrected into 

Ilf Here <Tir means a mole-Uke thing. Cf. LII.IO. 

55. The reading should be emended as 

56. The reading Ip^: should be read as Ip9^. 

57. The reading Is corrupt and may be corrected 

as Here %^rTf7 should be taken to mean own house 

or exaltation. 

58. Ihe reading should be emended as 

59. The reading fdfTlsilvw: should be corrected as fWrtt'T*!#:. 

f)0. The reading makes nn sense. It should be 

emended as iR?irTW3nTt; 

60a. The reader should bear in mind the fact that all the 7 planets 
cannot be exalted at the same time. For, when the Sun is exalted in Me^, 
Mercury cannot he so. A planet is said to be in Vargottama when it occupies 
the same Sign both in the Rasi chart and the ArhsaJea Chart. 

61. is grammatkally wrong. The author intends 
probably to convey tlte idea 

62. I'he printed text gives T'Idl:' which can mean only ‘defeated*. 
It may be some other word standing for some number. It must be fiRT. 
which would give the number 24. The word may yield the number 
27 which is the number of stars, or 12 which is the number of Ra^is. 

63. After subtracting the planet's longitude from its highest exal¬ 

tation, see if the result is less than 6 Rasis. If so, subtract it from 12 Rafis 
and reduce the result to minutes and multiply it by the planet's years. Hicn 
divide the product by 21,600. The quotient irprcsents years etc. contributed 
by that planet. The reading Nt should be read/as qt 

64. The reading is a mistake for qr 

64a. According to the plan given in/the previous verses for putting 
benehc lines in the Asfakavarga chart for each planet, we have to view the 
different houses containing bencfic dots from the point of the planet concern¬ 
ed. For example^ the Sun is good in transit in the 3rd, 6th, 10th, and llth 
from one's natal Moon (Risi). If these also happen to contain more than 
4 benefic lines, the effect of the Sun's transit through these houses will be 
excellent. 

65. The translation of the second half is tentative. 

66. The text invariably gives (Moon) for amt The reading 

is corrupt and has been corre cte d as ^^14. 



Jfotes 


773 


67. The reading WtWnTTO: b utterly corrupt It should 
ht read somewhat as 

68. The reading nWI: OTT: I b corrupt. 

It may be corrected as 1 

69. The reading would mean the 3rd, ascendant and 

the 11th house. 

70. should be read as ^ ‘^11^’ as 

71. As usual the readings are corrupt: Instead of putting «l4lfU: 
the editor of the Puriu has given us the reading 9WW:. sSlmilarly 

should be read as 

72. should be read as and VPTT as ^vit. 

73. ir^ iz should be read as 

74. should be read as and Htiivntl) as 

75. is unintelligible. should be read as T99[ifltr: 

76. The reading «nrr ^.. may have to be read as Vff : 
ftrTRff. 

76a. According to other authorities P6iqyogc does not lead to good 
character. 

77. should be read as 

78. The reading fAw; toHw: possibly stands siat Here 

means Latus, 


79. Here too the readings are very bad : The eKpreuion irTTP^ 

must be corrected as should be read as 

*<A*nr5^ftSwniij'. gn stands fw W:. b to be read as iTRt. 

80. The irotsfPITW b to be changed to 

to ^^tTTT; and to 

81. should be read as 

aU^\w..* 


82. The expression may have to be read as 

In the last condition we can also add the condition viz. when the Moon, 
bfing posited in the Arhia oj Mars or the Sun, b aspected 

83. W should be read as fracT. 

84. should be read as 4# 


85. It b strange that the author has omitted Sign Mina (Pisces) 
while giving the effects of the various natal S^ns. 

86. {aU is to be changed to to 

and b 

87. The reading may stand for In that case 

under 4 we have to take the meaning a» **]ot of %realih.” 

68. The reading, WWWl makes no sense. 

So It has to br read as The sr^VW or 



774 J^Srada Purdt^ 

triad of trouUea consists of and UtMAtv. The reading 

ifWrfrW^ should be read as 

89. should be taken as and ^^vnVTlf as 

90. The reading AouW be changed lo^JwWprtWTT:. 

91. should be read as ^RtnVTI^. to 

92. The meaning! given under Kwnbha and Mbia are tentative* 

irfinr^ should be read as ^TFWrft^ as a»d as 

^r^Efr:. 

93. atTTgh^r....ftlfinrtiTP^ thwld be read as arrrftt^ 

94. ITV should be emended as 

95. ffrdm should be read as fvvt fT, and f^ as 

96. should be read as and as 

97. inwtf4?Rfl is to be read as STTWlftlRft. The expression 
vvould mean, vanquished by enemies^ but the author means 

the opposite of (hat and had to resort to thb expression for the sake of metre. 

98. is to be read as and mfiral as 

•jif. 

99. Tliese verses contain many unintelligible readings: 

should be read as as (tentatively), 

is a hard nut to crack; it may be read as it4 H?: 

(tentative) or ^ (or ^ stands for 7, the meaning of 

being—'one enjoying sexual pleasures with an excellent damsel^ 
is metrically an impossibility and should be read as 

100. Read tntff ^ »nd troft m ilroraY 

101. ?r should be reawi as gWTW:; 5®TOtt as ^it ift; ftyifipn^. 

as (though the metre becomes iaulty); and posubly 

as 9^. 

102. should be read as and tR^ ^ as or 

103. The reading is highly corrupt. It m^ht be 

taken as is to be read as 

104. ^ should be read as 

105. TO: TOT: should read as TOf: TOIT. and as TOWf. 

105a. The fint line should be read as Y. 

106. wA ^ould read as azid fisvrt^T ^ ^ fmiwvqfd. 

107. should read as The reading 4tT^t|fTOPf 

is unintelligible. It may be taken as The meaning given above 

is tentative. Read V as 1^. 

106. should read as 

109. There are three yogas vis. Vesi^ Visi and Ubh^acarft when there 




Jfoks 


775 


Are pUnets (cautpt the Moon) in the 2tid, I2th and both rcspectivdy. 
(Vide ‘TundameDtah of Aitrolc^'* p. 149). 

no. The reading should be emmded aa 

Here W meaiUi head. 

111. Read as at^^TWWHfRtr. I 

% 

112. should read as ftdfijill 

US. The translation given above of verse 279 Is tentative. Another 
meaning of verse 280 is The wife would have defective limbs, if the Sun 
and Venxii together occupy the 5th or 9th house. If Saturn Is posited in the 
Lngna and Venus in Sandhi. K^fia being one of the synonyms of Saturn. 

114. ^1^ should read as and as 

115. should be read as 94^. 

116. should read as 9^^:. 

117. 0^ V should be read as 

4 % 

116. ^ should read as The expression is used «V«n^: 

for metrical necessity. 

119. should read as 

120. *9IW Mauwl^tl’ must be wrong. It should be read as 9m 

and as 'MNiyiMld 

121. This verse appears so be a repetition of verse 297. Here the 

word ?T makes no sense. It may be The translation is only 

tentative. 

122. should read as 

123. The word for or 

124. reminds us of the Brhajjataka expression. 

125. fsnftsnA: should read as 

126. ar^tniT shoidd read as 

127. should read as 

128. The reading is highly 

emupt; 9M41H should read as The corrupt portion ml^t mean 

the following :—When the lord of the 8th house occupies It and ti aspected 
by bcnefics» the native's death takes place in a peaceful and ideal manner, 

129* The ready is wrong both metiicaUy and grammatically. 

So it should be corrected as 

130. should be emended as and 

tn as *i#l^ <4)*^ 5 wnrt 9 ^ 911144 \ 

131. 41^ Th should be read as 

132. should read 9mvi4l4; and as Rf^ipr. The 

expression k hard to undersuad. It must be something 

or llftnr: In that case It may be read as vftnr meaning, 

from the ffword. 



776 


J^drada Purd^ 


133. ihould be read as and as 

134. ^RT: should be read as OTfk^^WTO:. 

135. should be read as 

136. should be read as as If 

be correct, we may have to conacme it thus : The weak Moon in the 4tb 
house without any other planet in it. should be read as 

and as iT^fifirret:, as ^^*41^11^ 

tldiilWW. 

137. should read as Vt. 

138. 1 ?^ should read as 

139. should read as f^T. 

140. The reading Is unintelligible. It may have to 

be read as 

141. "f!TWir*’ is to be read as must be 

142. VWntRT: should be read as nrf^:. 

143. arer^ should read as JTreR^Rn ITT^; awffl as ; 

and as aiwiiti^. 

144. ihould read as is highly 

corrupt. It may be something like 

145. is to be read as ftTOlWT. 

146. The second half which reads thus i ^ 

n*iniwn is woefully corrupt and obscure. It may be corrected as 
“fWWrtnrfhf m ?T«T or so. Another interpretation of this 

line proposed is : **If the Lagna at query is very strong, then the natal 
ascendant may be a sign which is a trine (Trikona) to this Lagna; or it 
may correspond to... .*’ 

147. In verse 346 'wHWTT’ may be MHahqqr The reading 

is difBcult to decipher. Some tentative meaning has been proposed 
Above. probably stands for 

148. WWq 8^iHfll should read as 4imv^^‘lfdfll. In the folbwing 
verses, from 349 to 365, the characteristics of the 36 decanates are described. 

149. may be or ^ifiwqTT which would 

mean : Jolly and very cunning; the Utter may be pre fer red. 

150. ^ould be read as and ^<.qqi8 as HTTO:. 

151. ITT^rTf^: may be read as HT^TTfiRT: or HWf^; 31Rf^ as 
and wmft as 

152. iqr may be qpfA or as it is; as fqgqrvff 

153* is unintelligible; *qqm|k^ may also be read as «nriq^; 

and should be read as 





777 


154. ftr# should read as ^ as Wi; as ?nt- 

af>d ftr^rW as Rr^f^. 

155. fWW: may be9T^. V^r^HT: or 

may be or ftp^TTOWf^'V; and may be 


156. «^URWI may br or (wUh burnt cloihrs) or 

TOT?|S|WI (seated on a burnt seat). 

157. rtlw may be CTIfl*{; t^dl^VTt fiwt WT: should be read as i??TT* 

WTT: fWTWT^ (or f^TOW); wrRfU^ is wrong for qdfaviq. In tlir text 
there arc no lines to describe the three decanates of Mina. 'Hic omission must 
have been due to the 8cribe*s inadvertence. 



CHAPTER FIFTYSIX 


Natural Astrology 

Sonandana said : 

U2a. Lord of ihiytar etc, (In one year), the Sun transits 
into (the twelve) rUHs (or signs of the Zodiac) Aries {Mesa) 
etc.^ during the (twelve) months beginning with Caitra etc.^ The 
King of the year is (the lord of) the week-day of the first day 
of the bright fortnight of the month of Caitra, The Commander 
of the year is (the lord of the week-day on which) the Sun 
transits into the sign of Aries and the Lord of Vegetation is 
(the lord of the weekday) on which the Sun transits into the 
sign Cancer, Kanaka. 

2b-3. As the Lord of (he year, the Sun is of middling benefit 
while the Moon would be extremely beneficial. Mars is not bene¬ 
ficial but Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are highly beneheiah 
Saturn is least beneficial of all. In due consideration of the 
strength or otherwise of these (planeu) should be indicated the 
general benefice of the year. 

SUN: RAVICARA 

4. Significance of snn^spots. Spots on the Sun of the shapes 
of a rod, corpse, crow and pillar, respectively, portend, (to the 
king), disease, turbulance, (trouble from) thieves and loss of 
wealth. 

5. (Sun-spots of the shape of) the umbrella, chaurie, 
banner, rain-cloud, smoke and sparks, portend the destruction 
of the land. 

6. Osage: If these spots arc, respectively, white, red, 
yellow or black in colour they will afflict the four castes Brak^ 
mins, K^atriyas, Vaityas and Sodras. If they appear in two or 
three of these colours, they will afflict the royalty. 

7. Significance (f the Sun's beams. If the (upward) beams 
emanating from the top of the Sun*s dbc are reddish, the com¬ 
mander of the army will die, if the beams be yellow, the prince, 
if white, the chief priest, and if variegated the people. 



II.56.8d-18 


779 


8a. If the downward beams are dark, they foretell disaster 
to the king and if reddish yellow, to the clouds (indicating rain¬ 
lessness) . 

8b-9. Thi SuiCs hue. The Sun is auspicious in HHra^ the 
cool season, if copper*red, in spring if saffron-hued, in summer 
if greyish, in the rainy season if vari^ated, in autumn if lotus- 
red, and in winter if crimson-coloured. 

10. If the Sun be yellowish, bright-white and crimson, 
respectively, in winter, rainy season and summer, it portends, 
O sage: diseases, drought and calamities. 

11. A sun appearing in a rainbow causes a fight between 
kings. And, if the Sun appears with hue of the hare’s blood, 
there will ensue shortly a world war. 

12. Ifthe Sun appears with the hue of the peacock’s feather, 
there will be no rains for twelve yean. A moon-Hke Sun will 
cause the replacement of the king of the land. 

13. If the Sun is darkish, there would be fear from locusts 
and, if greyish like ash, there would be contrywide distress. 
When a hole is seen in the Sun's disc an emperor will die. 

14. Orb of thi Sun. (The Sun*s orb) appearing like a pot 
will cause famine (in the country); if like an arch it will cause 
the destruction of the capital; and, if like an umbrella, the 
destruction of the country. A split Sun will cause the death of 
the monarch. 

15. If at sunrise or at sunset, there occur (against the 
sun's disc) lightning, meteor and thunder, then, one can for tell 
the death of the king or flght between kings. 

16. If for a fortnight or half a fortnight, the Sun and the 
Moon appear with a halo around {pcnvefa)f both day and nighl, 
it will cause the replacement of the king, which will happen, 
also if they appear crimson at rising and setting (during the 
said period). 

17. If the Sun is obscured at sunrise and at sunset by 
clouds having the shape of weapons, there will be war; and, (if 
those clouds have the shape of) sinful animab like the camel, 
the war would be terrible. 

THE MOON: CANDRACARA 

18. In the signs Pbces and Aries, the crescent Moon with 



780 


N^oda PurSs}a 


the southern horn higher (than the northern horn) is beneficent, 
while in the signs Gemini and Capricorn, the Moon with the 
northern horn higher is auspicious. 

I9-20a. In the signs Aquarius and Taurus, the Moon is 
auspicious if the horns are equal, and in Cancer and Sagit* 
tarius, if they look like arrows. In the signs Scorpio and Leo 
(the Moon) is auspicious, if it has the shape of a bow, and in the 
signs Libra and Vii^o, if it has the shape of a javelin. In the 
reverse positions, the Moon causes famine and war. 

20b*2ta. When the Moon courses south of the asterisms* 
Purvasadha, Uttarasadha, Mula and Jyestha there will occur 
Ares, drought and the destruction of forests and (the appearance 
of) snakes. 

2Ib-22a. (The time when) Moon counes south of the 
astcrisms Vi^kha and Anuradhi is inauspicious; and its cours¬ 
ing north of the asterisms Magha {pitrdaiv^fya) and Visakha 
{dvidaiva)^ is medially beneheiat. 

22b-23a. With reference to auspicious Moon, the six as* 
tcrisms from Revatl (Pau$i^a) are (called) ^Conjunction to be* 
{apTdpya-yoga) ^ the twelve asterisms from Ardra {Rudra) as ‘In 
conjunction* {Madhya-yoga) and the nine asterisms Jyestha 
{Vasava) are called 'Past conjunction* {Atita-yogo). 

23b-24a. The ‘half*asterisms* {Ardha-tirakas) are Bhara^i 
(}^( 2 ma)Jyes;ha {Indra), Asle^ {AkUa)^ Satabhisak {ToytSa) 
and Svati {Marut); the ‘more-than-half asterisms* {AdhyardhcF^ 
tdrakas) are: Dhruva, Punarvasu (i4iA*/i)and \\ik}L\ih{Dvidevd)\ 
the remaining asterisms are Tull* (iSirm^). 

24b-25a. The Moon with its south horn higher (than 
the north horn) is extremely beneficial and that with the north 
horn higher is generally auspicious. The illuminated portion 
decreases and increases alternatively.^ 

25b*26a. The Moon with a broad orb is a harbinger of 
plenitude, while that with a narrow orb would cause loss of 
wealth. If it appears to hang with face down, there will be a 
threat from weapons and if (elongated) like a rod, there would 
be disputes. 

26b-27a. If its horns or orb are crossed by Man and other 
planets, effects such as destruction of welfare, wealth, rains, 
kings and people, will follow. 



IL56.27b-J8a 


781 


MARS : KUJACARA 

27b-28a. When, (after retrogression), Mars has risen in 
an asterism, which thus forms its ^risingasterism*, (uda^a^nakfatra) 
if it again goes into retrogression in the 7th, 8th or 9lh asterism 
counted from its ^rising asterism*, such a retrogression is called 
Usna^ then will occur distress to people and damage by fire. 

28b«29a. The retrogression at the lOth, llth and 12th 
asterism is called Airumukha. It keeps off rains and destroys 
crops. 

29b-30a. When the retrogression of Mars is in the 13th or 
14th asterism, it is called Therein will occur the 

destruction of vegetation and of the rains. 

30b«31a. The retrogression on the iSth or 10th asterbm 
is JiudhirSnana, Mars will then cause famine, starvation and 
diseases. 

31b-32a. In the 17th and the ISth, the retrogression is 
called Musala. It will be attended with famine and will be ter* 
rible on account of heavy loss of wealth and grains. 

32b«33a. If Mars rises in the asterisms of Purva or Uttara 
Phalgun! and retrogrades in Uttara^adha {Vaiivad^va) and sets 
in RohinI (Caturdsydrk^a), it destroys three worlds. 

33b-34a. Mars which rises in Sravana and retrogrades in 
Pusya is inauspicious to kings in general and will threaten (es¬ 
pecially) the kings of that direction in which Mars rises. 

34b-35a. If Mars courses through the (four) stars of the 
Maghi constellation and retrogrades in the same constellation, 
it will cause f^r from drought and weapons and destroy the 
Pandya king. 

35b-36a. If Mars crosses the asterisms Maha (pitf)i Vii^ha 
{Dvidaiva) and RohinI {Dhdtr)^ it will then cause famine, death 
and disease. 

36b-37a. If Mars courses through the three Uttaras^ (viz., 
UUaraphalgunii UUara^Hf&dhaznd Ultara^bhadrapada)^ RohinI, Mtila 
(A'oirrttf), SravaM and jyestha (Indrabkd) or courses south of 
Rohi(ti, it will cause drought. 

37b-36a. Mars courting north of any constellation will 
be auspicious; while coursing south thereof, it will be inauspicious 
and cause dissen cions amongst the people. 



782 


ffdrada PurdfjA 


MERCURY : BUDHACARA 

38l^39a. If Mercuty rises, Being afflicted by a p>ortent 
it will cause drought, fear from fires, calamities and 
war between kings. 

39b-40a. If Mercury courses across the asterisms Dhani* 
stha {Vasu ), Srava^ {yai$fjava)y Uttari^dhd {Vaiiva)^ 
Mrgafir^ {Indu) and Rohinl {Dhitr) it will threaten with dis* 
tress and drought. 

40b-4la. If Mercury is seen among {five) constellations 
fram Ardra to Magha, it will then threaten with famine, war, 
disease and drought. 

4Ib-42a. Mercury traversing across the six constellations 
beginning with Hasta will cause wcliare, prosperity, health and 
destruction of diseases. 

42b^3a. Mercury coursing across the constellations 
Uctara-bhadrapada {Ahirbudhnya) ^ Uttara*phalguni {Aryama)^ 
Krttika {Agnaya) and BharanI (Tama) will bring distress to 
physicians and sea trade. 

43b-44a. If Mercury crosses the three constellations 
beginning with Purva*, Purva-phalguni, Purva*'a^dha 

and Purva-bhadrapada, it will then threaten people with 
starvation, weapons, fire and robbers. 

44b. The motion of Mercury in the constellations 
BharanI (Tdmya) , Krttika (Agni) , Rohini {Dhdtr) and Sv&ti 
(Vdyavya) is said to be Prdkrta (natural). 

45. In the constellations Ardra {Raudra) , Mrga^iras 
(Indu) y AilcM (Sarpa) and Magha {PUryd) , its motion is called 
Mitra (mixed) and in the constellations Purva**'phalguni {Bhdgya) 
Uttara-phalgunl {Aiyamd) y Pusy^ (Ijyc) and Punarvasu(^ditt), 
its motion is termed Saltkfiptd (concise). 

46. The motion amongst the constellations Purva^bhiul* 
rapada {AJa-eara^)y Uttara-bhadrapada {Akirbudhny^i) is called 

(Sharp), tcgdnta is the term for the motion of Mercury 
in the constellations Uttara^dha {Viiva)f Purvas&dha {Ambu) 
and Mula. 

47. Its motion is called Chore (Cruel) in the constel¬ 
lations Sravana (Hari), Citrli (7>J;/fa), (Pissa) an 

Satabhifak (VaruQa). Papa (sinful) is the name of its motion 



II.56.48-57a 


785 


through the constellations Vi$akh& {Ind^dgni)% Anuradh&( Afford) 
and Hasta {Mdrtani^). 

48. Mercury which has risen with one or the other of 
the motions Prdkrta etc. will be visible for as many days as it 
will be invisible (later). 

49. Mercury (completes the motions Prdkrta etc.), in 
order, in the following number of days : {Prdkrta) 45 (Mifra) 
30, (Safiksipta) 22, (Tikp^) 20, (Togdnia) 9, {Ghora) 15 and 
{Pdpa) 11. 

50. Mercury, in its Prdkrta motion, brings welfare, health 
and prosperity. During the motions Mitra and Sa^^ipta^ it is 
of mixed benefit, and, during the other (motions), it produces 
rain. 

51. If Mercury remains visible during the months 
Vai^kha. Sravana, Pausa and A^dha it will bring distress to 
the world; during the other (months) it is beneficial. 

52. However, if it is visible during the months of AMna 
{he) and Karttikii {OTja)^ there will ^ fear from weapons, 
famine and hre. If Mercury rises with the brilliance of silver 
and crystal, it will be most auspicious. 

JUPITER : GURUCARA 

53. (In the case of Jupiter), (wo constellations make up 
the months Karttika {Orja) etc.; however, three constellations 
make up the fifth, twelfth and eleventh months. The year should 
be named by the constellation in which Jupiter rises.* 

54. The years Karttika and Margaiirsa the 

Jovian years in which Jupiter rises in the constellations Kfttikit 
and Mrgasira, respectively) are inauspicious to people, the years 
Pau^ and Magha are auspicious, and, the years Phalguna and 
Madhu (Caitra) would be of medium benefit. 

55*56a. The year Madhava {Vaiidkha) is auspicious 
while Jyes(ha is of medium benefit. The year Suci {Afdifha) is, 
again, of medium benefit but Nabhas {Stdvar^) is extremely 
beneficial, while Bhadrapada is so at some places and for some 
people. The year {Aivina) is most auspicious. Thus has been 
stated the effect of the different months. 

56b«57a. Jupiter traversing to the north of the asterisms 
is productive of welfare, health and prosperity. If otherwise 



784 


}fdTQda Furdf^a 


traversing south) it will have the opposite effect. If it traverses 
through (the asterisms), it will have mixed effect. 

57b«58a. Jupiter having the hues—yellow, fire-bright, 
dark, green and red, will threaten creatures respectively with 
disease, arson, loot, weapons and missiles. 

58b*59a. Jupiter, if smoke^hucd, will cause drought. If 
it is sighted during day, it will cause the death of the king or 
the destruction of the country. 

59b«60d. The constellations Rohini and Kfttika are said 
to be the ‘body’ of the year. The two A^dhas, {piz>, Purva and 
Uttara) form its ‘nipple*. Ardra is its ‘heart’ and Magha, its 
‘flower’. 

60b*61. If the‘body’ (of the year) comes into conjunc* 
tion with a ‘cruel’ planet, there will be fear from famine, Are 
and wind; if the ‘nipple’ (is attacked), there will be fear from 
starvation; if the ‘flower’, roots and fmits will be destroyed; and 
if the ‘heart’, destruction of crops will follow. On the other hand, 
if the conjunction is with auspicious (planets), the results also 
will be auspicious. 

62-64. (The following are the effects, in order, when) 
Jupiter traverses the 27 asterisms commencing with Magha: 
Increase in crops; Health of the people; War; Food; Drought; 
Calamities; Distress to brahmins; Great happiness to cows, to 
kings; and to women. Quiet rain; Rain of snakes; Welfare; 
Rejoicing; Great Wealth; Prosperity; Destruction of the country; 
Torrential rains; Friendliness; Disease; Freedom from fear; 
Threatened disease; Vegetation, Rain; Disease; Grain; and 
Invisibility of the skies. 

VENUS : SUKRACARA 

65. Three lanes (pitti) each of Venus have to be con¬ 
ceived, situated, resp>ectively, north, middle and south (ofthe 
Sun’s path). The lanes have to be reckoned from the asterism 
Asvini {d<israbhd)y at the rate of three asterisms each. 

66. Thus will be formed nine lanes (pf^Au) which are 
termed, respectively, {\)Mgay{i\)Ibkaf(iii)Airdvata, (iv)Vr;aMay 
(v) Co, (vi) Jara^ava, (vii) Mrga^ (viii) Aja^ (ix) Dahana, 

67. Venus, traversing the three northern lanes produces 
the plenitude of grains, wealth, rains and vegetation. 



IL56.68a.78 


785 


68a. In the three middle lanes»(it causes medium effects 
in these (matters) and in the three southern lanesthe effects 
in all cases are completely adverse. 

68b-69. Jupiter traversing across the five astcrisms begin* 
ing with Magha (Pitr) produces rain, and so does it in the 
western direction while traversing the three as ter isms beginning 
with Sv&ti. Conversely, drought results. However, if it is in con¬ 
junction with Mercury, there will be rain. 

70. If Venus rises or sets on the eighth or fourteenth day 
of the dark fortnight, or on the full moon day the land will be 
flooded. 

71. If both Jupiter and Venus be in the seventh sign 
(Libra) and later pass on to the eastern lane, they will cause 
drought, famine and war. 

72. If Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn, precede 
Venus, they will cause, respectively, war, whirlwind, famine 
and drought. 

73. Venus is productive of plenty while traversing the 

astcrisms Purvasadha Anuradha (Mitra), Citara- 

phalguni {Arjramd), Ai]c^ (^^0 dndjye^ha {Indra), In Mula, 
it threatens with hunger, weapons and drought, and in Uitara* 
bhadrapada (Ahirbudhnya) and Rcvatl it produces fear. 

SATURN : SANICARA 

74. Saturn coursing amongst the astcrisms Sravana, Svati 
{Anila) Hasta, Ardra, Bharanl and Purvaphalguni (Bhdgya) 
produces for people plenitude, health and vegetation. 

75-77. (In the asterismal conception) reckoned from the 
astcrism in which Saturn rises: One in the head: (the next) 
three in the face; two in the vital parts,’ two in the eyes, five 
stars in the heart; four in the left hand; three in the left leg and 
three stars in the right leg, and four stars in the right arm, the 
occurrence of Saturn (in the said nine limbs) will produce, 
respectively: Disease, profits,misfortune, profits, peace, imprison¬ 
ment, difficulties, exalted pilgrimage, and acquirement of 
wealth, in order. 

78. When Saturn is retrograde, the effects are also 
retrograde. That is, the effects arc in order for the right motion 



786 N&raM Purd^ 

(of the planet) and when it is &st (in retrograde motion)» the 
effects are in the reverse order. 

SHADOW OR DRAGON’S HEAD ; RAHUCCHAyA 

79. The slow-moving (Rahu), is the demon’s head which 
had been cut off by Vis^u’s discus^ but which attained immor¬ 
tality on account of its having tasted ambrosia and so was raised 
to planethood. 

80. Through the power of a boon conferred on him by 
the Creator^ Rahu eclipses, at the syzygics, the Sun and the 
Moon, on account of latitude (vikfepa) and declination (avanaii). 

81-62a. Once in six months the possibility of eclipses 
should be checked. There are seven Lords of the syzygics, who 
have been functioning from the commencement of the aeon 
(kalpa). They are Brahma, Indu, Indra, Kubera, Varuna, Agni 
and Yama. 

82b-83. (If an eclipse occurs) in the syzygy, of which 
Brahma is the lord, there will be prosperity for cattle, vegetation 
and the twicebom. Similar is the effect besides trouble to 
brahmins, when Indu (Soma) is the overlord of the syzygy. 
When Indra is the lord, there will be enmity between kings, 
calamity and destruction of vegetation. 

84. During the lordship of Kubera, there will be loss of 
wealth to the wealthy; there will also be increase in grains. 
During Vanina’s lordship, there will be distress for the kings, 
but peace for others. 

85. During Agni’s lordship of the syzygies, there will be 
plenty of rains, increase in vegetation and peace. During the 
lordship of Yama over the syzygies, there will be drought, loss 
of crops and adversity. 

86. If an eclipse occurs before the computed time, there 
will be destruction to crops and fierce battles amongst kings, (if 
it occurs) aiRer (the computed time) there will be destruction of 
flowers, fear and loss of crops. 

87. If eclipses of both the Sun and the Moon occur during 
the same month, there will be enmity amongst the rulers of the 
land, loss of wealth and absence of rains. 

88. If the rising or setting Sun or Moon is eclipsed, the 
destruction of kings and grains will result; if (in such cases), 



11.56.89-99 


787 


the Sun and the Moon arc eclipsed completely^ they will cause 
starvaiion, disease and arson. 

89. An eclipse during the northward course of the Sun 
(sautnydyana) is destructive of royalty and brahmins and that in 
the southern course is destructive of the other (castes), Kahu 
observed in the four directions, reckoned from the north will 
destroy (the four castes), brahmin etc., in that order. 

90. There arc ten types of immersion, and, in (he same 
manner, ten types of cmci^encc as well. These cannot be 
properly identified even by Gods; then, what of ordinary men? 

91-92a. Having derived the true positions of planets by 
calculations, one should cogitate about their respective rates of 
motion (edra). Rate of planetary motion {grahaedra) is (he 
means of ascertaining auspicious and inauspicious times. Hence, 
the wise should strive to ascertain those times. 

TAIL OF THE DRAGON : KETUCARA 

92b-93a. The rising and setting ofoimcis (Ketu^s) are 
in tlie form of forebodings to men. They are of three types, 
Divya (‘Divine’), Aniarik:ia ^Atmosphcricar, and Bhauma 
(‘Earthly’) and yield aaspicious and inauspicious fruits. 

93b-95a. The Antarik^a ones arc said to occur in the 
shap>c of sacriBcial flags, missiles, houses, chariots, trees and 
elephants, and, also, of the shape of posts, javelins and hooks. 
The Divya types occur in the asterisms and the Bhauma ones on 
the earth. A comet {Ketu) , though really one, appears in differ¬ 
ent shapes, to destroy creatures on the earth, 

95b-96. As many days as a comet continues to be visible 
in one or the other of its different shapes, its effect will extend 
over so many months; and, as many months (as it is visible, its 
effect will extend over so many) years. The ‘Divine* comets 
continue to be effective for a liie-time. 

97. A comet which is short, resplendent, fair or white 
causes rain, A tall comet sets in a short time and causes drought. 

98. A comet of the shape of a rainbow brings ill luck, 
and one like a spear with two, three or four points is said to 
destroy the land. 

99. Resplendent comets of the from of a gem, garland, or 
gold, rising in the east or west, are injurious to kings. 



788 


^{(irada Puray^a 


100. Comets having the hue of the (red) batuibUka 
flower, blood {k^ataja) , parrot’s beak etc., arc born of Fire and 
are (as destructive as Are). 

101. The cornels bom of the Earth have the glaze of 
water or oil, and arc circular; they cause starvation and fear. 
White comets, born of the Moon, bring about prosperity and 
peace. 

102. Brahmadaysi^^ the comet, bom of Brahm’i, is thrcc- 
hued and three-homed and is known to raze down the entire 
population (of a country). 

103. The white comets that show up in the north-cast 
arc bom of Bhirgava(Venus) and are harbingers of ill luck. The 
two-horned comets, which are born of the ‘Slow-moving’ 
(Saturn) and are called Kanaka, also bring ill luck. 

104. The comets called Vikaca-s, bom of Jupiter, arc 
inauspicious even if they occur in the south. The liny while 
comets, born of Mercury, threaten with robbers and disease. 

105. The Mars-bom comets, called Kutikuma^Sy red-hued 
and javelin-like, arc harbingers of ill luck. However, the Firc-lKirn 
comets called VUvarUpa-s and of the hue of Are, arc prodticers 
of happiness. 

106. The darkish comets, called Arufia^Sj bom of the 
Sun, are inauspicious. However, the star-shaped comets born 
of Venus bring auspiciousness. 

107. A comet which occurs in the constellation of 
Krttika, causes the destruction of the people, while one seen 
over a palace, tree or hill causes the destruction of the king. 

108. The comet called Kaumuda, resembling a lily, brings 
prosperity but the comet called Avartak^tUy with three horns 
{trihrak)f is inauspicious if it rises at dusk. 

THE YEAR : SAMVATSARA 

109. Measttres of time and their use. Measures of time are 
nine, being, Brakmay Deva^ Manu^ Pittya^ Saura, SdvanOy Cdndray 
Ark^a and Guru. 

110. From among these nine measures, practical reckon¬ 
ing is done only through five. The practical use of each is set 
out here. 

111. The motion of the planets is reckoned through the 



11.56.112a-123b 


789 


solar measure {saura^mina). The reckoning of the rainy season 
and pregnancy of women are reckoned through the civil 
measure {savana^mdM), 

112a. (Times for) rains and the pregnancy, of clouds 
are reckoned through the siderial measure (n^^tra-mana). 

112t>! 13a. Times for setting out on a pilgrimage {ydtfA) 
marriage, religious fasts and tonsure, lords of the tiihi (lunar 
day) and the year, the day of the syzygies, setting up a house, 
observance of religious fasts etc., are all fixed through the lunar 
measure {edndra^mino), 

113b-114. Tkiyear. The years etc. arc reckoned 

on the basis of the Jovian measure {Curu^mdne). A year 
by each measure is made up of 12 months of that measure. The 
yean Prabhava etc. are measured off by the mean motion of 
Jupiter. 

115-120. (The sixty Jovian yean are) : (1) Prabhava, 
(2) Vibhava, (3)Sukla, (4) Pramoda, (5) Prajapati, (6) Angi- 
ras, (7) Srlmukha, (8) Bhava, (9) Yuva, (10) Dhata, 
(11) Isvara, (12) Bahudhanya, (13) Pramathi, (14) Vikrama, 
(15) Vfsa, (16) Citrabhanu, (17) Subhanu, (18) Tarana, 
(19) Parthiva, (20) Vyaya, (21) Sarvajit, (22) Sarvadhari, 
(23) Virodhi, (24) Vikrta, (25) Khara, (26) Nandana, 
(27) Vijaya, (28) Jaya, (29) Manmatha, (30) Durmukha, 
(31) Hemalamba, (32) Vilamba, (33) VUcarl, (34) Sarvari, 
(35) Lava, (36) Subhakrt, (37) ^bhana, (38) Krodhi, 
(39) Visvavasu, (40) Parabhava, (41) Plavanga, (42) Kllaka, 
(43) Saumya, (44) Sadh^a^, (43)Virodhakit, (46}Paribhavi, 
(47) Pramadi, (48) Ananda, (49) Rak^sa, (50) Anala, 
(51) Pingala, (32) Kalayukta, (53) Siddhartha, (54) Raudra, 
(55) Durmati, (56) Dundubhi, (57) Rudhirodgari, (58) Rak- 
tak^, (59) Krodhana, and (60) Kfaya. 

121a. These sixty years have, all, effects according to 
their nomenclature. 

I21b«123a. Five years make up a Tuga; thus» there are 
I2yugas (in a Jovian cycle). Their lordsarc, in order: (l)Vi$ou, 
(2) Brhaspati (Devapurohita), (3) Purandara, (4) liOhitai 
(5) Tvaitr, (6) Ahirbudhnya, (7) Pitrs, (8) Vilve-devas, 
(9) Sail, (10) Indragni, (II) Alvins and (12) Bhaga. 

123b. The lords of the diBerent yean of the are: 


790 J^drada Purdi^ 

(1) Agni, (2) Ina or Surya, (3) Indu or Candra, (4) Vidhi or 
Brahma, and (5) Isvara or Siva. 

124. One should announce the ciTects (of a year) only 
after fully ascertaining (and balancing) the strength and weak* 
ness of the lords of the year, commander-tn'^chief and the lord 
of vegetation and also the motion of the planets at the time. 

125. Utiardyana and Daknndyana. Reckoning from the 
commencement of Capricorn, six months, in the solar measure 
constitute UiUirdycn^ (the northward course of the Sun); this 
is also the day time of the gods. (The six months) beginning 
from cancer is Dakfirdiyana (southward course of the Sun) and 
that forms the night (of the gods). 

126-127a. During Uttardyana should be performed all 
such auspicious rites as the first entry into the house, marriage, 
consecration of idols, ritual tyir^ of the girdle made oimudja 
grass, sacrifices etc. {yajfiddi). During Daksindyana is to be done 
all inauspicious acts. 

127b-128. Tki siosans. Two months each, as reckoned 
from Mfigha constitute the (six) seasons Siiira etc. Thus, during 
uitardyam occur (the three seasons) Siiira (cool), Vasanta 
(Spring) and Grifma (hot), commencing from capricorn. And, 
during dak^indyana occur (the three seasons) Varfd (rainy), 
Sarad (autumn) and Hemanta (winter). 

129, The months. Lunar months arc reckoned up to the 
end of the new moon and solar months from Saikkfdnti t.s., 
entry of the Sun into the relevant signs of the Zodiac). In 30 
days would one revolution of the Moon be completed, as also 
one siderial {ndk^atreC) month. 

130-13la. The names of the 12 months from Caitra are, 
in order : (1) Madhu, (2) M^hava, (3) Sukra, (4) Suci, 
(5) Nabha, (6) Nabhasya, (7) (8) Grja, (9) Saha, 

(10) Sahasyaka, (11) Tapa and (12) Tapasyaka. 

13 lb-132a. That constellation in which the full moon 
occurs in any month , that month is named after that constel¬ 
lation. That full moon is also named with (the name of the 
constellation tacked to it). 

132b-133a. Tktfortnights. The two fortnights, iukla 
(bright) and krft^a (dark) of the month arc termed daiva (per¬ 
taining to the gods*) and piirya (pertaining to the manes), he 



n.56.133b-145a 


791 


two are specified for the performance of auspicious and inauspi¬ 
cious rites, respectively. 

TITHIS : LUNAR DAYS 

133b-135. Lords of the days. The lords of the lunar days are 
in order: Brahma, Agni, Virifici, Vispu, Sailaja, Vinayaka, Yama, 
Naga, Candra, Skanda, Arka, V^ava, Mahcndra, Vasava, 
Naga, Durga, Dandadhara, Siva, Visnu, Hari, Ravi, Kama, 
Sarpa, Kali, Candra, Visvedcvih, and Darsa. So also are the 
manes. 

136-137a. The names of the (fifteen) lunar days arc, 
Nanda, Bhadra, Jaya, Rikta and Purni, these being repealed 
thrice.® During the bright fortnight, their cflfcct should be 
counted as non-beneficial, medium and beneficial. In the dark 
fortnight, however, the reckoning should be beneficial, medium 
and non-beneficial, in order. 

13 7b-l 38a. Auspicious and inauspicious days. (In a fortnight, 
five days, being) the eighth, twelfth, sixth, fourth and four* 
teenih arc called pakfa^randhra (‘holes in the fortnight*) and 
are declared to be highly dreary. 

138b-139a. If it is desired to perform any auspicious act 
in the said five nonauspicious days, one should reject 7, 14, 9, 9 
and 24 n^dtkds^ respectively, (as reckoned from the commence¬ 
ment of the day). 

139b-140a. Except for amavd^ (the new moon) and 
navami (the 9ih), the odd days arc commendable (forauspicious 
rites). The pratipad (first day) is always of medium (benefit). 

I40b-141a. One should abstain from an oilbath on 
(the6th), meat on astami (the eighth), haircut on the day of 
Kali (i.s., the first), and recourse to women on full moon and 
new moon. 

14lb-142a. One should never clean the teeth on new 
mooxii pratipad (1st), dvddoH (12th), the pratiparva {i.e.y full 
moon) and J^avami (9th). 

142b-143a. One should not t^e an oilbath on days of 
Vyatipdtay^ sahkrdnti, ekddaSi (11th), full and new moon days, 
fofthi (6ch) and on Sundays and Tuesday; so also on days of 
VaidhrtaPu 

143b-45a. If one takes a bath in on datami 



792 


Ndradd Purdna 


(10th)» he will lose his son; if on trayodoH (13th) ,he will sufler 
from loss of wealth; if on dvitiyd (2nd), without doubt» he will 
lose his wealth and his son; and if on the new moon, ntwami 
(9th) and saptaml (7th)» his clan will be ruined. 

14Sb-46. Sinivdll andKuhu, On a full moon 

day, (if due to astronomical circumstances) the moon is seen 
(even) during day-time, that full moon day is called Anumati\ 
it is called Rdkd when there is Moon (only) during the night, 
In the same manner, the new moon is also of two types; when 
moon is visible (at some part of the day), it is called 
and when Moon is never visible, it is called Kuhd. 

147-48. Days of the commencement of Ike Tugas. The first 
day of Kriayuga fell on the 9th day of the bright half in the 
month of Karttika. The auspicious first day of Treidyuga was on 
the 3rd day of the bright fortnight in the month of Madhava. 
I'he first day of Dvdparayuga was the 15th day of the dark fort¬ 
night in the month of Magha. And, the fint day of Kaliyuga 
was the 13th day of the dark fortnight in the month of 
Nabhasya. 

149-152a. Days of commencmenl of ike 14 Manus that make 
up a Kalpa^ (1) 12th day in the bright fortnight of the month of 
(Karttika) (2) 9ch day, bright fortnight of Aivayuj (Asvina) ; 
(3) 3rd day, bright fortnight of Caltra, (4) 3rd day, bright 
fortnight of Bhadrapada; (5) llih day, bright fortnight of 
Pau^; (6) 10th day, bright fortnight of A^dha; (7) 7th day, 
bright fortnight in Magha. (8) 8th day, dark fortnight in 
Nabhaya (Sravana) ; (9) New moon in ^ravana; (10) Full 
moon in Phalguna; (11) Full moon in A^adha, (12) Full moon 
of Karttika; (13) Full moon in Jyes|ha; and (14) Full moon 
in Caitra; the abovesaid days, which are the days of commence¬ 
ment of the maniantaras, are, for men, extremely meritorious in 
the matter of worshipping the manes {iraddha ). 

152b-153a. Gajacckdyd. On the 13th day of the dark 
fortnight in the month of Bhadrapada, if the Moon occurs in 
the constellation Magha or the Sun in the constellation Hasta, 
the situation is called Gajacchdydi which is infinitely productive 
if a Jrdddha (is performed then). 

153b-54a. Intercalary tithis eU. 1( (hrtt lunar days occur 
on a civil day, there will be a tithiksaya (expunged lunar day)« 



II.36.154b-165 


793 


On the other hand, if a lUki extends over three civil days, tlicre 
will be an adhika (intercalary) Both are nonauspiciom. 

154b-53a. A Hth that extends upto (or beyond) sunset 
in a civil day is said to be (^full*) ; if the tithi is short 

(ofsunset) it is called Kkan4(i (‘broken’).^* 

I35b-56a. The fifteen parts of a tithi are called, in 
order, Pratipad etc. Halves thereof are called Kfnna^f in their 
(i. o{ Pratipad txc.) half-measures. 

THE DAY OF THE WEEK : VARA 

I56b-57a. Matuu of (he week-days. Sunday is ‘firm*, 
Monday ‘moving’, Tuesday ‘cnicr, Wednesday ‘whole*, 
Thursday ‘light’, Friday ‘soft* and Saturday ‘sharp*. 

l57b-58. EJecu aj the wttk^^days. K man who takes an 
oilbath on Sunday will be in distress, on Monday handsome, on 
Tuesday diseased, on Wednesday fortunate, on Thursday poor, 
on Friday depleted and on Saturday prosperous. 

159. The beginning of the wcek*day is reckoned from its 
occurrence in Lanka.** Beyond or before it {i.e., cast or west), 
the day will vary depending on terrestrial longitude (of the 
place) and the time of half ascensional difference in nadikds 
(at the lime of the year). 

160. Any act (performed on the day) of a strong planet 
will be cfTcctivc, while the same act performed on the day) 
of a weak planet will be hardly productive. 

161. The day of Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus 
(rr., Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday) are effective 
for all acts; the other days yield result in the case only of cruel 
acts. 

162*163a. The Sun is dark-red, the Moon white, Mars 
pale-red, Mercury (dark-green) like the dSrvd grass, Jupiter 
yellowish, Venus white, and Saturn dark. Each is benehcial to 
actions of those who arc of the respective complexion. 

163b*65. (Inauspicions periods due to) the Upagrahas 
(secondary planets) Kulika, (called also Gulika), Upakulika, 
and Vara vela (‘time when no work should be undertaken*), 
occur on each day of the weak, as specified below). The 
reckoning is in terms of praharasj (3J n4d*k^ each) commencing 
from Sunday. KuUka : Sunday, at the 7ih prakafa ; Monday, 



794 


N&rada Pu7d})a 


5th; Tuesday, 4th; Wednesday, 6th; Thursday, 4th; Friday, 
7th; and Saturday, 5th; Upakulika: Sunday 3rd; Monday, 2nd; 
Tuesday, 4th; Wednesday, 2nd; Thursday, 5th; Friday, 3rd; 
and, Saturday, Ist Varavela, Sunday, 6th; Monday, 2nd; 
Tuesday, 7th; Wednesday, 3rd; Thursday, 1st; Friday, 6th: 
and Saturday, 6th. The duration of each is half a prahara (t.r., 
one and three fourths nddikas ). 

166-67a. Lords of Ih hour. If the lord of the hour ‘kala- 
hore.<a\ for any particular lime, ksa$ia^vdfa, (within a day) is 
required, take the lord of that day as the lord of tlic first hour 
(of 2\ nddikas ), the sixth as the lord of the second hour and the 
sixth from that as the lord of the third hour. Counting repea- 
tcdly the sixth of the previous, the lords of the kdla^hords for 
each hour of 2} nd4ikd^^ for whole day and night are got, in 
that order. 


THE ASTERISMS : NAKSATRAS 

* 

168b-70. The lord: af (he nakfatras. The lords of the as* 
tcrisms arc, in order : (1) Asvini—Dasrau (Asvins) ; 

(2) Bharani—Yama; (3) Krttika—Vahni, (Agni) ; (4) Rohini— 
Brahma; (5) Mrgasiras—Candra; (6) Ardra—I^a (Rudrn) ; 
(7) Punarvasu—Aditi; (8) Pusya—Jiva, (Brhaspati) ; (9) Asle^a— 
Ahi (Sarpa) ; (10) Magha Pitfs; (11) Purvaphalguni—Bhaga 
(12) Uttaraphalguni—Aryaina; (13) Hasia—Arka (Surya) ; 
(14) Cilra—Tvastr; (15) Svati—Marul (Vayu) ; (16)Visakha— 
SakragnI (IndragnI, Dvideva), (17) Anuradha—Miira; 
(18) Jyestha^Vasava (Indra) ; (19) Mula^Nirrli; (20) Purva- 
asadha—Udaka (Apah); (21) Uttara-asadha—Visvedevah; 

(22) Srava^—Govinda (Visnu); (23) Dhanistha (Sravistha) 
Vasu; (24)Satabhi^k—Toyajja (Varuna) ;(25)P^rva-Bhad^a• 
pada—Aja Ekapad;(26 )Uttara-bhadrapada—Ahirbudhnya; and 
(27) Revati—Pu^. 

171. DoWniooking asiorisms. The nine as tcrisms Purva- 
phalgunl, Purva-isadha, Purva-bhadrapada, Magha, Asiesa 
(Ahi), Krttika (Agni), Viiakha, Bharan! (Yama) and Mula 
are downward*looking asterisms. 

171b*172. (During their currency, the undcr*meniioned 
acts are) ordained : Entering a cave, diagrammatic and other 




IL56.173-181 


795 


matters based on mathematics^ architectural work, digging of 
wells, retrieval of treasures etc. 

173. Sidiways^ooking asterisms. The nine astcrisms 
Anuradha (Mitra), Mrgasiras (Indu),Citra (Tvasfr)* Hasta, 
Jyestha (Indra), Punarvasu (Aditi), Revatl (Bhantya), Asvini 
and Svati are sideways-looking. 

173b« 174 During their currency, the undermentioned 
acts are ordained: Driving the plough, travel, riding the 
bullock cart driving machines, elephants and camels, 

and directing chariots drawn by asses and oxen, floating naval 
vessels, and work with buffaloes and horses. 

17Sa. Upward^looking asitrisms* The nine astcrisms Rohii>I 
(Prajapaii), Sravana (Vi?nu), Ardrd (Mahesa), Pusya (Arya) 
Satabhisak, Dhanistha (Vasu), Uttaraphalguni, Uttara-asadha 
and Uttara-bhadrapada, are upward docking. 

175b-76. (During their currency, the undermentioned 
acts are ordained: Royal consecration, marriage, hoisting the 
flag on the rampart, and erection of palaces, arches, gardens 
and forts. 

17 7. Classification of astetisms. The (four) astcrisms 
Rohinl, Uttara-phalgunI, Uttara*asadhaand Uttara-bhadrapada 
are ‘fixed’ {sthira). The (three) astcrisms Hasta {SUrya)^ Asvini 
and Ptisya are dight’ (K^ipra). Visakha {Dvid^vaiya) and 
Krttika ( Vahnibkd) arc ‘medium’. 

178. The (five) astcrisms Dhani^ha (Vasu), Punarvasu 
(Trfj/ya), Satabhisak (^miu), Svati and Sravana 
‘moving’ {Caio), The (four) astcrisms MrgaHrsa {Indu), 
Anuradha {Mitra)^ Citra and Revati (Anfya) arc ‘soil’ (mrdu). 
And, the (five) asterisms Purva-phalguni, Purva-asadha, Purva 
bhadrapada, Magha and BharanI (Antaka, Tama) are ‘violent’ 
(ugra). 

179a. The (four) Asterbms Mula, Ardra A^lesa (Indra) 
and Jyesfha (Indra) are ‘sharp’ {tik^f/a)^ All have effects in con¬ 
sonance with their nomenclatures. 

179b-80a. Karna^ha. It is auspicious to perforate the ears 
of boys in Citra, Punarvasu (Aditya), Asvini, Sravana (Visnu), 
Revatl (Antya, Hasea (Ravi), Anuradha (Mitra), Sravisfhi 
(Vasu), Mrgasiras and Pusya (/^)- 

180b-81. Dealings with eUphants and horses. All matten 



796 


Ndrada Purdrfa 


relating to elephants (like their taming, sale, purchase etc.) 
should be done in the asterisms Aivin! (Dasra). Mrga^iras 
(/ffrfa), Punarvasu (Aditi), Pusya (Tifya)^ Hasta, Citra and 
Svati. All matters relating to horses should be done in (the 
duration of) the ‘fixed* stars {viz. Rohini, Uttaraphalgunl» 
Utiarasadha and Uttarabh^rapada), and especially on 
Sundays. 

182. Cattle. Trade etc. in cattle recommended in Citra, 
Satabhisak {Varuna)^ Rohini (Vairinci), Uttaraphalguni,Uttara- 
asadha and Uttara^bhadrapada. This should, however, be 
never done on affami, caiurdail and the new moon day. 

183. The first driving of the plough (in a 
season) shall be done with oxen, in the (20 asterisms) consisting 
o{tht mrduy dhruva{slhira)f ksipra and rarj groups,Viiakha, 
Magha {Pitr) and Mula. 

184*85. In the Lditgala-cakra (‘diagram of the plough* 
with the asterisms represented on it), three asterisms reckoned 
from the one in which the Sun b at the time of consideration, 
tend to destroy the oxen; the next three, which from the tip, 
tend to the production of plenty; the next five, which form 
the sides, tend to happiness; the next nine forming the three 
spikes, lead to death; the next five lead (o prosperity and the 
last three, towards the tail end arc extremely beneficial'® 

186. Sowing. Sowing (crops) would be highly fruitful if 
done under the mrduy dkruva (sthira) and Kfipra groups of 
asterisms as abo under Magha (Pitr), Svati {Vdyu)^ Dhanistha 
{Vasu) and Mula. 

187-88. {In the Phanuakray the ‘diagram of the scrp>eni 
Rahu’, with the asterisms represented on its body) the three 
asterisms reckoned from the a^terbms in which Rahu occurs at 
the time under consideration will form its hood; (if sowing b 
done under those asterisms), the crops will be destroyed. The 
next three asterisms which form the neck will conduce the 
growth of weed {kajjala or fySmikd). The next twelve asterisms 
forming the body will conduce to plenitude. The next four as¬ 
terisms forming the tail will conduce to the dearth of grains. 
The (remaining) five astcrbms, which are outside (the serpent 
diagram), portend destruction to the crop.'* 

189. Bath after recovery frotH illness. One should not give a 



II.56.190-199a 


797 


bath to a person recovered from illness; under the asterisms of 
the sthifQ group, Punarvasu (Aditi), Asle^a {Sarpa), Rcvati 
(Antya), Magha (Pitr) and Svati (Maruts)^ and, so also, on 
Monday and Friday. 

190. Dance, Commencement of dance is recommended 
in the asterisms Uttara-phalguni, Uttara-asadha, Uttara- 
bhadrapada, Anuradha (Maitra), Jye^tha (Indra), Dhanisfha 
(Vasu), Satabhisak (Vanina), Pusya, Hasta (Arka), and 
Rcvati (Pausnya). 

191-92a. Conjugal felicity. Six asterisms beginning with 
Revati (Pausna) form the first group, twelve asterisms begin¬ 
ning from Ardra {Rudra) form the middle group and nine as- 
terisms from Jyesjha {InJra) form the final group, in order, in 
the consideration of the conjugal felicity of couples. 

192b-93. Size of the asterisms. The smaller asterisms 
ijaghanya) arc Satabhisak {Toyapa)s Ardra, A^lesa (Ahi), Sviti 
(Pavana), BharapI (Tama) and Jyestha (J/dkapa). 

The bigger Stars. Dhruva, Punarvasu (Aditi) and Vilakha 
(Dvidaivatya) ^xt the bigger stars (brhat)\ their measures in 
nadVs are SO, 90 and 82. The remaining asterisms are medium 
(Sama) in size. 

194. Prices are reduced to half during the asterisms 
A^vini, Krttika , Pu^a (Ijya)y Mula (NasrTtycC)^ Citra 
Tvoftra), Ultaraphalgunl, Uttara^dha and Uttarabhadrapada. 

]95-96a. Kula-aslerisms and victory in battle : The Kula^ 
asterisms are Magha (pitT)j\\ikV}ik(Dvidaivaiya) and Dhanis^ha 
{ Vasu). The d^a-asterisms are: Rohini (Dhatr) ,JyeHha, Punar¬ 
vasu (Aditi) y Svati, Revati (Pasifiyi)^ Hasta (Arka)y Sravana 
(Hari) , Purvabhadrapada Bharani (Antaka) and Asle$a 

(BkaujaAga ). The remaining stars are Kuldkula. 

166b-98a. From among these, if kings set out for battle 
during the A"ii/tf-asterisms, they will suffer defeat, while in Akula- 
asterisms, assuredly, they will win. During the fiTiz/aitu/^-asterisms 
there would be equality (ofresults) and peace will follov.'. 

I98b*199a. PufkarOy the inauspicious combination. If an odd 
quarter of the (Purva)-bhadrapada falls on a Sunday, Saturday 
or Tuesday, (the inauspicious yoga of) Tripuskara occun and 
will have the (destructive) effect of three Pu^karas. If the com- 



798 NUtada Purina 

bination is with an even quarter of the asterism (it will be 
Dvipuskara) having double the (d^tructive) effect. 

199b-200a. In order to destroy the evil effect of the 
formerj gift away three cows or their value in money; in the 
case of the Dvipu^karay gift away two (cows). The inauspicious 
effect of the asterism would then be obviated. 

200b-201a. K^eci of Pu^. The asterism Pusya aspected 
by a cruel (planet) or in combination with it, is always benefi¬ 
cial in all auspicious rites except in marriage. 

20lb-103. Pfumber of protninent stars in the asUrisms. The 
number of bright stars called Togatdrds^ in the asterbm-groups 
beginning with AivanI ( Dasra) are in order: (A^vinl )3, (Bharan!) 

3, (Krttiki) 6, (Rohini) 5, (Mrga-Siras) 3, (Ardra) 1, (Punar- 
vasu) 4, (Pu$ya)3, (Ailesa) 5, (Magha) 5, (Purvaphalguni) 
2,Uttaraphiilgunl) 2, (Hasta) 5, (Citra) l,(Svati) l,(Vi^akha) 
2, (Anuradha) 4, (jyestha) 3, (Mula) 11, (Purva?adha) 

4, (Uttara^dha) 2, (^ravana) 4, (Dhani^ha) 3, (Satabhi$ak) 
100, (Purvabhadrapada) 2, (Uttarabhadrapada) 2, (Revat!) 
32. 

204-10. FavouriU trees of the asUrisms. The trees favourite 
to the different asterisms arc : A^vini: Bharanl : 

Tamakara ; Kritika: Udumbara ; Rohini: Jambuka ; Mfgasiras: 
Khadira; Ardra: Kfsnaplaksa; Punarvasu: Vashia (bamboo) ; 
Pusya: Pippala (Pcepul) ; Aslcsa:^;^; Magha: Kfl/a (banyan) ; 
Purvaphalguni: Paldia\ Uttaraphalgunl: Ak^a: Hasta: 

Citra: Srivrksa (yilva)\ Svati; ^r;cma; Visakha: Vikahkata\ 
Anuradha: Bakula ; Jycsfha: Vi$ti • Mula: Sarja \ Purvasadha: 
Vafljula; Uttara^dha: Panasa (Jack tree); Sravapa: Arka; 
Dhanistha: Satabhisak: Kadamba; Purvabhadrapada iCuta 

(mango);Uttarabhadrapada: Picumandaka; andRevati: Madhu. 

211a. One (bom in a particular asterism) should en¬ 
deavour to worship the relevant tree when Saturn is in the 
particular asterism. 

YOGA 

21 lb-12a. Lords of the Togas. The presiding deities of 
the 24 Togas^"^ arc: (1. Vi^kambha) : Yama; (2. Priti): Viivcdcvah; 
{3 .Ayufmdn): Moon; (4* Dhati; (5. Sobhana): 

Jiva (Brhaspati); (6. Atigandn) : Moon; (7. Sukarmd): Indra; 



IL56.212b-22Ia 


799 


(8. i)Af«): Varui>a (Toya); : Ahi; (10, Ganja): Agni; 

(11. Vrddhi ): Surya; (12. Dhruoa ): Bhumi; (13. Vydgkdta ): 
Rudra; (14. Harsat^): Brahma (Ka) ; {15. Vajra): Varu^ 
(Toyapa); (16. Siddhi): Gape^; (17. Vjiatipdfa): Rudra; 
(18. Variyas ): Kubera (Dhanada) ; (19. Parigha ): Tva?ta, 
(20. <Siva ): Mitra; (21. Siddka ): ^ad^nana, (22. Sddhya ) 
Savitrl, (23. ^ubha): Kamala; (24. <^ukla): Gaurl, 
(25. Brahman): Nasatyas (26. Indra): Pitrs: and (27. Vaidhrti): 
Aditi. 

212b. Effects of the yogas. yogas^ vaidhfti and vyatipdta 

are always highly catastrophic. 

213* 15a. The 6rst half of Parigha is abhorred for all rites. 
In Vifkambha and Vajra^ the first three nddikds^ in and 

Atigarid<^ six, in Vydghdia nine, and in $tila five nddikds are to be 
rejected. 

215b«16a. KharjUfikd diagram. The asterbms Punarvasu 
{Aditi), Mrga^iras {Indu), Maghi, Asle^a {Ahi), Aivini, Mula, 
Hasta {Maitreya) Pusya [fjya), with their diagrams have to be 
understood as the Head-asterisms {murdha-bhd), in order. 

2l6b-18a. Draw a vertical line and 13 lines across it. 
In that diagram esMed KharjSrikd^cakra, place the Head-asterism. 
Between the Sun and the Moon marked on the vertical line, 
mark the (26) asterisms, leaving out Abhijit (the 28th naksatra). 
(The pair of asterisnu) on each crossline {Ekargala) asptex 
each other. 

218b* 19a. Duration of a yoga. A yoga extends to two 
nddikds and 12 vinddikds, and the yogas are 27 in number, in 
order (in a lunar day). 


KARAhlA 

219b*220a. Lords of the Kara^. The lords of the 11 half* 
tithis {Kararuis) are : (I. Bava): Indra; (2. Bdlava): Prajapati; 
(3. Kaulava) : Mitra; (4. Taitila), Aryama; (5. Gara) : Bhuh 
(Earth); (6. : Laksmi (Haripriya) ; (7. Vi^ti): Kina^; 

(8. Sakuni): Kali; (9. Mga); Rudra: (10. Catuspada): Ahi, 
(11. Kirhstughna): Marut. 

220b*21a. The six A<tf from Bava to Va^ij art auspi¬ 
cious. However, Viffi, either in the beginning or in the end, is 
not desirable for any auspicious rite. 



800 


NUrada Putina 


221b*22a. Karans diagram. (In the diagrammatic repre¬ 
sentation of the Koranoi)^ 6ve would be in the face» one in the 
neck, eleven in the chest, four in the nave], six at the waist and 
three in the tail, in terms of ndixkds. 

222b-13a. Those in the face indicate obstruction to one’s 
acts; in the neck, death; in the chest, penury; in the waist, 
madness; in the navel, loss; but in the tail sure success. 

223b. Of the (24 karanas)^ the stkira^^karartasy {vU.y 
Sakuni, Naga, Catuspada and Kiihstughna) are of medium 
effect; and, of them too, the middle ones, Naga and Catuspada. 

MUHORTA 

224b*25a. Lords of the mukUrtas. The mukUrtas of day 
time are lorded over by fifteen (deities, as under): Rudra, 
Ahi, Milra, Pitfs, Vasu, Varuna (Udaka), Visvedcvas, Vidhata, 
Brahma, Indra, Indrigni, Vasu,/Varuna, (Toyapa), Aryam& 
and Bhaga. 

225b-26a. (The lords of the mukUrtosoi the night are): 
Isa, Aja*Ekapad, Ahirbudhnya, Pusa, Aivins, Yama, Agni, 
Dhatf, Indra, Aditi, fjya (Brhaspati), Visnu, Arka, Tva$(rand 
Vayu. 

226b-27a. The measure of a muhUtta is one fifteenth part 
of the day-time and so also night-time (t.e., 2 na^ika) with 
their lords as stated above. 

227b-228. Mukurtas to be avoided. On the (seven) week¬ 
days beginning with Sunday, (the undermentioned seven sets 
of MuhUrtas) should be rejected for all auspicious rites; 
(1. Sunday): Uttaraphalgum (Aryama); (2. Monday) : Mula 
(Rak^sa) and Rohin! (Brahma); (3. Tue^ay): Magha (Pitr) 
and Kfttiica (Agneya); (4. Wednesday): Abhijit; (5. Thursday): 
Mula (Raksasa); (6. Friday): Rohini (Brahma) and Magha 
{Pitr);aDd (7. Saturday): Asle$a (Bhujanga). 

229. Muhuftas and Naksatras. Whatever rite has been 
ordained to be performed in specific nakfatrasy all those acts, 
including pilgrimages, shall be done during the muhirtas lorded 
over by the respective deities. 



II.56.230-240a 


801 


UPAGRAHA (SECONDARY ATMOSPHERIC 

PHENOMENA) 

23 0*3 3a. PorUntuous natural phenomena. Earthquake in the 
seventh asterism from Hasta (Suryabham), lightning in the 
hfth; Sula in the eighth, thunder in the tenth, comet in 
the eighteenth, in the ftfteenth, meter in the nineteenth, 

thunder*strike in the fourteenth, fall of thunderbolt in the 
fourteenth, and atmospheric haze (tnoha), thunder, earthquake, 
thunderbolt and halo (round the moon) respectively in the 
twentyiirst and further asterisms (are inauspicious) and no 
auspicious rite should be performed in the asterisms in which 
the above occur along with the Moon. 

233b'-35a. Other inauspicious combinations ( Togas). The 
Moon occurring in the astcrbms A^lc^a (Sarpa), Magha 
(Pitrya), Citr^ (Tva^tra) Anuradhi (Mitra) and Revatl 
(Antya), causes an inauspicious yoga to occur in the asterism 
as much removed from Aivin! as each of these are removed 
from Hasta (Suryabha), So abo in Sravana (Visnubhu). 

235b. The said two yogas are called respectively Caci^iia 
and Caf}4&yudha. No auspicious rite should be performed then. 

236a. Krakaca^yoga. A krakaca-yoga ^cutting saw combi* 
nation’ will occur when the sum of lunar day and Week-day is 
13. This is to be rejected for any auspicious rite. 

236b*37a. Sartivartqyoga. When Sunday falb on the 
seventh lunar day or Monday on the first lunar day, a sarhvarta^ 
yoga (^dbsolution combination’) will occur. This is all- 
destructive. 

237b*40a. The twenty •eight asterismat yogas, Th^ follow¬ 
ing eight jar produce effect, as per their meanings; Ananda 
(pleasure), Kdladan4a (Death’s rod), Dh Hmra (Smoky), Dhdtr 
(protective), Sudhdkara (ambrosial), Dfwdhkfa (crow) Dhvaja 
(flag), Srwafra (Visnu’s gem), Vajra (thunderbolt), Mudgara 
(spade), Chairaka (umbrella), Mi>a (friend), AfdrtOffl (heart), 
Padma (lotus), Lumbaka (cutting), Utp&ta (calamitous), Mriyu 
(death), A"4rta (blind), Siddhi (achievement), tubha (auspicious), 
Amrtyu (deathlcssness), Musala (pestle), Antaka (death), 
(elephant), Pak^asa (demoniac), Cara (moving), Sthairya (firm) 
and Vardhamauu (increasing). 



602 


Ndrada PurUna 


240b-41. These are to be reckoned, in order, from 
AsvinI (Dasrabha)on Sundays; fix>m Mrga^iras (Indubha)on 
Mondays; from Aslesa (Sarpa) on Tuesdays; from Hasta on 
Wednesdays; from Anuradha (Maitrabha) on Thursdays; from 
Uttaras&dha (Vaisvadeva) on Fridays and from 6atabhi^k 
(Varuna) on Saturdays.^* 

242-43a. Siddhiyogas for thi wiek^(hys. Hasta on Sunday, 
Mrgaiiras (candrabha) on Monday, Ajvinl(Dasrabha) on Tues¬ 
day, Anur&dha (Mitrabha) on Wednesday, Revati on Thursday, 
Pusya (Tisya) on Friday and Rohini on Saturday; these are 
called as Siddki^yogas (combinations for achievement). 

243b-44a, Effect of iithis classified as Nandd^ Bkadrd etc.^ 
It is not auspicious to have J^andd on Sunday and Tuesday, 
Bkadrd on Friday and Monday, Jayd on Wednesday, Rikid on 
Thursday and PUr^d on Saturday. 

244b-45a. (On the other hand), Jiondd on Friday, Bkadrd 
on Wednesday, Jayd on Tuesday, Riktd on Saturday and PUrnd 
on Thursday are termed siddka, (indicating achievement). 

245b«46. Dagdkayoga. Monday on the eleventh lunar day, 
Sunday on the twelfth, Thursday on the sixth, Wednesday on 
the third, Friday on the eighth, Saturday on the ninth and 
Tuesday on the fifth are declared as dagdhayogas (destructive 
combinations). 

247-48a. Some destructive Togas. Bharani on Sunday, Citra 
on Monday, Uttara^dha (Visvabha) on Tuesday, Sravis^ha 
on Wednesday, Uttaraphalguni (Aryamabha) on Thursday, 
Jyesfha on Friday and Revati on Saturday are destructive to 
one bom in the respective asterisms. 

248b*49a. Vi^akha, Aslesa (Ahi) and Caturvarga are 
declared as the three asiddhi-yogas^ Utpdta^ Mrtyu and Kona, in 
order, for the days beginning from Sunday. 

249b-50a. In other lands like Huna, Vahga aud Khasa, 
the Togas calculated on the basis of the lunar day cum week-day 
are not to be applied, but those calculated on the basis of week¬ 
day cum asterisms are auspicious. 

SANKRANTI (SUN»S TRANSIT INTO A SIGN) 

250b*51a. Week^d<^sandSa^dii(i» The Sun’s transits (5'ari- 
krdntis) on the several week-days commencing ftom Sunday are 



IL56.251b-262a 


803 


called; respectively, Chords Dhvdnkri, Afahodari^ Mandd^ Mandd^ 
kini^ Miird and Rdkfasikd. 

251b«52a. These transits will bring happiness, respectively, 
to the Sudra, thief, vaisya, brahmana, king, cow and all the 
beings not included above. 

252b*54a. Time of the transits. The Sun’s transit occurring 
during the forenoon is harmful to the kings, to the brahmanas at 
noon, to the vaisyas in the afternoon, to the iudras at sunset, to 
the ghosts, at dusk, the demons in the night, the actors after mid« 
night, the cowherds at sunrise and the religious students at dawn. 

234b«55a. Effects of the Sun^s transit into Aries. Mewohhdnli 
(Sun’s tratsit into Aries, and, so, the beginning of the year), 
occurring during day-time is productive of calamity and quarrel; 
if it occurs during night, there would be sumptuous plenitude; 
and if it occurs during the twilights, rains will be ruined. 

235b-58a, Personification of the Sahkrdntis. The personifica¬ 
tion of the Sahkrdntis when (hey fall in one or the other of the 
eleven kara^^ from Bava, are endowed with the following 
mounts: Lion, tiger, bear, ass, elephant, buffalo, horse, dog, 
goat, ox and cock. Weapons carried in their hands are Bhusundi» 
mace, sword, rod, bow, javelin, pike, rope, hook, missile and 
arrow, respectively. The food offerings prescribed for them are, 
respectively, rice, rice cooked in milk, rice obtained by begging, 
cake, milk, curd, sweet rice, molasses, wine, ghee and sugar. 

258b-60a. State of the personifications while in the Karanas, 
The Sun’s personification is deemed to be ^sitting’ if the transit 
occurs in Vanij, Balava, and Gara; it is said to be ‘erect* {i.e.^ 
standing) in Kaulava, Sakuna and KJmstuglma; the Sun is 
supposed to make the transit ‘sleeping* if it occurs during Catu- 
spada,Taitila and Naga. (The effect of the said three states) 
in the matter of the performance of ordained duties, longevity 
and rains would be medium, excellent and depletion, respectively. 

260b«61a. The above-said weapons, mounts and food if 
adopted by the people will also be beneficial to them, as 
also their condition as sleeping, sitting or standing (at the time 
of schkrdnti ). 

261b-62a. Classification of the asterisms. The astcrisms are 
also classified into four types, designated, respectively, as Andhaka 
MandOy Madhya and Sulocana, as counted from Rohini. 



Ndrada Pur&^}^a 


ao4 


262b. Vifnupada^ The transit of the Sun into the ‘firm* 
astcrisms, (vU.^ Utiiiraptialgunl, Uttarasa^ha and Uttarabhadra* 
pad a and Rohini, is called Visfiupada. 

263. Sndarifhnukha and Vifuvat. The transit of the Sun into 
the double-natured signs,** {vU^t Mithuna^ Kanydy Dhanu and 
Mina) is called Sadaiitimukha^ while ihc transit into the signs 
Tula and is called (Equinox). 

264a. During the southward course of the Sun (T^myd^ 
j/ana) the former, {vU,^ (he double natured signs) are firm {sthira 
in relation to the Moon and the asterisms, and Cara (‘moving*) 
in the northward course of the Sun (saumye). 

264b-265. Holy time at equittox (PuyfaUta). At the Equi¬ 
noxes, sixteen (before it and 16 after it, making a total 

of 32 nddikrtsare said to be ho\y suitable for meritorious 

rites. Dusk (juni^d) extends through three before the 

rising of the centre of the Sun’s orb (in the morning) and after 
the setting thereof, in the evening. If (the Sadkrdnti, i.e. Sun’s 
transit, occurs) before or after midnight, the holy lime, (one 
half of whicli is of 15 nd4lkds)i extends through (the afiernoon 
of)thc previous day and (the forenoon of) the next day. 

266. (By performing meritorious rites at the time of 
sankrdnti) one reaps results corresponding to the nature of the 
Sun and the Moon in the relevant sign, according as the Sun or 
the Moon is benevolent or otherwise. 

267. Expiation for Unholy time at Sahkrama. Take the de¬ 
grees that the Sun, after making a transit (into Mesa or Tuld)^ 
has to go to reach the transit into the ayana; if at one’s birth 
asterism occurs within that period on eitlSr-jide of the transit 
into the sign, the two are not auspicious for fasts and marriages. 
In order to counteract the evil, spread out sesame and draw on 
it a circle, trident and a triangle, place a bit of gold on it and 
gift it away. 

268-70. Power of Sankrama. The Moon is strong on 
account of the strengUt of the asterisms and the Sun at transit 
is strong on account of the Moon. In the same manner, the 
planets are also strong (at the time of the Sun’s transit). 

GOCARA (CURRENT MOTION OF THE PLANETS) 

271. Effect of the planets occupying the different O 



IL56.272-281a 


805 


sage ! the Sun is bcncfic when it occupies the 3rd, 1 1th, lOtH 
or 6th sign counted from the birth-sign (of the person under 
consideration), if it is not affected" by planets other than Sa¬ 
turn" occupying the 9th 5th, 4th, {ambu)l2ih (rippha). 

272. The Moon is bcncfic if it occupies the 7th {dyGrto) 
1st, Ihh, 6th (ari) 10th or 3rd sign from the birth-sign, if it is 
not affected by planets other than Mercury in the 5th, 8th, 12lh, 
4th and 9th (dhamta) signs. 

273. Mars is benefic if it occupies the 3rd, 11th or 6th 

sign from the birth-sign if it is not affected by Saturn, Mercury 
or Sun occupying, respectively, the 12th 5ih and 9ih 

signs. 

274. Mercury is bencfic if it occupies the 4th, 6ih, 8th 
10th or 11th sign from the birth-sign if it is not affected by 
planets other than the Moon m the 5ih (rfAf), 3rd, 9th, 1st, 8th 
and 12th signs. 

275. O great sage ! Jupiter is bcncfic in the llih, 9th 
4th or 7th sign from the birth-sign, if it Is not alTcctcd by the 
planets in the 12th, 8th, 10th, 4th and 3rd signs. 

276. Venus is benefic in the 1st to 5th {dsuta)^ 8th, 9lh 
12th or 11th signs from the birth-sign, if it is not affected by 
planets in the 8th, 7th, 1st, 10th, 5th, 11th, 6th and 3rd signs. 

277. No planet will be benefic if its current p>osiuon is 
affected (by another planet). Hence good and bad results shall 
be predicted only after duly considering planetary affectation. 

278. A planet which has turned malefic on account of be¬ 
ing adversely affected (by a planet) can still be benefic ifas- 
pected by a beneficent planet, while even a beneficent planet 
might be productive of evil effects if aspected by an evil planet. 

279a. Two (inimical) planets will not produce their in¬ 
dividual effects if they aspect one another, 

279b-80a. A planet occupying the sign of an evil planet or 
the house of an enemy planet, or if it has ah-eady set will not 
produce its good or bad effects. 

2801>81a. When planets occupy malefic places, one should 
take steps to perform propitiatory rites, for one’s progress and 
regress are dependent upon the planets, for which reason they 
are worthy of worship. 



806 


NUrcda Pur^ 


281b*82. Pricious SUmes. Towards (he propitiation of the 
planets Sunetc.» one should wear, in order, the precious stones: 
(Sun) pearl, (Moon) coral, (Mars) emcreld, (Mercury) Topaz 
(Jupiter) diamond, (Venus) Sapphire and (Saturn) Opal. 

(CANDRA-TARABALA: STRENGTH OF THE MOON 

AND PLANETS) 

283. Natun of thi Moou, One to whom the moon is benehc 
on the first day of the bright fortnight, to him it will be bene* 
ficent throughout that fortnight; on the contrary, in the dark 
fortnight it would be malefic. 

284. In the bright fortnight, the Moon is bcnefic on the 
second, ninth and fifth days. It would be benefic also on the 
i2th, 9th and 4th days if it is not affected by other planets. 

283. Birth asterims. Birth, wealth, danger, welfare 
enemy, benefactor, death, friend and intimate companion have 
always to be ascertained from the birth as ter ism. 

286*87a. The birth*a8Cerisrn and the 3rd, 5th and 7th 
therefrom do not yield benefits. In order to ward off the evil 
effects (of these four), one should gift to brahmins (the four 
objects) vegetables, molasses, salt, and gold with sesame, in that 
order. 

287b. The asterisms are particularly potent during the 
dark fortnight and the Moon is similarly potent during the 
bright fortnight. 

287c-88a. States of the Moon. The Moon has twelve states 
[avasih&s) in the (twelve) signs. And, these states will have 
effects in accordance with their nomenclatures, (given below, 
in verse 289), with regard to pilgrimage, marriage etc. under* 
taken at those times. 

288b-c. (In order to calculate the state of the Moon at 
any time), multiply the number of the current astcrism (reckon¬ 
ed from Alvin!) by 60, add the number oindiik&s elapsed at 
the desired time (in the current asterism), multiply the result 
by 4 and divide by 45 {ifu-^veda). Divide the quotient by 12 
[bhdnu). (The result would be the current state of the Moon). 

289. The (twelve avasthds are Prav&sa (exile), }fQs(a (loss), 
Mfta (death), faya (victory), Hd^ (laughter),(pleasure), 
Muda (joy), Supti (sleep), Bkukti (feast), Jvara (fever), Kampa 



IL56.290-298 


807 


(tremour) and Susthiti (firm establbhment). Their effect is in 
consonace with their nomenclatures. 

(SARVALAGNA : RISING OF THE SIGNS) 

290. Risi of Aries {Mefa^lagna), When the sign of Aries is 
rising (the undermentioned acts) will be successful: Royal coro* 
nation, marching of the army, peace, war, making of ornaments, 
extraction of minerabfrom mines and wars. 

291. Rise of Taurus (Vrfabha^tagna). When the signTaurus 
is rising, will be successful: Auspicious rites, firm actions, digg¬ 
ing of wells for water, construction of houses agriculture, trade, 
raising of cattle, etc. 

292. Rise of Gemini {Aiithuna^lagna)^ When the sign Gemini 
is rising should be done: Engagement in art and architecture, 
acceptance of ornaments, invitation, for sacrifice, dealings relat¬ 
ing to elephants, marriage and consecration. 

293. Riseo/Cancer (Korkafa^lagna). When the sign Cancer 
is rising, should be performed: Work relating to the collection 
and release of water in tanks, welb and lakes, physical nourish¬ 
ment and writing and literary activities. 

294. Rise of Leo ( Sifhha^iagna) . When the sign Leo is rising 
will be successful the following: work relating to the cultivation 
of sugarcane and grains, trade and adventurous onslaughts by 
kings, etc. 

295. Rise of Virgo {Kany^-lagna), When the sign Virgo is 
risir^, should be performed acts relating to: Study, architecture, 
medicine, ornaments, middling matters which are both firm and 
otherwise, physical nourbhment and all auspicious acts. 

296. Rise of Libra {Tula-lagna). When the sign Libra is 
rbing, should be done acts pertaining to agriculture, trade, travel, 
cattle, marriage, fasts and tulgbhdra (religious weighing of one¬ 
self in a balance). 

297. Rise of Scorpio (yrieika4agna). When the sign Scorpio 
is rising, should be taken action on all mat ten which are of a 
firm, permanent {sthird) nature as also service to the royalty, 
consecration and burglary. 

29^. Rise of Sagittarius {Dkanu4agna), When the sine 
sagittarious is rising, should be performed the following: Religious 
fasts, marriage, travel, matters relating to horses and elephants, 



808 Ndrada 

arts, and actions relating to matters which are of a miscellaneous 
and quasi-permanent nature. 

299. Rise of Capricorn {Makara^lagna). When the sign Capri* 
corn is rising should be performed: Stringing of bows and 
shooting of arrows, cultivation, matters relating to cattle and 
horses, setting out on a journey, tending of cows, servitude etc. 

300. Rising of Aquarius {Kumbha^lagna) . When the sign 
Aquarius is rising should one engage himself in agriculture, 
trade rearing of cattle, digging foi water, architecture, the fine 
arts, voyage, practice of missiles and weapons, etc. 

301. Rising of Pisces {Mina^lagna). W^hen the sign Pisces is 
rising, are auspicious acts relating to religious fasts, marriages, 
consecration, inauguration of water reservoirs and housing 
colonies, wearing of ornaments and using of water vessels. 

302. Potency of the rising signs. Success in actions, as stated 
above, would accrue in respect of the rbing of the signs which 
are clear i.e., vacant (or occupied by beneficent planets). 
However, if the signs arc aspectedby malefic planets or occupied 
by terrible planets, the results will abo be terrible. 

303. The Seven signs, viz., Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, 
Pisces, Libra and Sagittarius are beneficent (by nature) since 
they are occupied by beneficent asterisms; the other signs are 
evil-na lured. 

304. (Overand above this), the signs attain their (ultimate) 
strength from the combination of planets occupying them 
and by the aspect!ng of other planets on them. If neither of 
the above is applicable, the signs will exhibit only their 
primary nature. 

305. Towards the beginning (of their rise) all the signs 
will have their full strength, in the midd'e medium strength and 
towards the end little strength. 

306. First determine the rising sign (at the desired time) 
and then the strength of the Moon. If the Moon is strong, the 
planets in the seventh sign will also be strong. 

307. The strength of the Moon is the base, ^ as the sustainer, 
and supporter), and that of the other planets is only secondary 
(contained, supported). It is obvious that the supported is held 
by the snpporter. 

308. If Moon is benefic, all the other planets will also be 



11.56.309-317 


809 


bcncftc and if Moon is malefic^ (all the others) would also be 
rendered malefic, except the Sun. 

309. The planet occupying those di^grecs of a sign which 
have risen, gels the strength of rhe lirst part of the sign and the 
one coming after, that of the second pan. 

310. The Strengths of the planets in the other sections arc 
also to be reckoned in this same manner. By tliis pmeodure 
one can select a rising sign endowed with all qualities. 

311.12a. All men always wish for the minimum of bad 
effects and the maximum of good cflccu. Badcffccls arc inherent 
in lime and even the creator is incapable of eradicating them 
completely. Hence it is necessary to look for the minimum of 
bad effects and the maximum of good cITccts. 

PRATHAMA-ARTAVA (FIRST MENSTRUATION) 

312b« 13a. Inauspicious days of prathamdf'tava—pTaihamdTtava 
is inauspicious on new moon, the riifc/a*® lunar days (e/e., 4th, 
9th aud 14ih), 8th,6th, 12th, Isl, the first half ol (the yoga 
called) Farigha^^^ Vyatiputa^ Vaidhjta^ the (three) sandhyds (of 
dawn, noon and dusk), invasion by an enemy and (the Karana 
called) 

314. Pratkamdriava on the week*dnys. The result of 
PrathamdrUiva occurring on the week-days from Sunday arc: 
(Sunday:) Ill-health;(Monday:) Dear to the spouse; (Tuesday:) 
Unhappiness, (Wednesday:) Much-daughtcred; (Thursday:). 
Sensuous: (Friday:) Qiaslc, and (Saturday) Having Heavy 
tresses. 

315. Inauspicious asterisms and months —The following astcrism 
are inauspicious (in pTaihasndrtai>a)\ Bharani. Krttika, Ardra, 
Pdrvaphalgiini, Aslesa, Vis^ha, Jyespia Magha and 
Pur%'asaclha. The following months, too, arc not auspicious: 
Caitra (Madhu), Karttika (Orja), Asadha (Suci) and Pausa. 

316a. One having pratkamartava on the bhadra lunar days, 

2nd, 7th and 12th), the transit of the Sun into a sign, 
sleep, and the lunar and solar eclipses would be unchaste. 

316b-l 7. Toward off all evil the effects of praikamdrlataon 
malignant occupation and undesirable asterisms and week-days, 
the wise should offer oblations of sesame, ghee and durvd grass, 



810 Mrada Purdiia 

repeat the gdyciri mantra a hundred times and gift away gold, cows 
and sesame. 


ADHANA (CONCEPTION) 

318a. For conception, the first four nights (of menstruation} 
are to be avoided; the further days are permissible. 

318b-19. One who had been endowed with the sacred thread, 
if he desires for a male issue should resort to a woman when the 
Moon occupies an odd sign, the then rising sign aspecting a male 
planet^^, the lunar day being even, the asterisms being not one 
of Revatl (Pauf^a)^ Mula, Visakha {Aht) and Magha {Pitrya ); 
and the sacrificiai Rrt having not been fed by him (that day). 

PUMSAVANA: rite FOR THE BIRTH OF A 

MALE CHILD 

320a. Purfisavana *'^V/hcn conception has been confirmed, in 
the first third or second month, the Purf}savana ceremony has to 
be performed. 

320b-2I. Simontonnayana {Parting of the hair). The 
Simanta ceremony should be performed in the fourth, ^ixth or 
eighth month (of pregnancy) when the lord (of the month is 
strong,*® (the other conditions being that) the Moon and the 
asterisms relating to the couple arc strong; 

322. The lunar day not being riktd 4th, 9th, 14th), 
new moon or full moon; the week-day being Tuesday, Thursday 
and Sunday, (being the ^male’ days) ; the asterism being male, 
butomitting the tik^na (sharp) one’s (viz. Mula, Ardra, JycHha, 
and A^lesa), the mUra (mixed) ones, Krttika and Viiakha) 
and the ugrd (violent) ones, (pie., Purvaphalguni, Purvasadha 
and Purvabhadrapada, Bharanland Magha); the Moon being 
in a male asterism;** 

323. The 8lh house (indicating death) from the birthhouse 
being clear, the rising signs of the couples being not the eighth 
being aspected by beneficent planets and not aspccted by 
malefic planets; 

324. Beneficent planets occupying the 3rd (dhi), 9th 
dhama), ^nd Kendra and malefic planets occupying the three 
evil houses, the Moon being not in the 12ih (afttyOf loss) or 6ih 
(art). 



11.56.325-334 


811 


325. If any of the cruel planets which is strong, occupies 
the 12th, 5th {dtmaja) or the 8th place, assuredly It will kill the 
pregnant lady, whose sirrumta is being performed or the child in 
the womb. 

JATAKARMA and NAMAKARANA (BIRTH RITE 

AND NAMING CEREMONY) 

326. The birth rite (jutakarma) of the child should be 
performed on the muhUrtd of birth or at the end of the birth- 
pollution and should be preceded by the worship of the manes, 

327. When the birth-pollution has ended, the naming 
ceremony should be performed according to family practices. 
The name given shall be ancient, renowned and composed 
in auspicious syllables. 

328-30a, If due to the exigencies of place, time, in¬ 
vasion etc., there had been delay, the father of the child should 
perform the above two ceremonies when the planets Jupiter and 
Venus have not set, in the astcrism Pusya, during the north¬ 
ward course of the Sun, iit an astcrism belonging to the groups 
coTCi mrdu or kfipra^^^ in an auspicious week-day, the day 
being endowed with potency in consideration both of the Moon 
and the asterisms, during the rising of an auspicious sign and in 
an auspicious division thereof, and when the 8th house (indi¬ 
cating death) is clear. 

ANNAPRASANA (THE FIRST FEEDING) 

330b-31a. It is auspicious to perform the First feeding 
ceremony of male children in the sixth or eighth month, and of 
female children in the fifth or the seventh month (after birth). 

331b-32a. It is ordained to be performed oh an auspici¬ 
ous week-day, on any lunar day except riktd (4th, 9th and 14th), 
the omitted lunar day,^nundd (1st, 6th and 11th) and !2th and 
8th. 

332b-34. The first feeding ceremony would be auspicious 
in the asterisms of xht caray s/Aira, mrdu and kfipra classes, the 
eighth house (indicating death) being vacant, the 10th house 
also being vacant, during the rise of an auspicious sign and in an 
auspicious division thereof, in the forenoon, when (the rising 
sign is) occupied or aspected by beneficent planets, when the 



812 


Js'arada Purdayi 


3rd» 6th and 11th [l&bha) houses arc occupied by evil planets 
while x\xtkendray 3rd {dhi) and 9th {dhorma) are occupied by 
beneficent planets, and the Moon is in the 12th (vyaya), 6th 
(<3n),or the 8ih {nid/tana). 

CAULA (TONSURE) 

335. TIjc tonsure of boys should \yc performed in the third 
or the fifth year, in accordance with the family practice and as 
ordained by the Crkya^-sStra which one follows.^ 

336. The tonsure ceremony shottid be performed in the 
northward transit of the Sun, when the Jupiter and Venus have 
not set, on a lunar day other than the full moon and new moon 
days and the riktd days {viz.y 4th* 9th and 14ih), on a Friday, 
'Fhursday, Wednesday or Monday. 

337. For the tonsure ceremony, the asterisms AsvinT, 
Punaivasu, Pusya, Mrga^iras, JyeHh5, Revat!, three from Hasta, 
(vU.f Hasta, Citra and Svati), three from Sravana, {vU., 
Sravaiia, Sravisfha and Satabhi^k) are auspicious. 

338. One's birth astcrism is auspicious for coronation, 
tonsure, first feeding and educational initiation into (Vedic) 
study and wearing the sacred thread), but not in other cere¬ 
monies. 

339. (Tonsure should be performed) when the 8th house 
is clear, during the rise of an auspicious sign and in an auspici* 
ous division thereof; when the Moon docs not occupy the 8th 
house from the birth-house, and avoiding the sixth, eighth and 
twelfth houses. 

340. When the second {dhaio), trikona^s ^nd (Isi, 5th 
and 9th houses) and kendras (1st, 4th, 7th, and 10th houses) 
and occupied by beneficent planets and the 3rd, 11th and 6th 
houses by the other planets. 

340b-41a. (Tonsure should not be performed) after an 
oilbath, at dawn or dusk, on Tuesdays and Saturdays 
(flra), at night, after meak, in battle, when one is angry, wear¬ 
ing ornaments, riding in a vehicle or on the ninth lunar day. 

341b-42a. Trimming of the moustaches is recommended 
for kings regularly every fifth day; it o be done on the as¬ 
terisms recommended for tonsure ^but if the fifth day does not 



11.56.342-350 


813 


tally with the asterisms it may be done) at the time of rise of 
such an asterism (inconsiderate of othei factors). 

342b-4 3a. Tonsure is productive of benehcial results if 
done on the direction of kings and brahmins, on the occasion of 
sacrifice, death, release from bond, marriage and on (the 
ordained) weck-days> asterisms and lunar days. 

ANKURARPANA : auspicious SOWING 

343b. At the beginning of all auspicious rites, 

*50wing of the seed’, should be done with a view to gain aus- 
piciousness (for the rite). 

344-45. On the ninth, seventh, fifth, or third lunar day, 
on an astcrism recommended for sowing,^^ on an auspicious 
weekday, when an auspicious sign is rising, the houses should be 
well decorated by awnings, banners and arches, and auspicious 
words of blessing should be caused to be uttered by auspicious 
ladies those who are not widows). 

346-47, Then (the master of the rite), preceded by the 
playing of musical instruments, dancing etc., should proceed in 
the north-easterly direction and collect from there sand and 
soft mud. Returning to the house, he should fill earthen or 
bamboo vessels (with the sand and mud brought) and pour 
over it water into which difierent sectls and flowers have been 
put. 

MAUSjlBANDHANA AND UPANAYANA : TYING THE 

MAU51JI BELT AND COMMENCING STUDIES 

348. Maunjibandhana (lit, *tying the belt made of mauHji 
grass )®^ is recommended on the eighth year after conception 
for brahmins^ on the eleventh year for kfatriyas and on the 
twelfth year for vailyas . 

349. Upanayana could be performed even, at the fifth 
year, since the boy endowed with the sacred thread done could 
become well versed in the Vedas and Sdslras and be endowed 
with prosperity. 

350. To the boy, even a week Venus or Jupiter would 
be beneficent. Uponayana should be performed only at the years 
ordained therefore and not at other times. 



«14 


Ndjada Pur^ 


SSL {Upanayana should be performed) when Jupiter, 
Venus and the lord of the (relevant) Veda are visible. The 
lords of the (four) Vedas are, in order: {fyveda) Jupiter; 
{Tajurveda)^ Venus; (Sdmaveda:) Mars and (Atkarveveda:) 
Mercury. 

352. The appropriate seasons for the Upanayorta of the 
three classes of twice-boms are, Autumn (^jre^), Hot season 
(Grim^) and Spring (Vasonta)^ taken in the reverse order. In 
general, the time ordained for them are the five months begin- 
tng with Magha (Tapes), 

353. (One who wears the sacred thread) in the months 
of Magha and Phalguna will become well versed in the here* 
ditory practices of his family; if in the month of Caitra he would 
become a knower of ordained duties, wealthy and an expert in 
the Vedas and Vedahgas.*^ 

354. One who wears the sacred thread in the month of 
Vaiiakha would become wealthy, an expert in the Vedas, 
Sastras and the sciences, and physically strong; if in the month 
of Jye^tha, he would be a knower of ordained rules. 

355. For Upanayanay the most auspicious days are : In 
the bright fortnight, the 13th, 10th, 7ih, 11th, 6th and the 
12th, the other days are of middling benefit. In the dark fort¬ 
night, the 2nd, 3rd and 5th days are of middling eflcct and the 
rest are extremely bad. 

356-57. The asterisms favourable for upanayana are : 
Hasta, Citra and Svati (ar^a-fr^j), Revatl, Pu^ya Ardra 

(Rudra), Punarvasu tAdili), Uttaraphalgum, Uttara^dha and 
Uttarabhadrapada, Sravana Dhanis^ha, ^atabhisak (FtVnufrj^a), 
Alvin!, Anuradha (Mitra) and Rohini (Abjqyoni ). 

358-59a. The lenth asterism from the birth-asterism is 
called Karma, the sixteenth SaAghSta, the eighteenih Sdtnuddya, 
the twenty-third Virtdfana, and the twenty-hfth Mdrma. No 
auspicious rite should be performed in these asterisms. 

359l>60a. The week-days pertaining to Acarya, Saumya 
and Kavya, Thursday, Friday and Wednesday) arc 

auspicious, the days pertaining to the Moon and the Sun are 
middling and the remaining two are detestable for commencing 
religious studentship (vrata). 

360b-61a. Divide daytime into three. During the first 



IL56.361b-372 


815 


part one should perform acts relating to the gods, during the 
second part, acts relating to men, and during the third part acts 
relating to the manes. {Upanayana^ which comes under the first 
category, should therefore be performed only in the first part 
of the day.) 

361b-62a. If Jupiter, Venus or the lord of one’s Veda 
or their divisions are in debilitation (nira), or are situated in 
enemy asterisms or divisions the student will lose his family 
status and his character. 

362b>363a, Again, Jupiter, Venus or the lord of one’s 
Veda*^ occupies an inimical house or its division, the student 
will be the perpetrator of great sins. 

363b*64. If, however, Jupiter, Venus or the lord of one’s 
Veda or their divisions are in exultation (ucca) or occupy their 
own houses or their or the quadrant (kendra) or 

trine ( trikot^o ), the boy will be extremely wealthy and well 
versed in the Vedas and the Vedahgas. 

365. If Jupiter, Venus or the lord of one’s Veda is in 
high exaltation and the eighth house is clear, the boy will be 
well versed in the Vedas and Sutras. 

366. If Jupiter, Venus or the lord of one’s Vedas or 
their divisioas are in friendly houses or in their divisions or are 
in exaltation he will be endowed with knowledge and wealth. 

367. It is rare that in the case of boy all the three, oiz., 
the week-day of the lord of one’s Veda, the strength of the lord 
of one’s Veda and the rising sign of the lord of one’s Veda occur 
s Imul taneously. 

368. Thus, when the Moon is in the division of the lord 
of the Veda, the student would become learned, but if in the 
division of an evil sign or in a division of his own s^n, he would 
be poor and constantly distressed. 

369. When the asterisms Sravato or Punarvasu (Aditi) 
(prevail and the Moon is in a division of Cancer, the student 
Would be endowed with the knowledge of the Vedas and the 
sciences and w ith wealth and foodgrains. 

370*72. All the signs arc commendable (if the time for 
the studentship ceremony is fixed) in an auspicious lagna, in an 
auspicious division thereof, when the eighth house is clear, the 
lagna, which is not in the eighth house is occupied or aspcctcd 



ai6 


Kdrada Pur ana 


by beneficent planet? or by the five planets Jupiter, Sun, Moon, 
etc., when they are friendly and strong or by four auspicious 
planets fully endowed with strength of position etc. or aspected 
by them, and devoid of the twentyone great blemishes (possible 
in a day)”. 

373. However, only the auspicious divisions of the nine¬ 
fold division {nnvdmia) of the said signs are to be selected. But 
the division of Cancer should never be selected even if it is 
aspected by a beneficent planet. 

374. The divisions of Vrsabha and Mithuna, and Lihra 
and Virgo are also auspicious. Studentship ceremony is to be 
performed only in a navdrhSa selected in the above manner. 

375-76. If evil planets occupy the 3rd, 6th and 11th 
{djfa) houses, beneficent planets are not to be found in the 6th, 8ih 
and l2th houses, and if the Moon does not occupy the 6th, 8th 
or the 12th house from the lagnoy the boy who takes the vow of 
studentship will be pennyless and always consumptive even if 
the Moon is in exaltation in its own house. 

377. If the Sun is exalted in the quadrants, the student’s 
parents will die. A lagna which docs not have any of ilic above 
five faults is productive of auspicious results in upanayana, 

378. The studentship ceremony should not be performed 
other than in spring, nor in the galagraha days, the days of non¬ 
study,*® thc6ih nor in (the karoi^a called) 

379. The eight galagraha (lit. ‘gripping the throat’) days. 
viz^i the four days from the 13th, the three days from the 7th 
and the 4th (of the dark fortnight) are declared to be 
inauspicious. 

KSURIKABANDHANA—(GIRDING THE SWORD) 

380a. Now, shall I set out k^rikdbandhana ‘the girding of 
the sword’, a ceremony (ordained) for ksatriyas, before their 
marriage. 

380b-83. The K^urikibandhana ceremony should be per¬ 
formed after worshipping the gods and the manes, in the month 
recommended for marriage, in the bright fortnight, when Jupiter, 
Venus and Mars have not set, on days prescribed for MauhjU 
bandana (‘tying the belt of maufiji grass’)/^ on a week-day 
other than Tuesday, a day endowed with the strength of the 



XI.56.384-394a 


817 


Moon and the astcrisms, in a nainlmsakc except the 8th, of the 
performer, the 8th house being clear, the Moon being in the 
lagna leaving out the 6th, 8th and 12th houses, and with beiicti- 
cent planets occupying the 2nd {dhondj house, the trines {irikona) 
and the quadrants {kendra)^ while the others occupy the 3rd, 
11th (dyd) and 6th {an) houses. 

384. First the sword should be duly worshipped, placing 
it in front of the deities. Later, in an auspicious Ingna^ the sword 
endowed with proper form and proportions should be lied (o 
the performer's waist. 

383-386. Prognofiicaiion by Aya. Divide half the length of 
the sword by the breadth of the blade. The remainders are 
called Hyo,^^ (Remainder I, called) Dhvaja-dyay foretells dc.slruc- 
tion of foes; (Rom. 2) Dhanur'^dya foretells death; (Rem. 3) 
Siifihay Victory; (Rem. 4).Vt4«a, ill health; (Rem. 3) Kw, gain 
of wealth; (Rem. 6), Gardabha, sorrow; 

387a. (If the Rem. is 7, it is) Gaja^dya when there would 
be great happiness, and (ifthe Rem. is 8) it is Dht/ink^a (Kdka) 
when there would be loss of wealth. 

387b-89. Progwstication through scars. Multiply the length 
of the sword, measured in one’s own augults (iwo-finger 
breadths) by the length of the dagger {kkadgaputrikd) and divide 
by 11. (If a scar or flaw occun in the sword at distances from 
the handles indicated by) the several remainders, the dfcci 
would be, in order : (1) birth of a son, (2) death of the enemy, 
(3) acquisition of a wife, (4) travel, (5) auspiciousness, 
(6) loss of wealth, (7) gain of wealth, (8) satisfaction, 
(9) attainment (of desires), (10) victory and (11) praise. 

390-9la. A scar in the first pan (of the angula is in¬ 
auspicious in the Dkvaja and Vfsa dyas. It is inauspicious if it 
occurs in the middle of the Sirhha and Gaja^dyas prevail. It is so 
towards the end, if the^vflatfand ICdka dyas prevail. In the Dhumra 
and Gardabha dyas^ a scar will not bring prosperity if it is at 
the very end (of the adgula). 

SAMAVARTANA-(RETURN FROM STUDIES) 

391 b-94a. The ‘tonsureaAer return’( SamdoartanamuT^dona)^ 
should be performed on the twice^boms when they return from 
their teachers’ homes aftercxening themselves (in their studies), 



818 


Ndxada Purih^ 


(The ceremony ij to be conducted) during the north^ward 
coune of the Sun; when Jupiter and Venus are visible; in the 
asterisim Cicri, Uttaraphalgun!> Uttarasadha, Uttarabhadra* 
pada, Pusya (Ijya), Revat! (Antya), Srava^ (Hari), Anuradha 
(Mitra) and Rohin! (Vidhdtd); on the week-days of Sun, Moon, 
Mercury, Jupiter and Venus, and in their (auspicious) lagnas 
and divisions thereof and leaving out the 1st [pratipat)^ 4th» 9th 
and 14th {riktg)^, new moon 8th and the ‘omitted day* 
( dinakfoya) 

VIVAHAPRASNA : (SOLICITATION FOR MARRIAGE) 

394b-95a< Ascertaifuneni of mspiewus time : O great 
brahmin ! Of all the stages of life, that of the householder is 
the most exalted. There, too, happiness depends on the wife being 
of good character. 

395b«9€a. Her acquiring commendable character depends 
upon the beneficent lagna (at the time of wedlock). Hence I 
shall set out below the ascertainment of the purity of the Icgna^ 
taking into cognizance what has been stated on the subject by 
Brahma. 

396b-97. On an auspicious day, (the enquirer) taking 
with him bete! leaves, fruits, flowers etc., should approach, 
with folded hands, a well-qualified astrologer, who is comfort¬ 
ably seated and is having a clear mind (at the moment), and 
consult him, with attention, as if to a deity. (He should then 
convey to the astrologer the birth-sign, birth-asterism etc. of 
the proposed couple.)*’^ 

398. If (at the time of the enquiry), the planet in the 
lagna is cruel and there is Mars in the seventh (house therefrom), 
the death of the couple should be predicted within eight years. 

399. If the Moon occupies the lagna and Mars is in the 
seventh house, the wise should anticipate the death of the 
husband within eight years. 

400. If there be a malefic planet in the fifth house from 
the lagna, who is aspected by an enemy planet and is in debi¬ 
litation, the girl will, without doubt, have her son still-born or 
will turn unchaste. 

401. The Moon, occupying the 3rd, 5th, 7th, 11th (dya) 



II.56.402-413 


819 


or 10th {karma) hou^e from the lagaa^ if aspcctcd by Japitcr» 
will bring about the union of the (proposeJ) couple. 

402. If the sections in therelating to Libra, Taurus 
and Cancer arc occupied or aspected by Venus or Moon> 
then die people who solicit for the Iwicle will get her. 

403. If the Jrekkdna or navdmia is female^'* and the lagna 
even and aspected by the Moon or Venus, then also the bride 
who is solicited for will be obtained. 

404. In the same manner, the bride will secure the 
solicited bridegroom if the lagna or navdmiaka of the solicitor 

ut the time of the cr^uiry) is male or is aspected by 
male planets.*’ 

40!). If the query is ma le in the dark fortnight, when 
the Moon occupies an even sign from the lagna or is aspected 
by an evil planet or is in the 8ih house {randhra)^ the marriage 
(solicited) will not lake place. 

406. If, at the lime of enquiry, auspicious indications 
and omens are seen, they tend to the welfare of the couple, 
and if these be inauspicious, they tend to undesirable 
consequences. 

407-409®. ICanya> arof/a, sfilicilation for ike bride. On a day 
which is pure in respect of the five constituents (of the almanac) 
endowed with the strength of the Moon and the astcrisms, at 
the rise of the marital asterism, the solicitation for the bride 
{Kanya^vararj^a) should be made with the utterance of the pranava 
(syllable Om) by the bridegroom, through his elders, at the 
bride’s house, to which place he should go with (lowers, 
betel leaves, fruits, fragrant unguents and sanctified grain 
[aksaia) and white garments, (the procession being) accom¬ 
panied by music, musical in.struments and words of benediction, 
warding off obstacles* 

409b. The bride’s father should, then, offer him the 
bride with pleasure. 

410. To the bridegroom endowed with family status, 
character, youth, handsomeness, wealth and learning, should 
be offered the bride, beautiful and young. 

411-13. The bride should then worship Goddess £aci, 
who is the source of all good qualities, the most beautiful in the 
three worlds, is adorned with divinely fragrant unguents, garlands 



820 


NdiTiida Pur^a 


and garments, is endowed with all auspicious marks, wears all 
ornaments and illuminates all the directions by means of her 
superior gemset chains, is attended day and night, by thousands 
of beauteous maids, and pray to the Goddess thus: 

414. Goddess Indrani, the dear consort of God Indra ! 
bestow on me, at my marriage, fortune, health and male 
offspring.’* 

MARRIAGE 

413. It is desirable to conduct (he marriage of girls in 
the even years of their birth, and that of boys in the odd years 
(of their birth). Otherwise, it would be destructive of both, 

416. The months of Magha, Phalguna, Vaisakha and 
Jyestha are auspicious; Kirttika and Marga^irsa are middling; 
the rest are censurable. 

417. Never should marriage, installation of deities and 
upanayana be performed in ten aster isms from the time that the 
Sun enters the astcrism Ardra. 

418. Marriage should not be performed when Jupiter or 
Venus have set or when they are in the stages of childhood and 
old age (i.f., just after they have risen or when they are about 
to set). Neither when Jupiter is in the sign Leo or in a Leo*part 
(in any other sign). 

419. For thirteen days after its rise in the west or in 
the cast*^ Venus would be in the ‘child’s stage’ and for five days 
before setting, in the stage of ‘old age’. In the case of Jupiter 
both stages would be of 15 days duration. 

420. So long as God Visnu (Hrsikesa) is asleep, it is 
not auspicious. There is nothing more auspicious than the 
festival day of Visnu {Vasudeva). 

421. The marriage of the hrstbom, whether boy or girl, 
should not be conducted in the month of their birth, nor in the 
asterisms of their birth, nor in the week-day of their birth. 

422. In the month ofjycs^a the marriage of both the 
Jyes|haputri and Jyes(haputra (eldest daughter and the eldest 
son) should not be performed. It is best to have one ‘Jyestha* 
at a time, not. otherwise.^* 

423. A marriage should not be performed for a week 
after a natural visitation {utp^ta) (like the appearance of a 



II.56.424-434a 


821 


comet, earthquake etc.) nor a complete eclipse. If the eclipse is 
partial (the prohibition is) for three days. (Similarly, prohibited 
arc the intercalary lunar day) which touches three civil days 
{tridyusprk) and the expunged lunar day.®^ 

424. (In the case of planetary obscuration), three days 
after their setting and three days before their rise should be 
eschewed. So far as their dusks arc concerned, three days before 
setting and seven days before rising should be eschewed. (?) 

425. Five days towards the close of the (lunar) month 
should be eschewed. So abo the 8th and the fi*/J days, (wi., 
4th, 9th and 14th). The VyatlpHia and Vaidhrti^ in their 
entirety, and half of Parigha are abo to be eschewed.®® 

426. Marriage is recommended in the following astcrisms: 

Revati {Pau$na)y Uttaraphalguni, Uttarasadha and Uttarbha** 
drapada {tryutiara) y {Mailra) y Sv&ti [Marut). Mrga* 

iirsa {Candra) Hasta {Arka), Magha {Pitrya) and Muia, when 
these are not in vedha^ i.e>, not mutually afflicted. 

427. If, in a marriage, the potencies of Jupiter and the 
Sun®* are required for the couple, effort should be made to 
worship those two weak planets. 

428. The strengths of gocara'^y vedha^^ and a^lavarga^ reck¬ 
oned in fupa^^ are higher in the ascending order. 7'he strength 
gocara is of a general nature (compared to the others). 

429-30a. The potencies of the Moon and the aster isms 
should be comidered and then the strength of the five constituents 
of the pancdhga, (Of the latter, if) the strength of the iithi is one, 
that of the weekday is two-fold, that of the asterism is three¬ 
fold, that of yoga is fourfold and that of katana {lilhyardka) is 
fivefold. 

430b-31. The {prognostication as reckoned in the) 
i7UiAfir/a b more strong and lagna b still stronger, ffora^ is stronger 
and Drekkdn^^ is still more so. Pfavdmld^* is more strong and 
Dvddaldrfiia^ stronger than that. 

432. TrirhidtfiSa^* is stronger than the previous, The com¬ 
bined strength of the above has to be duly considered. All the 
signs which are beneficently aspected arc commended in fixing a 
marriage. 

433-34a. The signs occupied by the five planets Moon, 
Sun, Jupiter, (Mercury and Venus) are acceptable. That is an 



822 


Ndrada Purd^ 


auspicious lagna where all ihc four (Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and 
Venus) are in strength and which is devoid of the blemish of 
or the twentyone great faults (mentioned below). 

434b-35a. Twentyone Major blemishes {Ekavirhfatimahddofa }. 
O Narada ! Listen now, to the names and effects of the twenty- 
one ‘Major blemishes’, being set out below. 

433b-36. (i). Pahcadgafuddki^fdlntjia is declared as the 

first blemish, (li) The second is L/dajfdstaJuddhi-hinaSUryasan- 
krama, (iii) The third is Pdpofa^varga. (Then follow) : (iv) 

(v) Kujdstama; 

437-39a. (vi) Ga^jldnlai (vii) Kartari, (viii-ix) Rippha- 
fa^<i,^(endUt (x) Sagraha, (xi-xii) Affama^lagna Md AflamardSi of 
the couple, (xiii) Visaghafl, (xiv) Muhtirtado;a {DurmuhUrta)^ 
(xv) Vdradofc, (xvi) Ekdrgala {KharjQrtkd-samdnghribha) t (xvii) 
Graharioipdlabkaf (xviit) KrQraviddharkfa, (xix) KrUrasarhyutarkfa 
(xx) Ku^nvdmia, and (xxi) Mahdpd^a'^Vaidkrii.^ 

439b-440 (i), ^onpurify of Padedhga, Pancdtlga is constitul- 
cd by Tirhty Vdra, ^akfatra, Tnga and Karana. The purity (of the 
five items) constitutes (he purity of pancdhga. When there is a 
blemish in the pahcdUgOi mere merit in lagna would not bring 
the desired result. 

441a. Discard Pancesika (‘Five arrows’, (,ptfaS-45tia)as if 
it is milk mixed with poison. 

4411>42. If (at the selected moment, mukUrta) the lagna 
and lagndrhSaka are not aspecCed by or are together with their 
respective lords or by their mutual lords or auspicious friends, 
(such a muhurta should be rejected). If the lagna be the 7th or 
the 7th section, the bridegroom will meet with death. 

443a. If they (the lagna and the lagadjiiiaka) are not as¬ 
pect cd or arc together, as indicated above, the death of the bride 
will result at the time of the marriage. 

443b-44a. (ii). SaAkrama. In marriage etc. sixteen 

kds each have to be eschewed before and after the transit of the 
Sun into a sign. 

444b. (iii). Pdpa-Sa4varga,^ In fixing a marriage etc. the 
auspicious (findings as read off from) $a4varga are greatly com¬ 
mended (and, so, the inauspiciotis times as reckoned by the 
$advarga reckonings should be avoided. 

445. (iv). Venus m the sixth house. The blemish ot Bkfgu. 



ir.56.446-455a 


823 


occurs when Venus occupies the sixth house. Even if 
Venus is in exaltation and occupies the lagna with an auspicious 
planet, such a lagna should always be rejected. 

446. (v). Mars in the eighth house. The great blemish 
Kujdftama will occur when Mars occupies the eighth house from 
the lagna. Reject the lagna even if it is occupied by three bcnefic 
planets if there is alongside Mars in exaltation. 

447. (vi). Gan4dnta. Gan4dnta (relating to iithi or lunar 
days) occurs for two nd4ikds each at the junctures of the (three) 
P^rnd tithis with the (three) Mandd iUhis^ (te., between the Jth 
and the dth, 10th and llth^and 15th and 1st).®’ This lime is 
deadly in the matter of birth, travel, marriage etc. 

448. Gan4dnta (relating to lagna) occurs for Haifa nd4ikd 
each at the junctures of Cancer and Leo, Scorpio and Sagitta^ 
rius and Pisces and Aries; thb time is deadly. 

449. Can4Ma relating to asterisms occui*s at the junc« 

tures of the ending sixteen nd4ikds of the three asterisms Aslesa 
{Sarpa ), Indra {Jye$(ha) and Rcvati {Pau$na) with the first quar¬ 
ters of the respective succeeding asterisms Mugha, Mula 

and Asvini). 

450n, The said three tapes of junctures form three 
different types of Gai,i4^7itasy which are all highly harmful. 

430b-51*. (vii). Kartari. The crossing, (in their motion), of 
two evil planets, one in regular motion and the other in retro¬ 
grade motion, while facing theis known as Kartari^ it 
will cut the throats of couple (like a pair of scissors). 

43lb-52a. Discard the lagna which is tainted by the 
blemish of Kartari even if it be occupied by auspicious planets 
endowed with all good qualities. 

452b. (viii-ix). Ripphasa4a^tendu. When Moon occupies 
the 6th, 8th and 12th {Rip^a) houses, the blemish of that name 
is caused. 

453-54a. Discard, even with effort, the abovesaid logna^ 
even if it be occupied by Jupiter and Venus. For a lagna with¬ 
in an enemy house even if occupied by friendly planets, either 
in exaltation or debilitation, and even if invested with all quali¬ 
ties, is deathly to couples. 

454b-35a. (x) Sagraha. When the Moon is in conjunction 
with some other planets, the‘blemish’ by name occurs. Do 



824 Mrada Purdna 

not perform marriages (at a muhSrta) when the said blemish 
prevaib. 

455b*57. When Sun is in conjunction with the Moon, to 
be sure, poverty will result; with Mars, disease; with Mercury, 
childlessness; with Jupiter, mbfortune; with Venus, having a co« 
wife; with Saturn, turning a recluse; with Rahu, destruction 
of family base; and if the Moon is in conjunction with Ketu con¬ 
tinued suffering and poverty will result. 

458-59a. If the Moon is in conjunction with evil planets 
the death of the couple will result. However, if the Moon, in 
exaltation, is in conjunction with beneficent planets in friendly 
signs, the lagna does not turn evil but always tends to their 
welfare. 

45db-60a. On the other hand, Moon, in exaltation or in 
its astcrism or in a friendly house, if it b in conjunction with an 
evil planet will cause their death. 

460b-61a. (xi-xii). Affama^lagna and Afloma rdii. The 
eighth lagna or the eighth sign (of birth) of the couple, if it 
occupies the lagna (of the time of the marriage) that too would 
cause the death of the couple. 

461b-62a. Even if the said sign or the lagna is occupied 
by a benevolent planet, discard that lagna^ and its divisions 
and also other houses governed by the lords (of the eighth 
houses of the couple). 

462b-63a. The twelfth lagna or sign (of birth of the 
couple, occupying the /agna (of the marriage) will result in their 
loss of wealth. Hence discard the lord of that division of the 
lagna, 

463b-64a. The rise of the birth sign and the rbe of the 
birth lagna auspicious. If the lagna (of xhtmuhUrid) is in the 
upacaya-s^^ of the above two, it is extremely auspicious. 

464b-68. (xiii). Vi^aghafi. Four ghafikds each in conti¬ 
nuation of the undermentioned ghafikds, respectively, in the 
twentyseven asterisms are called Vifaghafikds. They should be 
eschewed in fixing times of marriages etc., even if endowed with 
other qualities. They are, in order from the asterism Asvini: (1. 
AfvinI) : 50, (2. BharanI) : 24; (3. Krttika) : 30; (4. RohinI): 
40; (5. Mrgasiras): 13; (6« Aidra): 21; (7. Punarvasu): 30; 
(8. Pu$ya); 20; 9. A^le^); 32; (10. Magha) : 30; (11. Purva- 



II.56.469-477a 


825 


phalgum)* 20; (12 Uttaraphalguni): 18; (13. Hasu): 2t); (14. 
Citra 20; (15.Svali); 14; {16. Visakha) : 14; (17. Anuradha): 
10; (18. Jycstha) : 14; (19. Mula) : 56; (20. Purvasadha) ; 
24; (21. Utcara^dt^a): 20; (22. Sravana): 10; (23. Sravi^thSi): 
10; (24. Sacabhisak): 18; (25. Purvabhadrapada); 16; (26. 
Uttarabhadrapada): 24; (27. Revati): 30. 

469 (xiv). Muh^rtodofa. Such muhMas in the week-day 
from, Sunday, as arc censured (for other auspicious rites) arc to 
be censured also for marriage etc., even if invested with good 
qualitics.^^ 

470 (xv). Vdrado^a. Such days of the week for which 
blemishes have been indicated, in order, beginning with Sunday, 
arc to be eschewed also for (marriage, which is) the most aus¬ 
picious rite, even if the days are endowed with all qualifica* 

471. (xvi). Ekdrgala. Discard a lagna which cncompas.ses 
even a fourth part of (an astcrism having) (he blemish of 
Ekdrgala, as if it is milk mixed with poison, even if (the lagna is) 
occupied by Venus and Brhaspati.’® 

472. (xvii). GrahanotpdUxbfia, (In an auspicious rite, like 
marriage), the asterism in which an eclipse or an Ulp&ta (like 
the fall of a meteor or occun'cnce of an earthquake) occurs 
should bediscarded for three succeeding seasons {i.e. six months), 
thereafter as charred firewood, except when they arc occupied 
by the moon and left {bhuktod muktam bham). 

473. {xviii-xix). KrUraviddAark^a and Kr&rasajftyuta. In aus¬ 
picious rites (like marriage) discard all asterisms which are 
afflicted {viddka)^^ or in conjunction with violent planets, as 
pafkagavyd^^ to which a drop of wine has been added. 

474. If the asterism in question had been afflicted only 
by its fourth part and that, too, by benefic planets, the whole 
astcrism is not rendered inauspicious. However, if the affliction 
or being in conjunction is by cruel planets, the whole asterism 
has to be discarded. 

475-77a. (xx). KunavdrhSaka. The navlMUas Libra, Gemini 
and Virgo and the Second half of Sagittarius are auspicioxis 
except the ending in each. The ending will also be auspicious if 
they are of the category.^ The other navdrhiakas are not 

to be selected since they are Kunavdrhiakas ('Evil nacMiSakas ^). A 



826 


JiHrada Purana 


lagna in which ihcrc is a KmaxiSahiaka is to be rejected even if 
endowed with all other qualifications. 

477b-78a. (xxi). Moh&paia VaidhriiP The day on which 
the mahSpgta Vaidkrti occurs should be eschewed in auspicious 
rites (like marriage), even if endowed with all qualities, lor it 
would cause the death of the couple. 

478b-79. Minor blemishes {Svalpadosa)» Minor blemishes, 
not mentioned (aI>ovc) also exist, like for instance, lightning 
and hailstorm; mock-sun, halo round the Sun and the Moon, 
rainbow, and thunder of clouds: minor tremours etc., 

lunar days called ‘burnt month* {itagdhamisa ). 

47S. Do^dlta-lagna (burnt , and thewith the 

appellation ‘blind*, ‘deaf* and ‘lame*. Now, the explanation of 
these is given below. 

480. Lighltihig and hailuomi. Lightning and hailstorm, 
which occur at unexpcvird times, will indeed, be injiiriou.s to 
auspicious rites, though, in course of lime, they will become 
non injurious. 

481. There is, however, no doubt that anyone of Jupiter, 
Venus or Mercury will obviate the effect of these gi'oups of 
blemishes if it is in a quadrant {kendta)^. 

482-84a. Vedha {Fietcing Affliction), (Draw a diagram 
with) five vertical lines, five across, and two each diagonally. 
Mark the astcrism Kittika {Agnidhi nya) at the end of the second 
diagonal in the north-east and the other asterisms, including 
Abhijit (in order, in a clockwise direction). The mutually 
‘pierced* astcrisms are those at the ends of the lines.’'* 

404b-85a. Latta. The Sun and other planets affect, for a 
day, an asterism, ahead of or behind it, (alternately). Thus, 
the Sun alFects the 12th asterism (ahead of it); Moon, the 22nd 
(behind it) ; Mars, the 3rd (ahead of it); Mercury, the 7th 
(behind it);Jupiter, the 6ih (ahead of it); Venus, the ">ih 
(behind it) ; Saturn the 8th (ahead of it); and Rahu, the 9ih 
behind it. (These days are to be scrupulously avoided in fixing 
muhfirtas.) 

4B5b-86a. Pgtcbha {Malignant asierim)^ Count from 
Hasta [SSiyabha) the asterism ASlc^a {Surpa)^ Magha [Piirya)^ 
Rcvali (/Jw(y<!),Citra {Tvdsfra)^ Anuradha {Mitra) and Sravana 



IL56.486b-496 


827 


(VUnubha) and count off those numbers from Asvini. The astc* 
risms got would be malignant asterisms {pdtabha) (?) 

406b. In Saurastra and the Salva country the blemish 

of Latia is not taken note of. 

487. Patila [Minor tremour) is not considered auspicious 
in Kalihga (Orissa) and Vahga (Bengal) countries. In Balhika, 
Kuru country and certain other regions, however, it is not a 
blemish at all. 

488. Dagdha^tithi and Dagdha^lagna. The ‘burnt' lunar 
days and the ‘burnt’ Ugnai arc eschewed in Madhyadesa 
(Madhya Prade&h) but not considered inauspicious in other 
areas. 

489. The iamc’, ‘blind’ and ‘deaf’ lagna^ and the signs 
which do not contain the ending of a lunar month are rejected 
in the Gauda and Malava regions, but not censured in other 
areas. 

490. Every moment is infested with some blemish or 
other, and it would be impossible even for the creator to wipe 
off the blemishes completely, hence one should opt for the 
maximum of auspicioiisness and the minimum of blemishes. 

491a. Marriage oliof. In an auspicious lagnay (decided 
upon) in consideration of the above, should be aixangcd the 
mutual viewing of one another by the couple. 

491b-95. The couple should then be made to ascend an 
auspicious altar on which holy fire is kept—an altar which is 
one cubit high, a square of four cubits on all sides; supported 
by four polished pillars; slightly slanting to the left; with a 
pavilion around, beautified by steps on the four sides; elongated, 
on the east and the north; beautified by the planting of plan¬ 
tain trunks; ornamented by (replicas of) swans and parrots, 
painted pots, and shoots placed on the arches; decked with heaps 
of love-inciting flowers and colours; sanctified by the benedic¬ 
tions ol' brahmanas and pleasing with auspicious and divinely 
beautiful ladies; and making the heart merry with musical 

instruments, dance and songs. 

496. Mutual horoscopical agreement of the couple^^* Eight are 
the miiiut^I compatabilities which conduce to sons and grandsons: 
(i)/?<!//, (ii) Siridnray (iii) GanOy [W) PHUay (v) ToM (vi) 
VarnOf (vii) Jiajju and (viii) Vafya. 



828 


N^rada 


497-98a. Agremint of RUi. Different asterism for the 
couple in the same rdii is excellent. Middling is to have different 
raHs^ but the same asterism. The marriage of a couple bom in 
the same asterism in the same rdH results in death. 

498b-99a. StridUra^ A distance within the first nine 
asterisms for the male horoscope from the asterism of the female 
is highly inauspicious, the second nine is middling and the third 
nine is excellent. 

499b-500a. Agreement in The asterisms in the human 

group (martya-gai^) are : The three pCrvas and ultaras, 
Purvaphalgunl, Purvasa^ha, Purvabh&drapada, Uttaraphalgunl, 
Uttara^adha and Uttarabhadrapada), RohinI {Dhdtr), Bharai;il 
{Tdmya)^ Ardra (Mahela). 

500. Those of the divine group are : Sravana [Hari)t 

Vasu {Aditya)y Hasta {Arka)t Svati Revatl [Aniya)^ 

Anuradha (Mitra), ASvini> Pusya (Ijya) and Mfgailr^a 
(Indu). 

501. Asterisms of the demonic gam {Rak^o-gana) arc : 

Magha Citra Visakha {Dviduivatya) ^ Krttika 

(^^t), jyestha (/ncA’a), Dhanistha (Kan<) 8atabhtsak (Vdriia)t 
Mula, and Ailesa (Ahi ). 

502. If the birth-aster ism of the couple is the same, it 
would be pleasing in many ways. It is middling if one is human 
and the other divine. Death will result (if the human and the 
divine are united) with the demonic. 

503. Agreement between the lords of the rdii : If the lords 
of the rdSis of the couple are one in the 6th house and the other 
in the 8th> death will result. If it be fifth and ninth, there would 
be childlessness. Second and twelfth houses, too, are not desirable. 
In the others, there will be excellent mutual attraction between 
the couple. 

504. If the said lords arc identical or friendly, the 
marriage will be happy. It might be so even in the case of two 
and twelve and the trines {triko^), but never in the case of six 
and eight. 

505*6. Agreement of Toni,^ The animals relating to the 
asterisms AivinI etc. arc in order; (1. Afvini) : Horse; 
(2. Bharani): Elephant; (3. Kfitiki): Goat; (4. Rohii;iI): 
Serpent; (5. Mf^aliras): Snake; (6. Ardra): Dog; (7. Punar- 



IL56.507-515 


829 


vasu): Cat; (8. Pu^ya): Goat; {9. Ailcja): Cat; (10. Magha): 
Rat; (11. PurvaphalgunI): Mouse; (12.Uttaraphalguni}:Cow; 
(13. Hasta): Buffalo; (14. Citra): Tiger; (15. Svati); Buffalo; 

(16. Visakha) : Tiger; (!7. Anuradha): Deer; (18. Jycslha) : 
Deer; (19. Mula) : Dog; (20. PQrvasicJha): Monkey; (21. 
Uttarasa^ha): Ox; (22. Sravau): Monkey; (23. Sravisjha) ; 
Lion; (24. 8atabhisak) : Horse; (25. Purvabhadrapada): Lion; 
{26. Ultarabhadrapada): Cow; (27. Revati): Elephant. 

507. The pairs Dog and deer, Mongoose and serpent* 
Goat and monkey, Lion and elephant, Cdw and tiger, Rat and 
cat, and Buffalo and horse are inimical. 

508. Van^a {caste) Pisces, Scorpio and Cancer are 
brShmanas; the further ones belong to the other castes.®^ If the 
male’s rdii is lower than that of the female in caste, it is 
inauspicious^. 

509-1 Oa. Rajju or (The 27 asterisms are in the form 
of a zigzag rope, each loop carrying 3 asterisms, thus forming 
three columns of 9 asterisms each, (If the asterisms of 

the boy and the girl fall) in the same column, it indicates death 
and not so in adjacent columns. 

510b-11a. Different types of marrf^r. (The three types of 
marriages) Pr&jdpatya^ Brdhma Daiva are approved by the 
sage, and if performed at the said (auspicious) times, would be 
extremely beneficial. 

51 lb. (The Asura marriage is achieved through the pay¬ 
ment of money and Paiidca by kidnapping the bride. The Pdksasa 
marriage is done by winning over the bride in battle and 
Gandharva is made by mutual tinderstanding. 

512«13a. Abhijit and CodhUlikd.^^ The fourth lagna from the 
lagfid at sunrise is called Abhijit and the seventh is called 
Godkfilikd. Both these are auspicious for marriage and (will 
bless the couple) with sons and grandsons. For the Easterners 
(belonging to Bengal, Assam etc.) and the people of Kalinga 
(Orissa), GodhUlikd is important. 

513b-14. Abhijit is considered as important in all regions 
as a destroyer of blemishes. The muktlrta (of two ndjikds) when 
the Sun is at the zenith is called Abhijit, It wipes off a 11 blemishes 
as the Pinaka-bowed (Siva) wiped out the Tripuras.^® 

515. Prohibitions in marriages. A daughter’s marriage should 



S30 


J^fdraia PuT^b^ 


not be conducted for three seasons after a son's marriage, 
neither should be performed the sacrament (for the change to 
married life, vraia). When there has been an atispicious event, 
there shall not be another auspicious event closely following. 

516. If the marriages of two sisters arc conducted within 
six months of each other, one of them will surely become a 
widow within three years. 

517. Mutual marriages should not be performed nor 
should two daughters be married to the same groom, nor two 
daughters Iwn of the same parents to two brothers born of the 
same parents. 

318a. Nor should two marriages be conducted at the 
same time, nor two tonsures. 

518b«19a. If a marriage is perlbrmed during the 

child if born during day-time will kill hb father, if during night, 
his mother, and if during the (morning and evening) twilights, 
himself. There is no exception to 

319b. A son and a daughter born in the asicrism 
Mula will positively kill the father-in-law, but not one born in 
the ending quarter of that astcrism. 

520a-20b. A boy, but not the girl, born in the first 
quarter ofAslesa and the latter two quarters of Jyc^iha will 
also (kill the father-in-law). 

521. A girl born in Mula or Purva^dha will not harm 
the father or the mother, but the one born in Jycjtha will kill 
the elder brother of the husband, and one born inVisakha 
(Dvidaiva) the younger brother. 

521-23. VodhSpiaveSa, For the auspicious entry of the 
bride into her husband's household, the sixth, eighth, tenth or 
seventh day counted from the day of marriage b recommended. 
(If it b delayed), the marriage journey should be made leaving 
out the second (and other even) years and eschewing the bride’s 
birth astcrbni, birth-lagna, and bbtlinlay, and abo avoiding 
position to Venus.** 

INSTALLATION OF DEITIES 

524a. The installation of anydcity during the northward 
course of the Sun will conduce to prosperity. 



IL56.524b-534b 


831 


524b-25. The installation would be auspicious if made 
at a lime when both Mercury and Venus arc visible, in the 
hve months from Magha, but omitting Citra; in the bright 
fortnight and, if in the dark fortnight, in the first eight days, 
the lunar day being selected in accordance with the day patro¬ 
nised by the particular deity; 

526-52 7a. On the two lunar days beginning with the 
second, the three days beginning with the fifth, the four days 
beginning with the 10th, especially on full moon day; 

527b-28a. On the asterisms, the three Uttards {viz., 
Uttara-phalguni, Uttarasadha and Uttarabh^rapada), Mrga- 
iiras, Revatl, Hasta, Citra, Svati and Pusya;dnd also on Aivini^ 
Rohi^i, Purvasadha, Sravai^, Anuradha, and Dhanisjha; 

528b-29, On week-days excepting Tuesday, when the 
Sun is strong with r^ards to (he master (of the installation), 
when the potencies of the Moon and the asterisms are forth* 
coming; in the forenoon of that auspicious day, when the lagna 
and the division thereof are auspicious, and when no (asterism) 
deadly to the master is rising. 

530. ^fa(ure of the signs and houses. All the signs are aus¬ 
picious if occupied or aspected by benefic planets, the Pancaka 
(Five sources of energy)*^ being auspicious and the 8th house, 
indicating death, is vacant. 

531. The Moon, Mars, Sun, Node, Tail and Saturn would 
be harmful to the master if they occupy the lagna^ while the 
other planets would bestow wealth, grain and happiness. 

532a. In the second house, the evil planets will not bes¬ 
tow any desired fruit, while the benefics and the Moon will 
bestow wealth. 

532b. In the third house, all the planets bestow sons, 
grandsons and happiness. 

533a. In the fourth house, the benefic planets bestow 
happiness, while the violent planets bestow unhappiness. 

533b. In the fifth house, the violent planets produce 
distress, while the benefic planets bestow sons and happiness. 

534a. In the sixth house the benefic planets become ene¬ 
mies, while the evil planets would destroy one^s enemies. 

334b. In the seventh house, the evil planets cause disease, 
while the beitefic planets bestow auspicious fruits. 



832 Mrada Purdrui 

535a. In the eighth house, ail planets occupying it cause 
the death of the master. 

535b. In the ninth house which indicates dhamay the evil 
planets cause distress, but the benefit planets are auspicious and 
bestow happiness, 

536a. In the tenth house which indicates Kama^ the evil 
planets give trouble but the benefit planets and the Moon bring 
glory. 

536b. In the eleventh house, indicative of profit, all planets 
tend to bestow the maximum income (profit) (to the master). 

537a. AH the planets occupying the twelfth house in* 
dtcating expenditure will make (the master) spend incessantly. 

537b«38a. The images of deities, installed, if not endowed 
with wealth, will harm the master, and harm the priest if not 
properly invoked with sacred chants. If not sculptured accord¬ 
ing to specifications, they will injure the master^s wife. Indeed, 
there is no act so inimical (as an inscallation (which has not 
been properly performed). 

538b-39a. If the installation is done duringa lagnd highly 
endowed with auspicious qualities, and if the blemishes are very 
little, the installation of deities would bestow upon the master all 
his desires. 

(VASTULAKSAI^IA: CONSTRUCTION OF HOUSES) 

539b-400a. Testing of tfu ground. Towards the construction 
of a town, village, house etc, first examine the ground for its 
qualities of smell, colour and taste. 

540b-41. For brahma^, (k^triyas, vaiiyas and 
sudras), it is auspicious if the earth has, respectively, the smell 
of honey, flower, sour fruit and flesh; has, respectively, the 
colours white, red, green and dark; and has, respectively, 
the tastes sweet, hot, bitter and astringent. 

542. It is beneficial for all people if the ground slopes 
towards north-east, east or north. Slopes towards the other 
directions would always be h^hly harmful to them* 

543. Dig a (cubical) pit of the depth of one cubit and 
fill it (with the excavated earth) • It would be extremely bene¬ 
ficial if there is earth to spare, if less, it b inauspicious and if 
just enough (to fill the pit), it b middling. 



lL56.544^556a 


833 


544. Dig a similar pil at dusk and fill it with water. When 
examined in the mornings if there is water stilly the place would 
be prosperous, if there is just slush, it would be middling, and if 
it is dry, it is inferior. 

545. Orientation {East-west determination). When a ground 
with good characteristics as above has been selected, prepare 
a level surface in its middle and draw a circle thereon, for deter¬ 
mining the east-west line. 

546a. Fix a 12-inch gnomon at its centre and with its 
help, determine the directions.^ 

S46b-47a. Construction of the building. In the ground measur¬ 
ed out as a rectangle and tested through the sixfold divisions 
($advarga),^^ a beautiful edifice should be erected, along the 
lines drawn. 

547b-48. Windows in the outer walls of the residential en^ 
closure. Along the directions on the four sides, reckoned from the 
east, eight gates each should be put up. In the clockwise order 
they will have the undermentioned effects: 

549. East: (i) Misfortune, (it) Loss of wealth, (iii) gain 
of wealth, (iv) propitiation of the king, (v) great wealth, 
(vi) big theft, (vii) rage and (viii) fear. 

550. South: (i) Death, (ii) imprisonment, (iii) fear, (iv) 
attainment of riches, (v) increase in wealth, (vi) freedom from 
doubts (vii) fear from diseases, and (viii) destruction of creatures. 

551. West: (i) Loss of a son, (ii) prosperity to the enemy, 
(iii) attainment of riches, (iv) receipt of wealth, (v) happiness, 
(vi) extreme misfortune, (vii) uni^appiness, and (viii) distress. 

552. North: (i) Loss of one’s wife; (ii) destruction of crea¬ 
tures, (iii) Misfortune, (iv) attainment of grains and wealth, 
(v) wealth, (vi) prosperity, (vii) intense fear, and (viii) hunger. 

553. Doorw<^s. The main doorway to the house is to be 
in the west or the south, its height being twice its breadth. 

554. BUdivision concept Divide the ground inside the 
boundary walls into 81 squares (by dividing the sides into nine 
equal divisions). Nine squares in the centre form the Brahma* 
stk^a (‘place of Brahma*), which is highly inauspicious (for 
residential quarten). 

555-56a. The thirytwo squares close to the outer wall, 
(t.e., Che border squares, all round) pertain to the ghosts. Resi- 



834 


N^jada Purdna 


dential construction in the ghost region will result in unliappi* 
ness, distress and fear. 

The other squares (are auspicious and) tend to bless one 
with sons, grandsons and wealth for one’s constructing the house. 

S56b-58a. The cast^west and north*south lines in the 
construction form its bloodvcsscb. The Brahma squares, the ghost 
squares and the intersecting points of the bloodvessels are to be 
understood as the vital junctures of the construction. The vital 
junctures are not commended for residential use.®’ 

558b-59a. Time for building construction. The months 
Margasiras {Saumya)^ Phalguna, Vaisakha, Magha, 8ravana 
and Karttika conduce to sons, health and wealth (to one who 
builds a house during these months). 

559b-60. Digvargayoni. Ihc (eight) groups begin** 

ning with a {viz., (1) the vowels a etc., (2) ka^varga, (3) ca- 
varga, (4) fa-varga, (5) ta-varga, {$) pa-varga, (7)ya-ra-la-va and 
(8) Sa^fa^sa^ka) are placed, in order, against the (eight) direc¬ 
tions beginning with the east. (The eight animals and birds, 

(1) eagle, (2) cat, (3) lion, (4) dog, (5) serpent, (6) rat, 
(7) elephant and (8) deer are tht yoni< (animal-births) of the 
(eight) said direction-groups. Of these the fifth counted from 
its group is its cnemy.^* 

561. Auspiciousness based on Varga^akra. (In order to 
determine whether the selected spot would be beneficial for the 
owner’s residence), the vorga of the sddhya (here, the village) 
and that of the sddhaka (owner) are separately (calculated) 
and each divided by 8. If the remainder got from the Varga of 
the s^haka is greater, the land is good for him, otherwise, it 
will destroy him.” 

562. Or, count the asterisms from the asterisms of the 
sddhaka (owner) to that of the sddhya (village), multiply that 
number by 4 and divide by 7. The greater the remainder, the 
owner will fare better in that land.^®® 

563. Auspiciousness based on area. The product of length 
and breadth forms the area of a house. From it is calculated, in 
order, the numbers indicating (the nature of) its positiveness, 
negativeness, income, asterism, week-day and mivdrhSa,^^^ 

564. Positiveness conduces to prosperity, while negative- 



IL56.563-574 


835 


ness is inauspicious. An odd number indicating income points to 
auspiciousncss while an even number indicates penury. 

565. Auspiciousness based on aslerisms. The third nsterism 
(of the house) from that of the master of the house indicates 
depletion of wealth, the fifth astcrism indicates depletion of 
prestige, and the seventh asterbm foretells death. 

566. Auspiciousness based on the signs. The second and 
twelfth sign conduces to poverty and triangular sign conduces 
to sonicssness. The sixth and eighth signs indicate death. The 
other signs are auspicious. 

567. Auspiciousness on the basis of week-days. Sundays and 
Tuesdays conduce to fear of 6re. The days pertaining to the 
other planets conduce to the fuKilment of all desires. 

368»69a. Deity of the dwelling and entrance to the house. The 
Deity of the dwelling ( Vdsiu^pumdn) would be lying prostrate on 
the house^site with his head towards the east during the three 
months beginning with Nabhasya {i.e., Bhadrapada, Asvina and 
Kirttika). This potbellied deity, called also Cara 'the moving’ 
shifts its position anticlockwise every three months, (thus remain* 
ing with his head towards north during Margailrsa, Pausa and 
Magha, west during Phalguna. Caitra and Vai^kha, and south 
during Jyestha, Asadha and Sravana). 

569b*70. The main entrance to the house should be in 
the direction in which the head of the Deity of the dwelling is 
(at the time when construction is started). A house with its 
entrance turned opposite to the said direction will bring disease 
and distress (to the master of the house). This drawback will 
not affect a house which has entrances on all sides. 

57 L Commencement of construction. A mud pot, with gold, 
gems, grain and lotus seeds should be placed in .a pit of the 
depth of a cubit in the centre of the house (•site) as a deposit). 

572a. The middle point of the longer side of the house- 
site is termed {ndbki) (navel) and an area of three digits around 
it is its belly. 

572b-74. At the navel a gnomon adorned with gold, 
clothes, etc., and conducive of sons and grandsons, has to be fixed. 
The measure of the gnomon for (the houses of) Brahmanas, 
(Ksatriyas, Vai^yas and Sudras) are, respectively, 24, 23,16 and 
12 digits* The gnomon should be constructed from the wood of 



836 Narada PxiTlbj.(X 

kkadiray arjuna, sdift and puga or from red sandal, pal3i<ty rakt(tsala 
or viidh. 

573. Divide die qnomon into three, construct a square 
around ir, then an oc logon and then an unbroken circle (?) 
[atiasram rjum fwaramm ), 

570-78, Fix the gnomon prepared as above at the appro¬ 
priate place duly marked with a string used to mark off the 
qiiadraiKs, signs etc. {^advmgiiiuddhisutteua) on an auspicious 
clay, (he prevailing asterism being one of the m}du. dkruva 
or kfipra classes'®^ the lunar day being not newmoon or one 
of the ukt3 ‘empty’ days (we., the 4lh, 9(h and 14th tiikis)^ the 
day being not Sunday nor Tuesday, the lagna and the eighth 
house being not occupied by evil planets, tiic eighth house 
being vacant, the lagm l>cing auspicious, and so also the 
mwMfdka division thereof, and the hgnn l>eing occupied or 
nspected by bcnchccni planeis. 

r)79-80a. The fixing of (hegnomon should be accompani¬ 
ed by (he utterance of sacred hymns and the sounds of inu>ical 
ins till men ts played by the most auspicious ladies. The kendra 
and irikona houses (quadrants and trines) should be occupied 
by beneficent planets, the third and the eleventh {cya) and sixth 
houses being occupied by the other planets, and the Moon occu¬ 
pying the sixth house from lag^. 

580b-82. Clouificatitm of dwellings. There arc six types of 
dwellings having, respectively, one, two, three, four, seven and 
ten halls; each of these are of sixteen types, which carry the 
appellations: Dkruva, Dharya, Jaya, Pfanda, Svara, Kanta, 
Manoramn, Sumukka, Durmukha,Krura, iiatru, Svarnaprada, h)iaya, 
Akranda, Vtpula and Vijaya. 

583-84a. The possible types of dwellings can be calculat¬ 
ed by the method of permutation and combination (as is done 
in metrics, where, in order to find the number of possible forms 
of a metre, the following procedure is adopted): Place the short 
syllable below the long syllable; and further, too, place the 
syllables, progressively. Thus fill the set entirely with long 
syllables and then add one with all short. 

584b-83a. Verandah. Construct narrow verandahs {alinda) 
round the building, starting from the entrance. Cumidering the 
verandahs from the east, there can be sixteen types of houses. 



II.56.585b-600a 


837 


585b-87a. l/icaiitm of the rooms. The bathroom shall be 
to the cast and the kitchen to the south-east. The room for 
sleeping shall be to the south and the armoury to tlie southwest. 
To the west shall be the dining room and the granary to the 
northwest. The room for worship is to be in the north and the 
room for the storing of milk» curds etc. to the north-east. 

587b-89a. Rooms for (1) bed, (2) urine, blood and 
faeces; (3) food, (4) auspicious things, (5) grain, (6) enjoyment 
with women, (7) M’calth» and (8) ornaments, are to be located 
(in between the eight rooms mentioned above) beginning with 
the north east-east. (Construction of residences in this manner 
IS auspicious.’®* 

f)89b-90a. Birds^ beo,<ts eU. of the direction. Flag, smoke, 
lion, dog, cow, ass, elephant, and crow—these eight arc ascribed, 
in order, to the directions beginning with the east.’®* 

590b-91. Inauspicious trees around the house. Pink udumbora^ 
cRta. snukiy nimbay vibkiiakay thorny trees, milktrees, nivatihay 
kapitthakay a^asH, smdhuvala and tintidika arc not recommended 
(for being planted around a residence). 

592a. An elder brother’s house to the south or west (of 
one’s own) (is recommended) as that of one’s own father. (^) 

592b. The foundations of a house are to be commended 
if they arc level and the pillars equal (in height), not otherwise. 

593. The walls should not be too high nor too low, the 
height being fixed as one likes it. So also, the storeys, one over 
the other. In all such cases, the above shall be the consideration* 

594-95, Drains and gagojUs. Drains in houses are of eight 

types (as obtaining in ciifTereni regions). They arc, in order: 

. 

Paficala, Vaidcha, Kaurava, Kaujanyaka, Magadlia, Surasena, 
Gandhara and Avantika. In all these the breadth is one fourth 
of the height, 

596. The Paiicala type is the smallest and the others, 
Vaideha etc., are larger, in that order. 

597-98. The Pahcala measure is applicable to all. How¬ 
ever, for the residences, in two or three storeys, of bra tuna nas 
etc., drains of special suitability are those of (he Avaiui measure 
to Brahmanas, Gandhara measure to Ksatriyas and Kaujaneya 
measure to Vaisyas. 

599-600a. Stables for camels and elephants should 



838 


Ndrada Purdria 


have their heights with accord with the dhvaja or gaja measures. 
However, for cattle and horses, the height of the cables shall 
accord with the dhvcja or vrsa measures. The entrance, place for 
penning and place for feeding should accord respectively, with 
the dhvaja^ sirhka and vr^a measures. 

€00b. VdstupUjd, I shall now set out the procedure for 
the worship of the building before it is occupied. 

601. On husked rice spread in the centre of the house, 
draw ten lines, (west to) east, a cubic in the length, and ten 
lines (across south to) north, thus forming 81 squares. 

602. Mark the 45 deities mentioned below (in the appro¬ 
priate squares), 32 of them in the border squares and 13 inside. 

603. Now, shall I state their names and places, in order. 
Here are the 32 deities (to be marked) from the northeast. 

604-Sa. (1) $iva, (2) Parjanya, (3) Jayanta, (4) Indra, 
(5) Surya, (6) Candra, (7) Bhf^, (8) Aka^a (Antarik^aka), 
(9) V4yu, (10) Pu$a, (II) Nirrti, (12) Gfhaksata, (13) Yama 
(Dandadhara), (14) Gandharva, (15) Bhrngarija (Bhrguraja), 
(16) Mi^a, (17) Pitfganadhiia (18) Dauv4rika, (19) Sugriva, 
(20) Pu^padanta, (21) Varu^ (Jaladhiia), (22) Asura, (23) 
Sesa (? Sosa), (24) Papa (Rajayaksma), (25) Roga, (26) 
Naga (Bhogi), (27) Mukhya, (28) Niiakara (? Bhallata), 
(29) Soma, (30)Sunya (? &rpa), (31) Aditi, and (32) Diti. 
These are the 32 deities. 

605b-7a. (As has already been noted, Brahma occupies 
the nine squares at the centre). Outside (this Brahmap<uia)^ are 
the four deities, Apabi Savitra, Jaya and Rudra in the comers, 
b^^nning from northeast. 

607b-9a. Again, in the alternate squares around Brahma^ 
pada, beginning from the east, are the eight deities Aryama, 
Savita, Vivasvan, Indra (vibudhadhipab), Mitra, Rajayaki^ma, 
Prthvldhara and Apavatsa. These arc the 55 deities (to be 
marked in the squares) 

609b-11. Classification of tkt deities. Apas, Apavatsa, 
Paijanya, Agni and Diti—these deities, form in order, (five) 
square-groups in all the comers. From among the deites, twenty 
arc always iwo-squarc deities. Aryama, Vivasvan, Mitra, Prthvl¬ 
dhara who are on the four sides of Hrahmk are three-square 
deities. 



11.56.612*622 


839 


612. Worship of the deities. The knower of house construc¬ 
tion should worship Brahma and the two-square and three*square 
deities with the hymn of house-building and with dQrvd-grzss, 

curds and rice grains. 

613. With the chanting of the Brahma-hymn shall be 
offered two white pieces of cloth. In due order shall be per¬ 
formed the invocation of the deity and the bestowing of honours. 

614. Offering of three types of cooked rice shall be made» 
as musical instruments are played, (after which) betel shall be 
offered. Then shall the master of the house pray (as follows): 

615. **01ord I Deity of the dwelling ! Obeisance to you, 
who are intent on lying on the ground ! May you make my 
dwelling always rich in cash and grains.** 

616. Having prayed thus, he should pay the priest dak,utid 
according to his mite and later feed the br&hmanas in consonance 
with his capability. 

617. One who performs properly the worship of the 
dwelling in this manner, will attain health, birth of a son, wealth 
and grains. 

618. On the contrary, one who enters (and dwells) in 
the residence without performing the worship of the dwelling, 
will have to endure disease, all kinds of difliculties and every 
calamity. 

619. Enter not a house which is either doorless or roof¬ 
less, or for which neither sacrifice has been made nor people fed, 
for such a house is a source of danger. 

TRAVEL:YATRA 

620. I shall now set down the dictums for travel for 
kings and all others whose time of birth is correctly known. 

621. In the case of those whose time of birth is not known 
the attainment of the predicted result would be by chance, like 
letters carved out by a worm.'®* However, in their case also cor¬ 
rect results can be predicted through (such methods of astrology 
as) Praina and PfimittaM^ 

622. Inauspicious days Jot trantL Travel on sixth, eighth 
and twelfth (lunar days), ^empty* days {viz-, fourth, ninth and 
fourteenth), full moon and first of the bright fortnight will tend 
to penury and distress. 



840 


K&rada Purdria 


623. Auspicious asterims for travel. Travel during the as- 
terUms Anuradha (Maiira), Punarvasu, (Aditi), Mrgaiiras 
(Indu), Hasta (.Arka), Rcvati (Antya), Sravana (Hari), Tisya 
(Pusya) and Dhanistha (Vasu) and also those other than the 
•evrnth, fifth, third and first, will yield one’s desires. 

624. tSUla (Spea^) on Travel not towards the 

east on Saturday and Monday, not southwards on Thursday, 
not westwards on Friday and Sunday, and not northwards on 
Wednesday and Tuesday. 

625a. .^Ula on astgrisms. (Travel is inauspicious on account 
or) Sula towards the four directions, from east, in order, on the 
astcrisms: (cast):Jyestha; (south): Purva-Bhadrapada; (West): 
Rohiru; and (north): Uttard*pha!gunl. 

625b. Ampictous asterims for all directms. The (four) 
astcrisms, Anuradha (Mitra), Hasta (Arka)» Pusya (Ijya) and 
AlvinI are prescribed for (travel) in all dii'cctions [sarvadvira ). 

626-2 7a. Blemish of Parigha^dan^a, Seven astcrisms each, 
counted from Kittiku (Agnidhtfiiya) arc prescribed for free (travel) 
in (the four) specihe directions {dig^dvdra) (reckoned from cast). 
The (diagonal) line from south-east to north-west U called 
Parigho-dandOy (‘cross-bar’) which should not be crossed (in 
travel as aboveHowever on night travel south-east in the 
astcrisms specified for the cast, the same rule is applicable in 
the case of the other directions also (i.e., southern astcrisms for 
southwest etc,). 

627b. The rdiis of the directions {dig~rdii) arc Mesa 
etc.counted in continuation ‘in order’ (from the cast).*** (One 
can cut ihc pmgha»dan(la in travel if the dig^tdH is favourable). 

628a. Laldfikd-yoga.^^^l^he lords of the directions are, in 
order: East: Sun; SE: Venus; South: Mars; SW: Rahu; West: 
Saturn; NW: Moon; North: Mercury, and NE: Jupiter.)*** 
When the lord of the direction (towards which one travels) is 
in the laldfa yogOy the traveller will not return home. 

628b, The Sun in the la^ia would be lald\aga (i.r., in 
the laldlayogd) for one travelling cast. 

629. Venus in the 12th and 11th houses would be laldlaga 
in the south-east. Mars in the lOih house would be laldtaga in 
the sotuh. 



11.56.630-639 


841 


630« Rahu in the 9th and 8th houses would be laldfaga 
in the southwest. Saturn in the 7th house from lagna would be 
laldfagn in the west. 

631. The Moon in the 6th and the 5th houses would be 
Inldiag^r in the north-west. Mercury in the 4ih house would be 
f^ldlaga in the north. 

632. Jupiter in the 2nd and 3rd houses would be Ifddfaga 
in tile north-east. One who loves his life would keep away from 
laldla-yoga. 

633. Effect <>/ retrograde planeti. If the planet in the lagna 
at the commencement of the journey is rcirogra<lc, iliai will 
cause the defeat of the king; so also the i^rga^ of those planets, 
if in retrograde motion. 

G34, Effect nf 4>^ww.TravrI in the direction of the (north- 
ward or sotuhward) course of the Sun and the Moon is bene¬ 
ficial (if both move in the same direction). If otherwise (/.r., 
if the Sun and the Moon move in opposite directions), the jour¬ 
ney should be begun during the day (if the journey is in the 
direction of the Sun*s motion) and during night (i< the journey 
is in the direction of the Moon’s motion) 

63j. Effect of Venus. (Journey undertaken) when Venus 
ha.s set will not l>c successful, while that against, the course of 
Venus would en<l in failure. The adverse effect of going agaitist 
Venus cannot i>c counteracted by other planeti (even if tli^y 1><! 
in favourabic positions). 

636. However, persons belonging to the five gotras, 
Vasistha^ Kasyapa, Atreya, Bharadvaja and Gautama, will not 
be affected by travelling against (the course) of Venus. 

637. Neither travel against Venus will affect their jour¬ 
neys within the same village, in famine, during wan between 
kings, and agitation against brahmins or kings* 

638. Venus will defeat the purpose of the traveller ifit is 
in debilitation (nicu), is in enemy planets* house, in retrogression 
or in defeat. On the other hand, if it is in exaltation, it will 
bring success. 

639. Pfognosticaiion based on om*s janmndagna. (If travel 
is commenced) in the 8th house as reckoned from one's jauma^ 
/ogna, or in the 8th rdti, or in the 8th tagna or rdii of one's enemy 



842 J^Csraia 

or in the r&ii of the lords of the above, no doubt, the traveller 
will meet with his death. 

640. However, if (he lord of one's janmalagna and that of 
the 8th lagna are friendly, the blemishes resulting from the 
janmardH and 8th house will be counteracted. 

641. Houses aspccted or occupied by violent planets (pw*, 
Sun, Saturn and Mars) and those of a double nature (piz., 
Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces) will bring about failure. 
Travel is not recommended during the rising of the ‘firm* 
{sthira) asteriams (pie., Uttaraphalgunl, Uttar&?adha, Uticra- 
bhadrapada and Rohini). On the other hand, houses aspcclcci or 
occupied by bencfic planets are good for (ravel • 

642. During (he five astcrisms (actually four and a half) 
from Dhanis(ha (Vasu) (o (he middle of Revati {QntvSTdhQ)^ 
should not be done the following five things; (Dhanisfha): 
cutting grass, (Satabhisak): collecting firewood; (Purvabhidra- 
pad a) r travel south; (UitarabhadrapadA): constructing cois; and 
(Revati): repairing houses. 

643. (Of a king) who starts (for war) when the then 
lagna is his janma-lagna on jmma^rdSiy or the lords of these two 
arc in the then logna^ or the (hen lagna is the 3rd, 11th 

6ih {ari) or lOih house as reckoned from the above two, viz^y 
ianmalagna and janmargii, the enemy will perish. 

644. If a Sirsodaya^rafi (sign rising with head )^^^ is rising, 
the dig*lagna is in the lagna, or a beneficent vargn is in the logva, 
(at the Sian of the journey) then, too, the enemy will perish. 

645. (If the journey is commenced by the king) ai ihc 
tnemy's jarmalagnay janmaraH or deatk-lagna (f.r., 8th house), 
or in the signs occupied by the lords of the above, then, also, the 
enemy will perish. 

646. (If a king starts) when Pisces is rising ( Mfna4agna) 
or in ihc PUces-division of another s^n, his journey will be 
tortuous (and unsuccessful). Similarly, the sign Aquarius or its 
section (in any other sign) is not recommended for any type of 
journey. 

647a. For (starting) a naval expedition or tr are I over 
the waters, the rising of ‘watery* $igns(jtf/a-f5/0“' or the 
sections thereof in other signs, is auspicious. 

647b-48. Thi taeki BhSvas {Houses). The twelve houses 



11.56.649-656a 


843 


(relating to any time) are designated as follows, commencing 
from the then rising sign {udaya4ag^a: (1) (Body), (2) 

Koia (Treasury), (3) Dhanvin (Archer), (4) Vihana (Vehicle), 
(5) Manha (Counsel), (6) ^alru (Enemy), (7) Mdrga (Way), 
(8) Ayus (Age), (9) Manas (Mind), (10) Vydpdra (Occupation), 
(11) (Attainment) and (12) Aprdpti (Non-attainment).”® 

649. The violent planets {vU.f Sun, Mars and Saturn), 
are destructive in all the houses except the 3rd and the llth 
(dpU), Sun and Jupiter do not harm the 10th house (Vydpdra). 
The bcncfic planets (w^., Jupiter, Venus, Moon and Mercury) 
make all houses except the 6th (Ari) flourish. 

650a. Venus, when set, docs not benefit any house and 
the Moon docs not benefit the 1st (M&rii) and the 8th {Mrtyu) 
houses. 

630b-31. Effut of Abhijit. To travellers in all directions 
except to the south, (he asterism Abhijit will fulfil all desires. 
This asterism is eifcccively beneficial even on a day which is not 
pure in relation to its five aspects {Pa^dngafuddhi)M^ 

632a. Cmbinatian benejic far traveL Multifarious are the 
combinations for travel {jdfrdyoga ). I shall, therefore, set forth 
those combinations. 

652b-33a. A combination would be effective, in the 
case oi* a brahmin, in view of the lagna; in the case of a ksatriya 
in view of the asterisms and in view of the auspicious moment 
(muhQrta) in the case of others. So far as a thief is concern¬ 
ed, the omens count most. 

65jb<654a. In the Kendras (quadrants, 1st, 4th, 7tli 
and 10th houses) and triko^as (trines, 1st, 3th and 9th 

houses) a (bcnefic) yaga would be constituted by any one of 
Venus, Mercury and Sun. A double yoga {adhi-yoga) would be 
constituted by two of them, and by three a super yoga 
(yogadhiyoga). 

654b-35a. A yoga y/on\d afford protection (kfema) and 
in an adhiyoga one would be successful. And, in Tog&dhiyaga^ 
protection, success and prosperity would result. 

653b-36a. The Moon, Saturn and Sun occupying, 
respectively, the 10th {Vydpdra)^ 6ih (i'flfm) and Ist (Affirti), 
houses, will ensure the victory of the king who is setting out 
for war. 



844 


NSrada Putdf^ 


656b-57a. The enemy’s forces will melt like lac in fire 
before a king who has marched when the planets Venus, Sun, 
Mercury, Saturn and Mars were occupying, respectively, the 
1st 7th {Marga)^ 1 Uh {Aya)^ 3rd and 6lh (^atru) 

houses. 

657b**38a. The enemy’s army will be transported to the 
abode of Death by a king wlio had set out when Venus 
occupied the 1st house (l^gna) and the other planets, the 2nd 
[Dhana) and the 1 lih {Ayo) houses. 

658l>-59a. A king who sets out when Venus is in the 
lagna^ the Sun in the 1 lih {Ldbha), and the Moon in the 2nd 
{Bandltu)f will destroy the horde of enemies just as a lion would 
destroy a herd of elephants. 

639b-60a. One who sets out when Venus is in exaltation, 
(the lord) of the lagna is also in exaltation and the Moon is in 
the 11th house would have all miseries destroyed as Kesava 
destroyed Putana.'^ 

660b-61a. If the and houses arc occupied 

by the bcnefic planets and the cruel planets occupy the 3rd, 
1 llh and 6ih houses, misfortune will seek out the traveller as a 
wanton woman (abhisdrikd) (would go out in search of her 
lover). 

G61b-62a. In front ofa king who sets out when Venus, 
Sun and Moon occupy, respectively, 1st, 6th and \2ih (rondhra) 
houses, the enemy would not stand firm, as (llic instable) friend¬ 
ship between evil persons. 

662b-63a. The enemy’s land would be within the grasp 
of a king who sets out for battle when Saturn and Mars are 
strong in the 3rd (irikhado) and 11th (Aya) houses. 

663 b* 64a. If a king sets out when Venus, which is in 
exaltation, occupies the Ifigna and the Moon is in the 11th 
house (idbkagata)^ he will destroy his enemies, as Lord Siv^a, 
with his bow Pinaka, destroyed the Tripura demons.**^ 

664b-65a. A king who sets out (for war) when Venus, 
which is in exaltation, occupies the hgne^ and Jupiter occupies 
the 11th house {Idbhaga) wilt kill his enemief: just as God 
Kumara killed the demon Taraka.^^^ 

665b-66a. A king who maiihes (for battle) when Jupiter 



II.56.666b-675a 


845 


occupies the hgna^ kendro or trikona, will consume his enemies 
just as fire bums out the forest. 

666b-'67a. Kings (who go for battle) when Mercury 
occupies the lagna, a benehc planet in the ktndra and Venus 
[Dhifnya] is in a (favourable) division {upckula) ^ will dry up 
the enemies just as the rays of the Sun dry up the lake during 
summer. 

667b-68a. A king going out when a benefic planet 
occupies a triktynaor kendta and the Sun or the Moon the llth 
house (Labha) will drive away the enemies just like the Sun 
drives out darkness. 

668b-69a. A king will destroy his enemies just as fire 
burns cotton if bcnefic planets occupy their own houses, the 
kindrOy trikonas ^j\d the llth hoase {Ay<i) when he sets out. 

669b*70a. A king who goes out (for war) when Moon 
occupies its own house, Jupiter is in a ktndrazvid Sukra [Mantri) 
15 in the 7th house, will destroy all his enemies like the sacred 
Pchcok^ara destroys all sin.'^ 

670b-71a. A king who sets out when Venus, which is in 
the occupies also ihtvargotlama division in will destroy 
the horde of enemies just as the remembrance of Hari {Hmsmrti) 
would destroy all accumulated sin.**® 

67lb-72a. (A king starting on an expedition) when the 
kendra is occupied by a bcnefic planet and the Moon in the 
trikmm is also in the vargotiama section, will crush his enemies 
along w'ith their clan just as Indra crushed the (flying) 
mountains.*** 

672b*73a. A king will kill his enemies just as the kite 
kills serpents, (if he starts for battle) when Jupiter occupies 
a friendly house and Venus occupies the kendra or irikona, 

673b-74a. (If a Ung) sets out when a benefic planet 
occupying the kmdra or the tTib>na is also in the vargoitama 
division (of the navdmia)^ he will wash away his enemies just 
as (the sacred river) Ganges (Bh^Irathi) washes off sins.*” 

674l>75n. Those kings who set out to conquer their 
enemies in the above yogas called ^Royal yogas' [nrpdhvaya) 
(will be victorious and) their fire of anger would be put out by 
the tcan of the enemy queens (who wotild be weeping on their 
fresh widowhood). 



846 


Jf&rada PurOna 


675b*76a. The tenth day of the bright fortnight of the 
month of Aivina is called Vijaya. For those who go out to fight 
that day there might be truce> but never defeat. 

676b-77a. For omens and portents the mental attitude 
is most important. Hence it is up to all scrious-minded people 
to cultivate the mental attitude. 

677b*78. One who desires to continue alive should not 
undertake a journey when a festival, the ceremonies of bestowing 
the sacred thread, marriage and installation of a deity, and 
pollution due to death or child birth (which is in force) has 
not been duly completed. 

678b-79a. A king should not set out when there is going 
on a buffalo fight or a goat fight, a quarrel between his queens 
or they are in their monthly coune, clothes have been soiled, 
and when angry words have been uttered. 

679b-80a. Food before setting out, A king will conquer his 
enemies if he starts towards the (four) directions beginning 
with cast after a repast, in order, of rice with ghee, cooked 
sesame balls, dish of fish, and rice cooked in milk with ghee 

added. 

680b-8la. On the week-days beginning from Sunday, 
(he should set out) after Uking a food of (1) majjaka^ (2) rice 
cooked in rice, (3) kahjika^ (4) water, (5) curd, (6) milk and 
(7) cooked sesame. 

681b-84. A king will conquer his enemies if he sets out 
on the 27 asterisms beginning with Asvini, accompanied by his 
army consisting of elephants, chariots, horses and infantry, 
after having his repast on : (1) Kulma$a^ (2) cooked sesame, 

(3) curd, (4) milk, (5) wine, (6) ghee, (7) water, (8) venison, 
(9) blood from the preceding, (10) rice cooked in milk, 
(11) bind’s flesh, (12) Venison, (13) harems flesh, (14) rice, 
(15) pfiyangti (mustard), (16) rice cakes cooked in oil, 
(17) variegated egg, (18) fruits, (19) flesh of tortoise, (20) of 
tvSxnd {2\) o£ godh&, (22) of iatyaka, (23) sanctified food 
{havifya)^ (24) cooked ricc-scsamc mixture {kfSorSnM), 
(25) cooked gram, (26) balls of cooked flour, (27) dish of 
fish, (28) variegated cooked rice, and (29) curd rice.^” 

685-86a. Procedure for the morch. The king should first 
ofier oblations of sesame in the (sacred) fire and then worship 



II.56.686b.695a 


847 


the lord of direction (in which he u to proceed }• He should 
then pay obeisance to the deities and brahmanas and start 
after receiving their blessings. (The worship of the respective 
deities) should be according to the prescribed specifications of 
complexion, dress, unguents etc. and with the chanting of 
their mantras. 

686b«87a. Indra should be worshipped as mounted on 
(his white elephant) Airavata, resplendent with (his consort) 
Sad, as holding the thunderbolt in his hand, as of golden com- 
plexion and as adorned with divine ornaments. 

687b-88a. Agni should be worshipped (in an idol having 
seven hands, seven tongues, six faces, seated on a goat, with 
his consort Svaha, red-complexioned, and holding the patdia 
twig and sacrificial ladle as weapons. 

68db*89a. Yama should be worshipped as holding the rod 
as a weapon, with red eyes, mounted on a buffalo, seated with 
his consort Syamala, red-complexioned, looking up and 
beneficent. 

689b-90a. Nirrti should be wonhipped as holding the 
sword and shield, blue-complexioned, mounted on a man as 
his vehicle, with raised hair, odd-eyed, with a high neck and 
lordly. 

690b-9Ia. Vanina should be worshipped as holding the 
serpent-rope, ye 1 low-cornplexioned, seated on a whale, with his 
consort Kalika and adorned with gem-set ornaments. 

691b-92a. Vayu should be worshipp>ed as the life of 
living beings, two-armed, holding a rod and riding a black 
antelope with his consort Anjam* 

692b-93a. Kubera should be worshipped as riding a 
horse, holding a pitcher in his hand, two-armed, golden-head, 
accompanied by his consort Citralekha and lording over the 
(semidivine) Yaksas and Gandharvas. 

693b-94a. (Isana) should be worshipped as holding the 
bow Pinaka in his hand, seated on the bull, with his consort 
Gaurl, as the best of all, fair-complexioned with the crescent 
moon on his crest and with his sacred thread formed by a 
serpent. 

694b-95a. Pracidure whan march is delayed. In case a king 
cannot move off inimcdiaicly for some reason or other, he should 



846 


Mrada Purd^a 


(still) make a start along with his flag, weapons, missiles and 
vehicles (exactly at the auspicious time determined as above). 

695b«96a. The place up to which he should march (be¬ 
fore stopping) shall be two hundred t/at/</a-mcasvrcs, or forty or 
even twelve, (as convenient). 

696b-97a. The king should not stay for more than seven 
days at one place and the others five days. In case of a longer 
delay (the ceremony of) starting should be made at another 
(auspicious) lagna (to be determined as before). 

697b‘98a. If there is untimely rain accompanied by 
lightning and thunder, or the three types of (major) natural 
calamities, the king should not move forward for three days. 

698b-99. Omens at (he (ime of march. The sounds of 
ratnakuiya, she-jackal, crow and pigeon and of ruru^ parrot etc. 
(if heard from) the left and of potaki and the bird bkaradvdja 
from the right (arc auspicious). 

700. The forest-crow is inauspicious, while four-lcggcd 
animals on the right arc auspicious. And, so is being siarcd 
at by a chameleon, but not by one of black colour. 

701. Hearing the boar, hare, godhdt cat and serpent 
being spoken about is auspicious but the sound made by them 
or seeing them is not auspicious. It is the contrary in tlic ca^e 
of the monkey and the bear (which can \)C seen and heard but 
not spoken about). 

702. The peacock, deer, mongoose, wild, crow and pigeon 
are auspicious at being seen at the commencement of a journey; 
the reverse is the case when one returns (home). 

703. A corpse, without any mourning, if seen (at the 
commencement of a journey), will fulfil the objective of the 
journey. On the ocher hand, a corpse, accompanied by 
mourning, seen on the return, will turn one into a corpse. 

704-6a. The following, if seen at the time of setting out, 
will destroy the aim (of the journey) : An outcaste, eunuch, 
bearded, diiink, vomit, medicine, one bathed in oil, fat, bone, 
skin, charcoal, diseased, molasses, cotton, salt, threat from an 
enemy, thirst, serpent, sterile woman, dwarf, saifron-clothed, 
clean shaven, hungry and the naked. 

706b-9. On the other hand, the following seen/heard (at 
the start of a journey) will fulfil its aim : Blazing fire, horse, 



IL56.710-716 


849 


throne, brahmaiias, unguents, flowers, sanctified rice grain, 
umbrella, chowrie, swing, king, foodstufT, sugercanc, fruits, 
bengal gram, cooked rice, honey, ghee, curd, cow, bull, fish, 
flesh, wine, white cloth, sound of conch, flags, courtesans, filled 
pitchers of water, gem, gold vessel, mirror, the sound of cattle 
drums, mrdahgasy patakas^ bells and lutes, and the auspicious 
chant of the Vedas. 

710. If one secs an adverse omen for once, he might 
remember his personal deity (and proceed); if he secs it for a 
second time he might worship the brahmins (and proceed); if 
he secs it for the third) he must return home. 

711. Sneezing heard from any side is inauspicious and 
the sneezing of cows is deadly. However, it is harmless if clone 
by children, old men, diseased persons and persons suffering from 
cold. 

712. Binding on the conqueror. The conqueror who has 
taken the enemy’s capital should not touch another’s woman, 
nor the wealth of brahmins and gods, nor ilic elcpltaius, and 
horses, nor the distressed and the disarmed. 

RETURN TO THK CAPITAL 

713. Occupation of a new residence. The first occupation of 
a newly built house should be done during the northward course 
of the Sun and after worshipping and oflering oblations to the 
Building, the previous day. 

714. (Occupying the house) during the months of Magha, 
Phalguna, Vaisakha and Jyesiha is auspicious, while it is 
middling in the months of Margasirsa {Sautajfa) and Kantika; 

715. Occupation (of the hottsc) is auspicious in the 

as ter isms of Mrga sir as {Sasi), Pusya Revaii, Satabhisak 

(Farwna), Ciirn {Tvdsfra), Anuraclha {Miira) and the fixed 
asterisms, (Wz.,Uttaraphalgum, Uttarasadha, Utiarabhiidrapada 
and Rohini), (care being taken to see that) Jupiter and Venus 
arc visible [i.e,, not set). 

716. Occupation is auspicious both during day and night, 
on week-days other than Sundays and Tuesdays, and lilkis othei 
than the empty lunar days (nk/J, riz., the 4ih, 9th and 14th) 
and new moon. 



850 


Jidrada PurdJ^ 


717. Thus, at an auspicious time, on an auspicious day, in 
the forenoon, when both the Moon and the as ter isms are 
strong,'® in a fixed lagna (m., when the‘fixed* signs, Taurus, 
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius, are rising), and in a ‘fixe<l* division 
of that lagna^ not affected by deadly indications, characterised 
by blemishlessness. 

718. When the bcnefic planets orcupy the trikar^ and 
the kendras, while the others occupy the 3rd, 11th and 6th houses, 
when the Moon occupies a house other than the 6th and the 
8th from lagna, 

719. In the birth asterism or birth-sign of the master or 
when they are in exaltation, the occupation will result in pros¬ 
perity, otherwbe misery and penury will result. 

720. The wise man shall enter the charming and at¬ 
tractive house, accompanied by variegated and auspicious sounds 
(of music and instrumentation), with the Sun on the left and 
with a pot of water carried in front. 

PROGNOSTICATION OF RAIN 

721-22a. If (when the possibility of rains is considered) it 
is the advent of the rainy season, the Moon being in a ‘watery 
sign* {Jala-rdfiy^^, in the kendra if it is the bright fortnight and is 
aspected by benefic planets, there would be heavy rains. On 
the other hand, if the aspection (of the Moon) is by malefic 
planets and if it is summer, there would only be a litde rain. 

722b. The same will occur also when Venus is character¬ 
ised by the different things mentioned for the Moon. 

723. If in the rainy season, the Moon occupies the 
seventh house from Venus and is aspected by benefic planets, or 
in the irikof^a or 7th house from Saturn, there would be 
(immediate) rain. 

724. Venus will produce immediate rain if it is near 
Mercury. If, however, the Sun occurs between the two, there 
would be no rain. 

725. Venus in the five asterisms beginning with Magha 
( i.i., Magha, Purvaphalguni, UttaraphalgunI, Hasta and 
Citii) will cause rain, if the three asterisms Svati, Visakha and 
Anuradbi follow (t.s., in the regular motion of the planet). If 



n.56.726^737a 


851 


otherwise in the retrograde motion of the planet), there 

would be no rains. 

726. Planets near the Sun cause rains when they are just 
before or behind the Sun (in their regular motion), but not in 
their retrograde motion. 

727. Venus coursing on the left will bring about rains if 
it is moving south. There would be rains in the morning and in 
the evening as the Sun enters the asterism Ardra. 

728. There would be increase in vegetation during the 
twilights (due to rains falling at these times) and there would 
be prosperity on all counts for people during nights. Light rains 
will then reduce prices and no rains will increase crops. 

729. If there is a division in the rising of Ardra, there 
will, no doubt, be a calamity. If, however, the Moon, Jupiter or 
Venus is in a kendra^ the calamity will not occur. 

730. The Sun occupyir^( the asterism Purvin^ha and 
surrounded by clouds, will cause noticeable rains on all days from 
Ardra to Mula. 

731-32a. If there had been rains on Revati {Pau^abha), 
there would be no rains for ten days. If Simha is divided, how 
can there be rains and if Karka(a is divided, how can there be 
no rains. If the rise of Kanya is divided there would always be 
plenty of rains. 

732b-33a. (Rains in) Uttarabhadrapada are indicative of 
vegetation in the beginning and Revati of vegetation in the end. 
Rains in Bharani are indicative of vegetation throughout, while 
AivinI is indicative of destruction of all vegetation. 

73Sb-34a. When Venus is in the 7th sign ahead of Jupiter, 
there would be heavy rains, especially if the rainy season is at its 
height. 

734b*35a. If a halo (jHtnve^a) occurs around the Moon, 
extending to seven asterisms (fiorn it), there would be 
rains, heavily interspersed wiih lightning and accuxnpanied by 
the croaking of frogs. 

735b-36a. If the clouds in the centre of the sky are in¬ 
clined towards the west or towards the south, there would be 
rains shortly. 

736b-37a. Cats pawing the ground, encrustations occur- 



852 K&rada Purdita 

ring on melal and children building bunds on the pathways are 
indicative of rains. 

737b-38a. Moving rowsofantS) profusion of glow-worms, 
serpents climbing up trees arc indicative of (immediate rains). 

738b-39a. The Sun and the Moon, at rising or setting, 
appearing dull or coloured like honey and if there be severe 
wind at that time, heavy showers would follow, immediately. 

(KORMAVIBHAGA : DIVISION OF THE GLOBE) 

739b-40a. This land (of India) has been laid out as if 
divided into nine sections (mnn^/o/a) and set in a clockwise direc* 
tion on nine parts (of the body )ora tortoise facing east. 

740b-41. The (central) navel region consists of Aniar* 
vecia and Puftcula. Ihc face*region, in the cast, is formed by the 
region forming Magadha and La(a. The (right) forc-lcg is 
formed by Stri-(rajya), Kalihga and Kirata. 

742. The (right) Hank region consists of Avami, Dravit^la 
and Bhilla. The (right) hind leg region is constituted of by the 
countries of Gaud^, Kohkana, Salva, Andhra, and Paun<.lra. 

743. The tail-region is formed by Sindhu, Kasi, Maha- 
rastra and Sduras(ra. The (left) foot-region consists of Pulinda, 
Cina, Yavana and Gurjara. 

744. The (left) flank region is made up of Kuru, Kabinira, 
Madreya and Matsya. The (left) foreleg region is constituted 
of by Khasa, Ahga, Vahga, Valhika and Kamboja.*** 

745. In the nine parts commencing with the navel place 
three asterisms each, beginning with Kritika, When any of these 
stars is aspectedby malefic planets, there would be misery (for 
the region represented by ti), and when aspected by bcnefic 
planets, (there would be happiness ibr the region). 

(UTPATA : PORTENTUOUS PHENOMENA) 

746. (Portentuous phenomraa are said to present them* 
selves) when (idols of) deities (in temples) frequently dance, 
fall and burn; weep, sing, sweat and laugh; 

747. Vomit fire, fumes, oil, blood and water; stand up¬ 
side down and move from place to place. 

746. Such freak occurrences seen in the idols of deities 



11.56.749-758 


853 


(constitute portentuous phenomena). So abo are mansions in the 
air {gandkarva-nagara)t asterisms becoming visible during day; 

749. The fall of a mighty meteor and the raining of 
twigs, grass and blood, atmospheric smoke in mansions in the 
air, and earthquake during day or night; 

750. Sparks without fire and flames without fuel, rainbow 
during night, mandukaiikhara^ and white crow; 

751. Sparks of fire emanating from cows, elephants, 
horses and camels, two-headed and three-headed animals being 
born from unnatural wombs. 

752-53a. Mock-suns in the four directions along with the 
(real) Sun; jackals inhabiting villages; and the appearance of 
comets; and agitated flock of crows, in the night and pigeons 
during the day. 

753b-54a. So also trees flowering out of time and seen 
bearing fruits likewise; they should first be cut down by the 
wise and then rites for averting the evil foretold should be 
performed. 

754b-55a. Many are such portentuous phenomena which 
are destructive in the diflerent regions. Some bring about death 
and some others fear from enemies. 

755b-56a. An anthill covered with honey (at the nine 
places, viz^i) the top (and the eight directions from (he east) is 
indicative, respectively, of fear, fame, death, depletion, reputation, 
happiness, misery, prosperity and loss of wealth. 

756b-37a. O great brahmin ! at the occurrence of all 
such portentuous phenomena, (if of an inauspicious nature), 
rites for averting evil should be performed with care as specified 
by the ritual texts. 

757b-58. O brahmin ! Thus has been narrated to you 
the discipline of all its aspects. I shall now set out the 

exquisite science of metrics. 



CHAPTER nFTYSlX 


1. he twelve rdhi or tigoi, of SO* eftch» which moke up the sodUc 
(S60*) are: ((Ariee); (2) VffMd (Taurui); (3) Mitkuna (Gemini); 
(4) Karkafaka (Cancer) ;(5) Sitkha (Leo); (6) Jr4e>d(Virgo); {7)TuId (Libra); 

(3) ytMta (ScMpis); (9) Ohoftus (Sagitiarim); (10) Makora (Capricorn); 
(11) JTumfrAd (Aquarius) and (12) AfM (Piseca). 

2. The twelve months are : (l)Cfttre, (2) VgUikha, ($) Jpufka, 

(4) (9) (6) (7) AJuina, (0) K&rttikaf (9) 

(ID) Peu/e* (11) Mkgha and (12) Fhiiguna, 

3. Very of^en the asicrismi are referred to in the Pardae not by their 
proper names, bat by names of the presiding deities of the relevant asteriimi. 
The following table gives the asterisms with the presiding deities noted 
against each. 


AsUrims and thrir dnhrr 


1. 

A/ptar~Alvins 

2. 

BAaragI ■Yama 

3. 

jrrtdii—Agni 

4. 

AsAtpf—Pr^ipati 

S. 

Affga/iroi*^oma 

6 . 

ifrdrd^Rudra 

7. 

PimerMw«*-Aditi 

8 . 

Pe(ya»Brhaspati, Ijya or Titya. 

9. 

iO/e/d^-Sarpa» Ahi 

10. 

Af^Atf^Pitrs. 

\U 

P 6rt>a'‘pMgvnh^ Bhaga 

12. 

VU4/4*phaliuni —A ryami 

13. 

//art» ■Saviti 

14. 

Clftri—Tvaiti 

15. 

Ssdd^Viyu 

16. 

Ki/dAA4~Indrigoi, Dvideva 

17. 

Anargdft^^Mitra 

la 

J!wf/Ad»Indra 

19. 

Afi/e—Nirrti 

20. 

P g^Ao^ Apab • 

21. 

C/dera^idfto-^Vilvedevih 22, 

ifrat>apa Vimu 

23. 

Dham^^ or ^ratriffh ^— 
Vanif* 

24. 

i^ataAAi/aA—Varupa 

2$. 

Pirva^khddrapada^ Aja 

26. 

^/ttarl^AJ4rapads•~Ahi^budhnya 



27. 

RrMti^POHt 


4. The lines which are corrupt in the PurdiM are translated 
according to the parallel texts in the Xdradij^ScAikiti, 2. 27-8 (cdn. Varanasi* 
IW5). 

5. The concepdon here is as ibltovrs: In the 60»year cyde of Jupiter* 
let the several years be given the names of the 12 lunar mooths reckoned 
from KArtdka. Then, the first four months, Kiittika, Mkrgadria, Pausa and 
Might, will have two coniteUations each* the fifih mwth* Philgttna* will 
have three coniteUations* the next five months two constellations each and 
the eleventh and the twelfth months, Srivaoa* Bhidrapada* Alvina* will have 
three comtelladons each* thus completing the circle of 27 eonsteUadoni. The 
names of the years mentioned in ^e following verses refer to the above 
special connotacm. 





855 


6. Sooie portion omitt«4 here by bAplograpby» io the VenkAtesvera 

Preti edn. oftbe Purina a rendered and ineened here from the parallel 
passage occurring in the (edn. Banares, 1905), 2.7.4. 

7. The Venk. Press edn. hu: *'Oj>e in the face* two in the anus, 
three on the head*'. The emendation is from the paralUl passage in the 
/{dra^ya»S^fntd (edn. Banares, 1905)» 2.83. 

8. Thus, Nanda days are : I, 6, 11; BhadrI : 2, 7, !2; Jayl : 3, 8, 13, 
Rikti : 4, 9, 14 and Purpl : 5, 10, 15. 

9«9a. On Vyaiipdta and VaidhfU see above, ch. 54, venes 174lf. 

10. That is, water in which dmataka (myrobalan) fruit has been boiled, 
in view of Its medical properties. 

11. Tbit occurs for the reason that civU days and lunar days are of 
variable lengths and do not coincide. Thus, when a civil day is 24^ hri. and 
the relevant lunar day is 24 hrs. and commences 15 minutes after the civil day, 
that civil day will contain, in it, three lunar days, the first for the first 15 
minutes, the second for 24 hrs. and the third for the last 15 minutes. And, to 
correlate the lunar days with thectvil days, one hfli will have to be expunged. 
The convene is the case when the lunar day happens to be longer than the 
civil day, which latter commences a little after the lunar day has commenced. 

12. This happens because the lunar day and civil day can commence 
at different times. A lunar day which has commenced much later than the 
previous sunKt will, naturally, extend to beyond sunset of the relevant civil 
day and a lunar day which has commenced earlier than the previous sunset 
will fall short of the next sunset. 

13. LaiSkI (not modem Ceylon) is a hypothetical city conceived to be 
situated on the equator at the aero meridian of Indian astronomy. The time 
of sunrise at LahkI is taken as mean and local time calculated therefrom. 
On Lahki see above cb. 54» Verses 65^7. 

14. For a detailed elucidation of the calculation of the lords of the 
hour and the rationale of the calculation thereof, sec Muhurtacinidma^i of 
RIma-Daivajna, 1.55*56, and the com. Pfydfadhdrd by Govinda Jyotirvid 
(edn. N. S. Press, Bombay, 1945, pp. 49-50). 

I4a. For the asierisms comprising these groups, see above, under venes 
177*79, 

15. On the LdUgaia^akra or Halat^ra and the citation of authorities 
in the matter, including the verses of N5rada translated here, see C^m. 
Plydfadkdrd by Govinda Jyotirvid on the MuhwiacinUmar^i of RimadaivajAa, 
(edn. N. $. Press, Bombay, 1945, pp. 73*74). LdAg^aiakrat, with 28 asterisms, 
including Abhijit, have also been conceived. For the dCKription of such a 
Cukra^ ace ^aTapalijq^earrdt ( Kaihi Sit, Str^ 205, Varanasi, 1971) , pp. 201-02. 

16. For details about this serpent diagram and for further authorities 
in the matter, see the com. PiyufodhAri by Govinda on the MukuriacinfAmpi 
of RAmadaivajfla, 2. 29 (edn., N. I. Prew, Bombay, 1945, pp. 72-73) and 
XwpatiiayacarjA, ep. tiU, pp. 202- 

17. The Ycg4 as noted earlier (see fn. to Ch. 65, verse 124), is a period 
of variable length, during which the joint motion in longitude of the Sun 



856 


Mrada Purd^a 


and the Moon amounti to the span of an astensm in the zodiac, vii., 13^20\ 
The 27^*9X01 contained in 360^ are wholly of astrological significance, not 
astronomical. Being one of the five items the yoga for each day 

would be specified in the Hindu almanacs. 

18. Since 28are mentioned here, the asterism Abhijit has alio 
to be reckoned along with the accepted 27 asterismi. 

19. The reckoning is made thus: Consider the asterism prevailing on 
the relevant day. Count its number from Aivini on Sunday. Mrgaiiras on 
Monday, etc. The^g^r of that number (counted from Xnanda) will be 
prevailing on that day. 

20. The fifteen lunar days are divided into five classes : I. i 

1, G, 11; Bhadrd 2, 7,. 12; Jayd 9. 8, 19; RiktA : 4, 9, 14. PurpH 5, 10, 15. 
They have efiVets according to the meanings of the diflerent terms. See 
above, vv, 136-37, 

21. The twelve signs of the zodiac are classified into three: Cera or 
‘moving*, being Meta, Katka, TuU and Makara, sthira or 'fixed*, being Vffa, 
Siitiha, Vr^eika and Kumbha, and Joisoah/tdia or double-natured*, being 
Michuna, Kanyi, Dhanu and Mina. 

22. The sign of the Zodiac (which corresponds also to the ‘houte* and 
^mansion* in a horoscopk diagram) which the M<>on occupies at the time of 
one's briih is termed the 'Birih-stgn* (janma-rdii) of the individual concerned. 
Other signs are counted taking the ‘birth-sign*, as the fini. 

23. If a planet is‘affected* {VMhat ‘pierced*, i.s., under Vtdha) it 
might turn into a malignant sign even if it had been primarily benefic. 

24. The presence of Saturn in the prohibited signs 9, 5, 4 and 12 is 
tolerated because, being the son of Sun, it would not turn malefic against its 
own father. The rule is (bat neither will a son be malignant towards his 
father nor a father towards bis son. The rule is applicable in the cases also 
of Mo'>n and Mercury, below. 

25. The fifteen lunar days are classified into five, being jVWodd: 

1,6, II; Bhadrd'. 2, 7, 12, Jayd: 3, 8, 13; AfArg: 4, 9, 14; and Piir^: 5, 10, 15 
each possessing effects according to their nomenclature. See above, vv. 136-37. 

26. Parigha is the 19th of the 27 yogas enumeiated and described earlier 
(see ch. 54, vene 124). 

27. Viffi is one of the Karafta divisions of time, each of the duration 
of half a lunar day, enumerated and described above(cb. 56, verses 2l9b-220a.) 

28. The planets are classified as Male: Sun, Mars, and Jupiter; Female: 
Moon and Venus; and Neuter: Mercury and Saturn. 

29. Fum-saMfld (‘Male production rite*) and Simantonnaj/ana (parting 
of the hair) are two Vedic rites performed so that the child born Is male and 
the delivery be safe. 

30. The lords of the months of pregnancy are : 1st month: Venus; 
2nd, Mars; 3rd Jupiter; 4th» Sun; 5th Moon; 6ih Saturn; 7th Mercury; 8th, 
the lord of the riling sign at the time ofcooception; 9th Moon; and 10th 
Sun. C/, MuhiirtaeifUdma^i ofR&ma, 5.9. 

31. The male aiterisms are: Aivini, Bharatii, Fu^ya, Aile^i Magha, 



Notes 


857 


Uuaraphalguni, Svati, Visikha, Jye«iha, Mula» PurvS^ejha, Uttarasa^Ua, 
Sravana and Piii'vabhadrapada. 

32. Thai is, excluding ihc three further groups tlks\ia (‘sharp’) 
ugra {‘violent*} and mi/ra (*mUed*). On the clas&ification of the a^tensms into 
seven groups having qualiiies indicated by their nomenclature, see above, 
under verses 177-79. 

33. Dinakfaya [Tiihtkfaya, *omrited lunar day', lit. loss of a lunar day) 
rcfcr^ to the lunar day which is comploicly contained within a civil <lay (the 
lunar day being shorter than the civil day) and, so, is If A out c»f c(mnt. On 
this, see aboNc, ch. 54, verse 71 and ch. ^ vtvtcs ir»3b-54a and the notes 
dicre<in. 

34. The are auxiliary texts appertaining to the difTerent 

Vedas, prescribing the 'household* rituals of an orihodox Hindu, like 
the tive daily sacrifices (mahdyaji^t)^ the sixteen sacraments (fo^fiifi»amskArns) 
like conception, bit (h rites, tonsure, rnarrtage etc. Euch Veda has 

its own CrhvasHlrttt which the followers of ihe diffaeul Vedas adopt in 
perfornnug their rituals. 

3 u For the asterisms recommcfKkd for sowing, see above Venc 186. 
The asterisms recommended are those of the ntf^a, sthita and kttfifO groups 
and Mngha, Sv&tl, DhaniMha and MOIa. 

3(). For this a triple coid is plaited out of the mnuHjt or dftrbha grass 
and is ceremonially used in ihtee loops round the waist uf the boy who is 
invested with die sacred thread (.ye/ifqpoctte) and initiated into Vedic study 

{upen^ynna). 

37. 'Fhc Vtdangas are auxiliary texts which instruct in the correct 

recifatitm and ri^ht understanding of the Vedas and prescribe the exact per* 
forniance and punctual observation of Vedic ritual. Each Veda has iu own 
auxiliary texts which fall into six entegories dealing respectively 

with ' (I) Stks^ (Phonetics), (2) Vydkarw (Grammar), (3) 
(Etymology), (4) Chanda^ (MctriG), (5) (Astronomy) and (6) Kaipa 

(Ritual), divided into three— Gihya ‘household litual', SreuUit sncriliclat ritual* 
and Sutbu 'construction of altars*. 

38. The lords of the Vedas are: Rgnsda. : Jupiter, Tajuroedn: Venus; 
SwncvtJa : Mars, and AiAarvaoede: Mercury; Sec alx>ve, verse 351. 

39. These bicmislies arc Ibicd in the ftdlowing verse : 

t Hko-1 Licalan-opardga^gttlikdh ditiyendv-asatl^ 

di ^{dru4ko^i^uktcr&i>iitadfk^sdyihn^asttlhyddi^b / 

ga^(ldnt^sj^a‘vis<irk ithiTodi cn kerntam riktd-ytamt-viiiayo 

Idtaikdrgida-iaidkfMhiiinuah jari«/r« ra»jyd and // 

of Mathur Namputiri (Ed. Panchangam Press, 
Kunnamakulam (Kerala), 1955], Verse 1. 

The days on which these ‘blemishes of day* (nityadcfii) occur should be re¬ 
jected in fixing the date for any auspicious rite and if they rannot be avoided, 
due expiation prescribed for obviating the evil effect of each of these 
blemishes has to be duly performed before commencing the auspicious rite. 



858 


Jf&rada PurSna 


Theie 'btemlihes oT ibe day’ are: Tlie four blemishes oa accouni of 
portencuous natural phenomena (atpdU)^ being : (1) IJlkd (meteor), 
(2) VrvUalana (earthquake), (3) Vpot&ga (eclipse)» (4) Gulika; the Bve 
blemishes due to the positions of the planets, being (S) Moon in the 6th 
bouse, (6) in tlie 6ih house and (7) in the 12th house, (8) 
msikta^f&tx (llie house which lias been aspected, occupied or left by the 
evil planetsei:., Sun, Mars, Saturn and Ribu, (9) Aipecling by Venus 
(^iVn^iA); one blemish due to the time of the day, being (ID) Siyahnoiandhy^ 
(dusk); three blcmishet due to asicrisms, l>eiog (11) (12) 

(iUhd), (13) four blemishes of lunar days (lirti)* being (14) Sthir^ 
karapa, (l5)AaiJ, (\6) and (17) Viffi^{ka,apa); and four blemishes 

due to tlie positions of the Sun and the Moon, being (18) (19) KkArgalc^ 

and (20) VaMria,&ud (21) dAt/iVas. 

40. The anad/ijdya or non^tludy days arc: 1st, 8ih, 14lh and 15ih days 
of the dark and bright fortnights; 2nd day of Jyenha, lOib of Asfidha, 4ih 
and 12 th of Magha, all in the bright fortnight; and the days of 

when the Sun transits from one sign to another. 

41. ViffinoM of the halMiMt dnrauont of astrological impoi iance 
into which the lunar month is divided, on which see above, ch. 54* 
vv. 126*27 and the notes thereon. 

42. On Mau/fjhb^ndUna, an auxiliary ceremony of UpanayanOy see 
above, vv. 348 ff. 

43. Prognostication by dya Is more commonly made in the case of 
buildings where the length of the bulding b multiplied by its breadth and 
the product divided by 8, and the remainders arc called on the basis of 
which future u foretold. Tlius, Remainder 1. called Dhpaja fureiclls, for the 
master of the house, fame; 2. called Dh6iM, sorrow; 3. Sim^tOy victory, 
4. enmity, 5- Fr'/a, wealth; 6. CardeMa, penury; 7. Gaja, happiness, and 
8. DfivAAkfOy illneu. 

44. Samdvarlana means literally ‘return*, here, ‘return of the Vedic 
student to hb own house from hb teacher's house after successfully coiiiplei- 
ing hb studies. At the ceremony conducted on the occasion, the grass-belt 
(mauAji) that he would be wearing throughout hb studentsInp is removed 
and he Is given a ritual tonsure (mog^bM), called generally, go-ddna (g>-*-hair, 
g^_cutung), and, thus, prepared for hb entering the next stage of life, 
namely, that of the householder. 

45. For the rikid days, see above under verses 126—37a and the notes 
thereon. 

46. On dinakfaya (‘omitted day’), see above w. 153b—54a and ch. 64, 
verse 71, and the notes thereon. 

47. This lialf verse which b needed m the context, but which is not to 

be found in the Venkateswara Press cdn. of the Purina, has been restored 
from the corresponding section of the 27. 4. 

48. The odd numbccs arc cooiidcred males and the even numbers 
female. 



KqUs 


839 


49. Of th« ttven planets^ Sun. Mmn uid Jupiter m male«» Moon and 
Venus are females, and Mercury and Saturn eunuchs. 

50. The ‘Hve ronstituents’ of a day, on the basis of which 

the nature of the day is determined in Indian astrology, are noJc^atr^ 
(aiterism), tiMt (lunar day in the bright or dark fortnight) vdra (week-day), 
yoga and karao^. Since Indian almanacs mention these five constituents for 
every day of the year, these almanacs are, by extension, called PafUdAgas. 

51. It may be noted that Venus rises in the west aHer its invisibility 
in its right motion (krama-mau^/^) and in the east after its inviiibility in 
its retrograde motion {vakra-maufi^). It may also be noted that since Jupiter 
moves outside the orbit of the Earth, it becomes invisible only in its right 
motion, and not in its retrograde motion. 

52. The idea is this : Tlie grouping of the Jytftha month, Jyt.Uha 
daughter and Jjufiha son (jyt/fha^trajm), is not auspicious in marriage. To 
marry off a jyeMha daughter or a jye^fka son in the jytffha month, in which 
case a group of two jye^tha^ is formed, is middling. What is auspicious is to 
have only ontjytffha at a lime. In other words, it would be auspicious to 
marry off the eldest daughter and an eldest son separately and in muntiss 
other ihMjyoffha. 

53. On these days, see above verses 1531^54a and the notes thereon. 

54. On Vyatipdta VaUhTti wd Parighay being the 17 th, 19th and 
23rd of the 27 yogas, see above, ch. 54 verse 124. 

54a. Vfdha (lit. * piercing*, oiddha *ptefced') refers to the mutual afflic¬ 
tion between pairs of asterums that happen to be at the ends of the lines in 
the Pafita-ialM-cakra (five-sptke-diagram) and Sapta-iaUki^cakra ('seven- 
tpike-diugiam') which might be represented as follows:— 



/'aHfa-Salm-Vfdha-Cakra Supla-Sama.l'tdha-Caira 


In the fint diagfam, Mteriims Mich m AhUd and P6rrifa,fha and Bharavl 
and dfli(fi)d6J,and in the second diagram Bharanl and MaghA, and Krtitki, and 
^reMpa are mutually afflicted. The former ‘affliction’ i» to be considered for 
the entrance of the bride into the groom’s hou«. olTer and acceptance of 
the bride and piarriage, and the latter for other allied rituals. 



860 


}fdrada Purdna 


55. The planets, on account of certain positions in the heavens, and 

the ^houses* {hhivcs) on account of their being occupied or aspected by certain 
plancit acquire certain sources of strength and weakness, called 
^planetary potency* and ^potency of the house*. 

56. Cocara See above, under w. 271-82. for prediction based on Gocora 

see Ch. 34, or Results of transits’ in B. V. Ramon, Hindu FrtdUti^n 

Astrology^ Bangalore, 7th edn., 1054. 

57. VedhOy see above, verse 426. 

58. Atffivcrgn or As(akAv*irga refers to the eight sources of energy which 
each of the seven planets and the ascendent (lagna) as the eighth attain as a 
result of iu own transit from riii to rv/i and its l>eing aspecred by the other 
seven. For details see Cli. 18. The AHakuMfga lyslem: Strength for transiting 
planets, in B. V, Raman, Hindu Pridictiot AstroUgy, (Bangalore, 7th edn., 
1959). 

59. Rupa forms the unit of measuring tlie potency of planets and 
houses. 

60. Ry Hard is meant the strength of the ‘planetary hour*. Each hour 
of a week-day is goverae<i by a dlfTerent planet in a certain order, the 6rst 
hour being governed by the lord of the day. On‘Planetary hours* and a 
tabic thereof, see B. V. Raman, Muhirtn er EUcltonsl Astrolcgy^ Bangalore, 
2nd edn , 1954, pp. 215-16. 

61. Drekk'ina (decanate) ]. The aodiac of 360* is divided into 36 
drekkd\uii, each extending the 10®. Thus, each sign will contain three drekkiifas. 
On this see Ch. 36. ‘Drekkunas and stellar influences', iti B. V. Raman, Hindu 
Pffdktiit Astrology, Bangalore, 7lh edn. 1959. 

62. Noverhia is the division of the sign (30®) into 9 parts, each extend¬ 
ing io 31/3®. Tliis corresponds to one-fourth of an asterism (13 1/2®). Thus 
the total numlx^r of navdmSas in the zodiac or 27 asterisms, would be 106. 

03. When a Sign (30®) is divided into 12 parts, each part is called a 
uvddaiomia f {2 1 / 2 ®). 

64. TrMjfhJa is the division of the sign when it is divided by tliiriy, 
each division being 1^. 

56. The Jdmttra^ofa occurs when the seven lli house from lagno or the 
Moon is occupied by any planet. For marriage Oie iiouse should be vacant. 

66. For an account of these blemishes, see B. V. Raman, Muhurta or 
EUctionnl Astrology, (Bangalore, 2nd Edn , 1954) Ch. 5 ‘Special adverse Togas 
and their neutralisation*. 

67. The reference is to the PaHfoka, being five sources of energy 
pertaining to a pai titular moment, known as Agni,Roga, Cora, Mrtyu znd 
Rdja. The numbers of the litti, vara, naktatra and logna prevailing a I 
the moment under consideration arc added up and divided by 9. If the 
remainder is I, it is Mr^u-PafUaka^ indicative of danger; if 2. Agni, indicative 
of risk of fire; if 4. Rija, bad results; if 6. Cora, evil happenings; and if 
8. disease. Remainders 0, 3, 5 and 7 are mfpa/Unkas, free from the blemish of 
PafieakOf and so such momenu are auspicious. 

66. The $a^varg/ti% a group of six iiulep. nJent divisions of the xodiac 



I{oi€S 


861 


and the day, each being used difTereniiy to read the 6jture. The six vargas 
are : Ri^iiy Her Ay DrtkkA^iay X^Amiot DtjAdAiAmia and Trithid^Cy the second 
being a division of die day and the others of the Zodiac, prognoslicationt 
being made in a different way for each. (For details, see B. V. Raman, Hindu 
Rridictm Asirology^ op. cit., pp. 92^97)* 

69. On the claoihcation of the lunar days into Xanda, BhadrAy JayAy 
RiktA and PurftAy sec above, under verse 196. 

70. is a term for the 3rd, 6th, 10th and Itth signs from the 

loina. 

71. The muhuTta referred to here is the iimc^measurc of2 adrfiAdr 

(48 minutes.). The muhurUts to be rejected in the seven week*days 
are: On Sunday, the 14th; Monday 6ih and 12ih; Tuesday, 4th and llih^ 
Wednesday (the muArlrra called ; Thursday, 12th and I3th; Friday, 

4th and 8th and Saturday, 1st and 2nd, as reckoned from sunrise on the 
several da>*s. 

72. Tuesdays and Saturdays arc to be invariably avoided for 
marriages, 

73. On EkArgata see above, under verses 2)4b*2l8a. 

74. On Vedha ‘Affliction* add viddha ‘afflicted*, in relation to asterism, 
see above, note under verse 420. 

75. (a mixture of five products of the cow, being milk, 
curd, ghee, urine and dung), is used as a holy liquid for the religious bathing 
of idols during worship. 

76. Vargottama^naoAfhiakui. Of the nitvAmlakVy the first nariimiaka in a 
sthira^rdii , the fifth in a c^ra^rAii and the ninth in a duiivobhAva^rAJi are espe¬ 
cially benefic and so are called vargutlama^fUU'Amiukas, On novAmSekAy see above 
note under verse 490 and on the division of the rAiis as stkiru etc., see above 
under verse 490b. 

77. On Vaidhfti, see above, under ch. 64, verses 174 ff. 

78. The ktndrd (quadrant) positions in a 12-member chart are the 
Ist, 4th, 7th and lOtb. 

79. For the diagram, sec above, under verse 426. 

80. ‘Lame* : Kumbha (Aquarius) during day time and Mina 
(Pisces) during night. 

‘Blind’: Sithha (Leo)^ Aja (Aries) and Vrsa (Taurus) during day¬ 
time and Kanya (Virgo), Mithuna (Cemini) und Karkafo (Cancer) during 
night. ‘Deaf* : TulA (Ubra) and Kr/fita (Scorpio) during day and Makora 
(Capricorn) and (Sagittarius) during night. 

81. These are called kdfa-s* 

82. The 27 asterisms are divided into three gafias (groups), called 
respectively, Dawa (divine), AiAnu^a (human) and RAkfusa (demoniac), the 
persoTis born on the different astcrisms possessing the innate qualities express¬ 
ed by these terms. The agreement in gAfta indicates cotnpatability in tem¬ 
perament between the couple. 

63. roni'kufa indicates sexual compatibility. 



862 J^drada 

64. Varjfd (caste) u indicative of the spiritual and cfoistic development 
in a person. 

85. This would mean tbat» Aries* Leo and Sagittarius are Kfatriyaa, 
Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn are Vaisyai* and Gemini, Libra and Aquarius 
are ^Odras. 

66. Conversely if the caste of male’s r&ii is the same or higher than 
that of the female’s rd/i, it is auspicious. 

87. The translation here does not follow the textual verses. Rajju or 

ATd/e is extremely imporiant in matching horoscopes, for it indicate! the 
compatibility in physiological and hereditory temperaments, the three 
columns, shown below, represent the three humours Kdto, Pitta and 

Kapha : 


V4ta 

Pitta 

Kapha 

Asvinl 

Bbarani 

KrtHkk 

Ardri 

Mrgafiras 

Rohiol 

Punarvasu 

Pu>ya 

Xiletk 

Uttaraphal. 

POrva-phal. 

Maghi 

Hasta 

Cttrft 

Svatl 

Jyeitha 

Anurddhd 

ViiSkhg 

Mula 

POrva-ftfk. 

Utura-ayL 

Satabhitak. 

Dhanitthi 

Sravapa 

Purvabh5dra 

UtiaraUtkdra: 

Revail 


Persons of the same humour (addO would not be mutually compatible, 
especially those under the Pitta humour. 

88. Three lines are left out in the Venk. Press edn. of the AT. Their 
rendering is added here from the corresponding verses in the X^ada-Samhit^^ 
27. 141-42. 

89. This muhiirtc is called Gadkuiiki because it occurs at dusk when 
cows return home from pasture, happy and expectant, running and raising a 
cloud of dust. 

90. The reference u to the complete uprooting by Siva of the three 
demoniac cities {Triputa) with B single shot of His arrow. For the story and 
references, see Puronic En^opagdta, pp. 799>94. 

91. Lit. ‘neck’ which as the junction of the head and the body, 

is of different kinds, s.g., the junction of the asterisms, fitAu, lasno, yogas, 
iUronar, jMrr, seasons, months, fortnights, days and nights. Some of 

Cbeie, specified in astrological texts, are extremely inauspicious and it is these 
that are referred to here. On see also above, venes 448-50a. 

92. Atiiukra (PratOukra) or ‘journey opposed to Venus* will occur if 
Venus appears in the sky <^»posite or to the south of the direction in which 
the bridal party has to travel. 

93. On Pagtaka^ see above under verse 441. 

94. For the method to determine the directions, tee above ch. 64, 
w. 128*31. 

95. The fadoarga is primarily tlie diviiiom of the circle, oit., RASi, Haii, 



}{ottS 


863 


Dnkkdi^ NaodthUf DvAioS^mU and See note under verge 490b» 

above. 

96. On tbU lee BrAetfonAiU, of Variharnihirm, 59. 42 AT. 

97. On the bloodveateU (iird) and vital pomts {mamawM)* gee 
BfhatscmJnl4f op. cii.t 53. 6^65. 

96. Thuij (1,5] eagle and terpent, (2,6) cat and rat, (9»7) lion 
and elephant, (4, 8) dog and deer are cnemieg by nature. 

It ii itated elsewhere that these Mrgat 
have the values, called ^arai (*arrowi*) 

respectively, as (1) 8, (2) S, (3) 6, pa*varga ya*varga fa-varga 

Narapati (Xashi Skt Sir., No. 205, -- ' ^ 

VaranaiJi 1971, p. 271). These ta*varja a»varga - - 

numbers are used at the basis for ^ ^ 

different typa of computations for Serpent Eagle 

the progoosii cation of different - — ' ■ ■. > — ■ ■ - 

matters. These numbers have been (a*varja ca*varga ka*varga 

used for the calculations in the neat 4 6 5 

two venes of the Pufd{M. 


99. The Fargo of the village and that of the owner are found by 
adding up the values of the individual coasooaotg and the vowels in their 
names. Thus, if GokuJa is the name of the village, its wgo would be 5+^ 
5-^6—^8^37. For an owner by name Rima, the wga would be 9 8 1 
^8a>i20. The respective remainders, on dividing the pargds are 5 and 4. 
Since 5 U greater than 4, Gokula will not be suitable for Rlma to construct 
hU residence. 

100. For a further reading on the basis of these parg^numbers, see 
below, verses 569k^60a, and the notes thereon. 

101. Different calculations the adopted in this behalf. For some of 
these, see 3fyAfifta<utldmaat, op, ait 12. 9-4 (pp. 41^17} 12. 11-12 (pp« 
422-24). 

102. On ;a^tierg«, see above, under verse ^90b. 

103. On the claasificati«i of the asieritms, see above, verses 177-79. 

104. This method, called OuM^tt'prastOru or ChitiSaMii, has been ml 
out both in mathematical texts like Bbiskara's LtiAnXi, Cagito^ifo^y aw flAdfa, 
261-66, £dn. K. V. Sanna. ip. at, pp. 459-64 and Kedirabhaw’i 
Frftaro/adkflra (6. 1-8). Thus, the pr^Hdra for the 6-lettered foot of the 
Ck/atrf metre would be given by the arrangement of the syllables as 6/1, 
5/2,4/3, 3/4, 2'5,1/6, giving the resultt 6, 15,20,15,6.1, restively, 
when one long syllable, two long syUablei etc. occur, making a total of 69. 
When the tingle case with all short syllables is added, tbe total powble 
number of arrangements of tbe letters tvould be 64. 

105. Tbe allocation of the rooou in tbe dxleen directions diftrs, to 


pa-varga 

Rat 

ya-varga 
, 3 

Elephant ' 

ia-varga 

4 

Deer 

ta-vmrja 


a»varga 

7 


6 

Serpent 


Eagle 

(a-varja 

ca-varga 

ki-varga 

4 

6 

5 


Liop 

Cat 




864 Ndrada Purina 

iora« extent. In the dliTerent texts. For thedaflercnt auihoritiet on the subject, 
tee Muhwtccintdmartii 9p <it»t 12. 21, pp. 432-33. 

106. 'rhit verse which does not have any significance here, should 
actually come after verse 562, being a continuation of the subject of Di^vergo^ 
y^niy making use of the Kerge-numbers. For this coniinuiiy. see JVard/pjti- 
jayscafyAseorodaya, op, cit,, pp. 271-73. where readings are made on the basis 
of these birds, beasts, etc. in the Ayarakra. 

107. Dhtraja, gaja, vrta, etc. are comparative measures derived by 
dividing the area of a building by eight. The divisions are used for various 
other purposes. On this see MiJiirtatinidmaf^, op, cit, 12. 4-5, pp. 417-18. 

108. The distribution of the deities in the 81-square diagram ( 

(okrtt) might be represented thus : 



109. The reference is to the ghu^fara^nydyc, the instance of the mark 
of gnawing of a worm on a piece of wood resembling a letter, by chance. 

no. These are branches of asirol^y for the prediction of future 
events on the basis of Praina or questions articulated by an enquirer, and 
the time, manner and circumstances under which they arc put. Mmilia or 
omenology relates to prognostication based on natural and other phenomena 
at the time under consideration. 

111. This travel diagram ( Tifri^akn) could be represented as follom: 





S 









J^otes 


865 


112. The reckoned in this manner would be : East: Me^a, 

Siihha and Dhanu; South : V^ak^a, Kanyii and Makara; West : Mithuna, 
TuU and Kumbha; and North : Karka. Vricika and Mina. 

113. Awould occur if the lord of the direction which a 
traveller takes» occupies certain specified house in relation to the lugna at 
the time at which the journey is commenced. 

114. This information which is necessary here, but is omitted in the 
Ndioda Purina is taken from elsewhere. 

115. Since the motions(c^eM)of the Sun and the Moon arc only towards 
the north and the South of the Zodiac, while the cardinal directions include 
also east and west, it is explained in astrological texts that 'north* lakes in 
also east, and 'south* takes in also west. 

11C. The twelve signs (r^is)are classified into three types in considera* 
tion of the posture presented by the figures of the animals etc. in which 
they appear, as upright, inverted etc. Thus, the (signs rising 

with the head up, i.r. upright) are : Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and 
Aquarius. The /’/;/WrTya*rd/<>( signs rising with their hind pads, /.r., inverted) 
are : Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarius and Capricorn. The Ubhnyodaya»r4Sij 
(signs of a combined nature)are Pisces and Gemini. 

117. In (he classification of the signs on diverse bases, the'watery* 
signs are Cancer, the latter half of Capricorn and Pisces. 

118. The twelve'houses’are given below under their better-known 
designations, with those aspects of man's life to which they are related: 

1. Tanu-bhiva (Body, build, appearance). 

2. Dhflfia~bh^vc (Wealth, property, family, vision, relatives). 

3. Bhrdtr-bhAva (Brothers, intelligence, strength, help, army). 

4. Sukha-BH^va (Happiness, vehicles, education, friends, residence). 

5. PutraMdva (Childicn, fame, pregnancy). 

0. .^atru~bhdva { Enemy, debts, disease, misery). 

7. Kalatra’bhdoa (Wifeor husband, death, gambling). 

8. AyuT-bhd90 (Longevity, gifts, intrigues, war, victory and defeat). 

9. Dharma^bhdv^ (Piety,god, teacher,father, travels, fortune). 

10. Karma^bhdjxx (Occupation, Philosophical bent, activity). 

11. Ayc-Bhiva (Income, profiu, gains). 

12. Vy^a-BhAva (Expenditure, loss, salvation}. 

119. These five aspects of a day are its /itAi (lunar day). tfdra (week 
69ty),nakfatra (asteiism), yoga ami ikerotta (see above notes on cha. 54, w 
124*27). A day is declared as paMnga-iudAa (pure in relation to its five 
aspects). When these, individually, are in combination, are blemish less. 

120. The reference is to the episode in the Bhdgavota Purd^ (Skandha 
10) describing how Lord Krsiia(Ke&ava) residing in GokuU during his child¬ 
hood, ddtroyed the demoness PuUn5 who had been sent out by king Kamsa 
to kill him. 

121. The episode of god Siva destroying three demonic cities, Tripuras, 
and the three demons occupying them, with the shooting of a single arrow 



866 Xdrada Purd^ 

from hit bow, forms the basis of a leoftby rpiiodo described in the Padma^ 
PurApat cbi. ]3-l4, and 3S-34,SAi/«Mte, Sk, 7, chs. 3]'S4. 

122. For a detailed account of the devastation of the world by (he 

demon Tftraka and the destruction ^ that demon by KumAra (God Skanda) 
bom of the union of God $iva and (oddest PArvati, daughter of Himavftn. 
lee SkoJida PutA^a, SamhKat>&‘Kha94A, AfoAdMArals, ch. 223 

AnuiAsana^pw^t ch. 85, VAtmikt^RAm^ BAla. ch. 36. The epiiode forms 
(he basil of Xemdrajam^AaM, a long poem in Sanskrit by KAlidAsa. 

123, On the efHcacy of tbb fiv^syllaUed oMatrs, 

'obeisance to Lord Siva*, see the sectiMS on PaMkf€rvHAhAI>f\)^Ct in the 
SuMpurAftAf VAjMotjr^samhtiA, Chs. 82^. 

124* The Kergettoeidih/e-i, being the most effective section in the 
Msdi^e^ivlsion of the rAiii are the following : (1) The Aral luutAthJd in the 
case of the 'Moveable slgnt' (cere^a)» ««<., Aries, Cancer, Libra and 
Capricorn; (2) the 6frh moM/c in the case of the 'Fixed signs' (slIdfa-rSAis), 
ate., Taurus, 1 m, Scorpio and Aquarius, and (3) the ninth aaedA/s in the 
ease of the 'Double-natured signs* DwUvdbhAoa rAHs), aie., Gemini, Virgo, 
Sagittarius and Pisces. 

125. There are several episodes in the FurAnas to vindicate the efficacy 
of uttering the name of Hari (Vifgu). For example, see the story of 
AjAmila, the depraved brihmaoa who gained salvation at the utterance of 
the name of Vifou {BkAgdoaid P. Sk. 8, Ch. I). 

226* On Indra'i cutting of the wings of the destructive flying mountains 
tf., the episode narrated by Mt. MainAka to HanumAn, VAlmSki^RAmAjd^dt 
Sun^tnkA^^^, ch. 1, 

127. On the episode of Bhagiraiha, king of the solar dynasty, bring- 
log the divine Ganges down to the earth (o reMsrrect bis ancestors and the 
river getting (he appellaiioQ BkAginikl on that account, see MMhhArdU, 
Vddepana, ch. 106; VAtmtid^Rkm^f^^d, BaU. Canto 42; BraAmAiifh P. ch. 91; 
PaAmdP, Pu 4, Gh.21. 

128. It may be noted that the prescription is for the 28-cycle of 
aster isms, including Abhijit, it being number 22 in the list. 

129. It is worth while to note the ideals of chivalry and non-injury 
advocated by the Purina in this verse which restricts a cox>querer from 
bdulging in pillage, plunder and insult. More explicit is the injunction of 
the Vdrihd^PwA^d which says: "The distressed, the frightened, the disarmed, 
the freeing and those who have surrendered with grass in their mouths, those 
with broken arm and those who have got down from their horses and 
elephants—tttese should not be kiiled nor tortured. The lone beir to the 
fainily,those who have surrendered, with folded hands, saying. "1 am yours', 
should not be attacked and those (like sages), children, and those protected 
by women should not be killed nor tortured.’* 

ISO. On CdddrdbdU and TArAkdU, the astrological strengths of (he 
Moon and the asteritm relating (o a person, see B. V. Raman MitkArU 
(Bangalore, 2nd edo., 1954), Ch, Ill. *The birth-star and the birth-moon'« 



^foUs 


867 


151. The ‘Watery ligna' arc Cancer, the latter half of Capriewn and 
PlKCS 

132. The divaion irf the country, made as above could be represented 

thus: 







CHAPTER FIPTYSEVEN 


Tfu Desaiption of Prosody 


Sonandana said : 

]• Metres are of two varieties: (I) those of the Vedas (2) 
those of secular or classical literature. Again metres can be 
divided into two classes: Mdtrd*Vr(ta^di metre regulated by the 
number of prosodial instants in it and (2) a metre regulated 
by number of syllables it contains. 

2. MA and TA (standing for Magar^ and Tagai,ia. These 
and others are explainetl in later verses,) RA and SA^ TA and 
JAyBHA and NAy the GURU (i.e. long) and the LAGHU 
(short), O Brahmana, these are said to be the basis in prosody 
as explained by experts in the science of Prosody. 

3. Magana is that set of three syllables where all are long 
ones ( — — MoUosus). Taga/ys is that set of three syllables 
where the first syllable is short (v — — Bacchius). The Ragana 
is that set of three syllables), in which the middle one is short 

V — Amphimacer), and Che Sagatui is that set of three 
syllables in which the last one is long (w—Anapestus). 

4. The Tagos^a is that set in which the last one is short 
( — — V AAtibacchius). The Jagas^ is that set of three syllables in 
which the middle one b long (v—v Amphibrachys) and the 
Bhagasjia is that set of three syllables in which the first one is long 
(—V V Dactylus.) The Pfagana is said to consist of three short 
syllables (v v v Tribrachys). Osage, the Canos or sets of sylla* 
bles contain three in each. 

5*6. Five Goisas are mentioned with four short syllables. 
They are admitted in the Aryd and other metres. If a conjunct 
consonant, the aspirate Visorga at Anusvdra comes after a short 
syllable that short syllable is considered to be prosod tally long. 
The abbreviated term for a long syllable is GU and that for a 
short syllable is LA. A fourth of a verse is called a Pdda 
(foot). A break in the middle is called a Tati (Caesura). 



n*57.7-13 


869 


1. ONarada. a VfUa (metre) is classified into three : 
Sama^ Ardhasama and Vipoma. If all the four feet have the same 
characteristics, the metre is called Sanui, 

8. If the fint and the third feet have one set of charac¬ 
teristics (i.e. combination and arrangement of the Ga^as) and the 
second and the fourth feet have another set of characteristics^ 
the metre is called Ardhas^a^ If all the four feet have different 
characteristics it is called Visama. 

9. There are verses with one syllable in each foot. This 
number is increased one by one upto twenty six syllables. Each 
one thus constitutes a separate metre. 

10. Beyond that the metres evolved are called Danddcas 
the first of which is Can^^rffi Prapdta. If each verse consists of 
three feet or six feet it is called a Gdthd. Now listen to the names 
of the metres in order. 


11-13. ^fam€of the mire 

Mo. ^ yllables in each foot 

Ukti 

One 

Aiyuktd 

Two 

Madhyd 

Three 

Pratiffhd 

Four 

Supratisfhd 

Five 

Gdyatri 

Six 

Ufnik 

Seven 

Anu^lubh 

Eight 

Bfhati 

Nine 

Paftkti 

Ten 

Triffubh 

Eleven 

Jagati 

Twelve 

Atijagatl 

Thirteen 

SakwTi 

Fourteen 

Alil<AvaTi 

Fifteen 

Asti 

Sixteen 

Atyasti 

Seventeen 

DhHi 

Eighteen 

Vidkrti {? Atidhrti) 

Nineteen 

KtU 

Twenty 

Prakrti 

Twentyone 

Akrli 

Twentytwo 

Vikrli 

Twentythree 



870 


J{Arada Purd^ 


Sarhkfti (? Sashskrtx) Twcntyfour 

Atikfti Twcntyfive 

Utkrt I Twcntysix 

14-15. These arc the names of the different metres. By 
means of Prastdra^ they may have many combinations. In the 
Prastdra for each metre> first take one foot with all long 
syllables. Beneath the first long syllable put a short syllable. 
All the remaining syllables must be as they are above. In the 
next line do like-wue until all of them become short. 

16-20. (These verses form a group requiring arithmetical 
calculations. An explanatory translation with illustrations 
is necessary in stead of a literal one. Here Prastdra^ 

Lfddifta, Ekadvj/ddula-ga-kriySt Sat^fydna and Adhva-yoga are 
the technical terms in Sk. Prosody.* These are retained as the 
explanation of these terms will be more useful than their word- 
to-word rendering.) 

Prasidra means **A representation or enumeration of all 
the possible combinations of certain given numben or of short 
or long syllables in a metre”. If a Prastdra is /{asta (lost) and 
needs ascertainment of the ^lost* Vrtta^ the procedure is called 
Xaffa^prtayaya. The variety {Bhida) of Prastdra is determined 
in the following way: 

If the J^ofta number be even, one should record a Lagku 
(v) for it. The number is to be halved and if it be still even, 
one is to record another Laghu (v) for it. If the ^fasta number is 
odd (not divisible by 2), record a Guru (—) for it. Add one to 
that odd number and divide it half. If that number be uneven, 
record a Guru (—) for it. Thb should be continued till the num¬ 
ber of syllables in that foot is completed.* 

If the type or Bheda of a Prastdra is known but not the 
number of its variety Uddistdiika)y it is ascertained as follows: 

In the Uddiffdy there are signs ot Laghusmd Guru (in 
a certain arrangement). One should write the number 1 over 
the head of the first syllable and go on doubling the numbers 
over the heads of the subsequent syllables. One should add 
number 1 to the number above the Laghu (v) syllable and that 
is the number of the Uddisfa or variety of that Prastdra. 

(For example: We want to know the number ofa variety 



11.57.20-21 


871 


of a four-syllabled metre with the following distribution ot Lagku^ 
Guru syllables in its metrical foot: 

12 4 8 

Guru Guru Guru Laghu/ 

As the number 8 is above the head of Laghu^ we should add 
1 to it. And 8 + I»9 is the Uddifidnka of the variety of the 
metre.) 

The next two processes are a bit complicated. But briefly 
they are as.follows:) 

Eka’^xyUiAa^ga^kriy^ is the method of ascertaining the 
complete number of Prastaras of a particular Chanda. It is 
call^ calculation or Saixkhy^a^ We hereby know the number of 
Lagkus and Gurus in a Prostdira. Thus in a Prastdra of a metre 
with four-syllabled foot, there will be the following varieties: 

No. 


(1) All the four syllables Laghu ... 1 

(2) One Guru + three Laghu syllables ... 4 

(3) Two Gurus + Two Laghus ... 6 

(4) Three Gurus + One Laghu ... 4 

(5) All four Guru Syllables ... I 


Total : 16 Vrttas 

Thus 16 is the total number of Prastaras according to the 
SahkhySna, 

This total can be arrived at by adding one to the Uddtstah- 
ka. As noted above the numben of Uddxstas arc: 1 +2+4+8 
«15 1 »16 

By deducting one from doubling the number of Prastdra 
is also called Adhva by the wise people.^ 

21. O sage ! I have lightly indicated to you the charac¬ 
teristics of Chandas ^dstra (the Science of Prosody). The details 
of subtle varieties of Prastir as are infinite. 



CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN 


1. Prasi&ra —A UbuUr represenlAtton of the long and short 

{Lttghu) syllables of a metre %ntb all pottil^e varieties. 

2. Pratidro n^fam 4k4^dt^^^i^ga^kriyAh / 

SojMjfinom tc 4U pra^^fi $rnf$d(t // 

^Vrtta-Ratn&kara VM. 


3. For example * The 6tb type of a four^yllabled (footed) metre wilt 
give us the arrangement of the syllables in its foot as follows: 

Now the number 6 is even, so it is to be marked as La^htt (v). Its half: 
6/2**3i an odd number and hence is to be marked as Guru ( ^ )• No. 3 
being an odd number 1 is to be added and the total is to be divided by 2. It 
3x1 

ii being an even nurobor ti to be noted as a Lofhu ( v ), 

Further this 2/2»l which is an odd number and should be marked as a 
CaTM ( - ) • 

Thus this 6th variety of a four^yllabled metrical foot will be : Laghu- 
Guru-Laghu«Guru ms the arrangement of syllables per foot. 

4. These last 5 verses ofthb Chapter of the NP. are the same as those 
in Ked&ra Bhatta’s Vriia Patndkara. It appears that both NP. and Ked&ra 
Bhatta used a common source. For the interpretation of above verses, I have 
used the Comm. Vftla^ratndkant^patUM on Vftta Ratnikara by the Simhali 
scholar Sitaskandha Mabg Sthavira (Nimaya Sagar Edt., 1906). 



CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT 


^uka*s Tmptation* 


Ndrada submitted: 

1. When there was a reference to the term Anuedna (wcll- 
versedness in Vedas) all the Veddngas (ancillaries to the Vedas) 
were heard (by me) from your lotus^Ukc mouth (as they were 
being explained) partially in brief and partially in details. 

2a. Narrate to me in details the (story of) the birth of 
Suka, O highly intelligent sage. 

Sanafidam narraUd: 

2b-3. It is reported that formerly, on one occasion, on 
the peak of mount Mcru, in an extensive forest of Kar^ikara 
trees, Lord Mahadeva accompanied by multitudes of terrible 
goblins sported himself. The daughter of the Lord of mountains, 
goddess Parvati, was also there with them. 

4^5a. The holy sage Vyasa (Krsna Dvaipayana) per¬ 
formed a divine penance there. He was devoted to the practice 
of Yoga. By dint of his yogic power, he entered (withdrew) 
in the soul and performed Dhdrand. That excellent-most sage 
performed those austerities for the sake of a son. 

5b-7a. “May my son have the virility of Fire, Earth, 
Wind and Ether all round!’*. With this solemn vow of per¬ 
formance of pcnancc, he practised severe austerities and sought 
after the Xxird of gods who is impossible to be attained by 
persons who are not self-possessed. 

7b-8a. It is reported that the powerful sage stood 
for one hundred years, subsistir^ on the air only, and pro- 


* This chapter incorporates chapters 323 (from v. 11 onwards), 
324, 325 of the ^dnti Pana of the AfM. In the notes on these, Mbh»AfM. 
Sdnti Parva, the next reference is to chapter No. and Verse Nos. 

t For Miteb of the NP. would be a better reading as the 

puissance of five Mahdbhdtai is desired. The Mbh. also ineludei ‘water* in the 
list of Mahdbhutes whose strength b requested. 



874 


Ndrada Purdna 


pitiatcd the multi^formed great god (MahluJeva), the consort 
of Uma. 

8b* 12a. There were (in attendance) all Brahmanical 
sages, heavenly sages, guardians of the worlds, demigods like 
Sadhyas, along with eight (twelve) Adityas, Rudras, the Sun 
god and the Moon god, Gandharva (king) Visvavasu, Siddhas, 
be vis of divine damsels. There the great god Rudra, wearing 
an auspicious garland ofKarnikara Howers, shone like the Moon 
in the autumn. 

I2b*l3a. It was surprisingly mysterious to all the three 
worlds that his (Vyisa's) complexion did not fade nor exhaus* 
tion overcame him. 

13b* 14a. As he, of immeasurable splendour, was absorbed 
in Yoga, the locks of his matted hair due to his splendour 
appeared to glisten like the blazing flames of Are. 

14b-15. O Narada ! Pleased at heart with this type of 
penance and such devotion of the sage, the great god Mahadeva 
made up his mind (to bestow favour on him) and the three-eyed 
Lord spoke to him smilingly. 

16. ^‘Your son shall be as pure as the Fire, as the Wind, 
as the Earth, as the Water and as the Sky. 

17. He will be the partaker of consciousness of himself 
being the Brahman; his intelligence and mind shall be con¬ 
centrated on the Brahman; he shall be permanently established 
in the Brahman. By dint of his (Brahmanic) splendour, he will 
be renowned all over the three worlds.’* 

18. After having obtained that excellent boon from the 
Lord, Vyasa, the son of Satyavatl, was one day engaged in 
churning the sacrificial sticks, with the desire of making a Are 
(for sacriAcial purpose). 

19. At that time, the illustrious sage happened to see a 
heavenly damsel called Ghrtaci who, in consequence of her 
brilliant splendour, possessed excellent beauty. 

20. Seeing that celestial damsel, in that forest, the great 
sage Vyasa became instantly passionately enamoured of her. 

21. After making Vy^ deeply agitated with passion, 
the most beautiful Ghrt4cl, transforming herself into a she- 
parrot, approached him. 

22. Even after seeing the celestial lady disguised in 



II.58.23-34a 875 

another form, he was overcome with cupid (passionate love) who 
spread in every part of his body. 

23. With great (moral) ^mragc, the sage tried to restrain 
his passion. But his mind being extremely agitated^ Vy^ was 
unable to control it. 

24-25. Due to the inevitability of Destiny (lit. what 
was to happen) the heart of the sage was fascinated by the 
(beautiful) form (ofGhrtaci). With the desire to do this (vi-e. 
the kindling of Are) while he was suppressing his passion with 
special elForts, all of a sudden his semen fell on the churning 
sticks. It was thus that the great ascetic §uka was bom» while 
Vyasa continued the churning of sacrificial sticks. 

26-27. The foremost of sages, the great Yogi, was (thus) 
born of (lit. from the womb of) two (sacrificial) churning 
sticks. Just as a blazing sacrificial fire after being fed with 
oblations of ghee, sheds his effulgence all around, in the same 
way Suka was born as if blazing with his brilliance, assuming a 
wonderfully beautiful form and excellent, unsurpassable com¬ 
plexion, O, foremost of Brahmanas. 

28. * The Cahga, the greatest of all rivers, assumed her 
(godly) form and coming to the top of theMeru bathed 6uka 
(with her own waters after his birth), O Narada. 

29. There fell from the sky to the ground a deer-skin 
garment for Suka (to wear it). The Gandharvas constantly 
performed their musical concerts and the various groups of 
celestial nymphs indulged in dances. 

30-31 a. High sounding heavenly kettle-drums began 
to beat lustily. Gandharva Visvavasu, Narada and Tumburu, 
and the pair of Gandharvas Haha and Huhu eulogised the 
nativity of Suka. 

3!b-33a. There arrived the regents of different worlds of 
whom Indr a was the leader, and gods, heavenly sages and 
Brahmanical sages as well. And the wind-god showered all 
varieties of heavenly flowers. (In this manner) all the world, the 
mobile and immobile, became highly delighted. 

3 3b-34a. The highly resplendent, noble-souled god 
Mahadeva along with the goddess Uma performed with due 




Grammsticslly the verse is loose tnd defective. 



876 Mrada Purdifa 

formalities the ceremony of investiture of thread of thesage*s son 
(i.e. Suka) as soon as he was born. 

34b-36a. To him gifted Indra, the Lord of gods, a 
wonderfu Mocking heavenly water-pot (Kaman^dJu) out of love 
and gods gave him clothes. Thousands of swam, peacocks, cranes, 
parrots and blue jays hovered around him clockwise, O Narada. 

36b-37a. The highly intelligent great sage, having 
obtained his divine nativity from the two sacrificial sticks, 
stayed there, observing his holy vows with great attention* 

37b«38a. As soon as he was bom, the Vedas with all 
their esoteric secrets and all their abstracts, approached him for 
dwelling in him even as they approached his father. 

38b*39a. Although he was conversant with Vedas, 
Vedangas (accessories of the Vedas) together with their com¬ 
mentaries he remembering that it was hb duty (to have a guru, 
as per ancient religious practice), selected Brhaspati as his 
preceptor, O prominent Brahmana. 

39b-40. Having studied all the Vedas along with their 
mysteries and abstracts as well as Itihdsa (History, like the 
Mckdbkdraia) and all the sciences and scriptural texts based on 
the Vedas, the great sage paid his tuition-fees to his preceptor 
and performed the rite of Samdvarlana (the formal conclusion of 
the life as a religious student). 

4U42a. Observing the vow of celibacy, he, with great 
concentration, began to perform severe austerities. Even though 
he was a child, the great ascetic became worthy of being honour¬ 
ed and consulted due to his knowledge and penance. 

42b-43. The mind (intelligence) of Suka who was the 
observer of the path leading to Emancipation (from the cycle 
of Sandra did not take interest in the three ASramas (stages of 
life) depending on the house-holder’s stage of life.* 

44-45a. Desirous as he was of the highest beatitude and 
endowed with humility as he was, he bowed down to him and 
requested him: ‘You are an expert in the religious path that 
leads to Emancipation from Samsara. May you be pleased to 
elucidate that to me, so that I may be blessed with Supreme 
tranquility of mind.’* 

* Here endi chapter 324 of (he Mbh. SdnH, 



II38.45b-55 


877 

43b-46a. Hearing the words of hU son, the great sage 
advised him, you leam the scripture pertainir^ to Mok^a 
as well as all other different religious duties.” 

46b*47a. At the behest of his father, Suka, the excellent* 
most among the knowers of the Brahman (or Vedas) learnt the 
entire Toga-Sdstra and the (Sd^fya) philosophy of Kapila 
completely. 

47b*49a. Seeing his son resplendent with the splendour 
of the Vedas* and endowed with the glory of Brahman and 
thoroughly conversant with Moksa^^dstra^ he directed him then 
”Go to Janaka, the king of Mithila. That king will explain to 
you everything about the meaning of the Mokfa^-^dstra. 

49b*30a. At the behest of hb father, Suka went (was 
about to go) to Janaka, the king of Mithila, in order to enquire 
about the definite knowledge (mV/Ad) about duties leading to 
and the nature of that ultimate goal. 

50I>54. (As he was about to depart) he was instructed 
(by his father). “You go by the way traversed by ordinary 
mortals.” Suka was not surprised (at thb instruction). He was 
further advised : “You should not go through the sky by your 
Yogic power. You should proceed there with simplicity and 
straightforwardness and not for seeking pleasure. Specialities 
(friendship etc.) should not be seen (formed) by you, as those 
specialities (or contacts) become binding. Even though the king 
is adopted by us as one on whose behalf sacrifices are to be 
performed by us, you should not entertain any pride about it. 
You should stay inhb premises. He will dbpcl all your doubts 
as the king is proficient in Dhama (religious duties) as well as 
scriptures regarding (the path to) Mokfa. You should abide 
unhesitatingly by whatever he asks you to do.” 

Being thus instructed, the righteous*souled sage Suka 
proceeded to Mithila. 

53. Though he had the capabiUty of traversing through 
the sky the whole of the earth alongwith the oceans, he crossed 
on foot the mountains and reached the sub*continent called 
Bharata. 

* KP. reads : brihy^ But iciArk brdhj4 is meaaiaf* 

less and an obvious miscopyin^ otSaUuk br4krt^ of the Mbh, Sdnii. 325.5a. 



878 


//Arada Purd^ 


56, The great sage passed through different prosperous 
and rich countries. At last reaching the country (known as) 
Videha, he approached Janaka. 

57. When he arrived atthegateof (Janaka’s) palace^ 
he was stopped by the door-keepers. The great Yogin stood 
there unaffected by hunger or thint. 

58-60a. O Narada^ even in the heat of the sun, he was 
not distressed by exhaustion or dejection and was absorbed in 
meditation. One of the porten who was posted there saw Suka 
standing, blaring like the mid-day sun. He worshipped Suka 
with due formalities and paying obeisance to him with his palms 
joined, led him to the second apartment of the king’s palace. 

60b-6I. Near the harem, there was a beautiful garden like 
Cahraratha park (of Kubera). It abounded in trees in full 
blossom and had separate swimming pools and playgrounds. 
Showing him that garden, the porter made him sit and humbly 
reported (his arrival) to the king. 

62. Having heard that Suka had arrived, the king ap¬ 
pointed courtesans for his service as well as to gauge the disposi¬ 
tion and the inclinatioos of his mind. 

63. All those damsels were young, beautful-looking with 
fine tresses of hair, possessing excellent hips, clad in red clothes of 
fine texture and decked with ornaments of burnished gold. 

64-65a. All of them were experts in agreeable conversa* 
tion, competent to read the minds of man and skilled in all 
(amorous) acts. They were more than fifty. They arranged for 
his reception with water for washing feet etc. They gratified 
him with such articles of food as were agreeable in the season. 

65b-66a. When he had eaten his food, they showed him 
beautiful parks in the town one by one, O Narada. 

66b-67a. Sporting, girling and singing, those ladies, 
conversant with male psychology, entertained that noble*‘Souled 
sage. 

67b-68. The pure-souled ascetic, born of sacrificial fire- 
sticks, had conquered his anger and had subdued his sense* 
organs. He was always absorbed in meditation. He was neither 
delighted nor angry at these. 

68b-69a. Suka washed his feet and after completing hij 



IL58,69b.72 


879 


Sandkyd prayer, seated himself on a holy seat meditatir^ on that 
object for which he had come there. 

69b-70a. In the earlier part of the night, he became 
absorbed in meditating upon Narayau. In the middle part of 
the night he duly went to sleep. 

70b-71a. Getting up early m the morning and after 
performing the necessary rites of bodily purification and ablu« 
tion, the highly intelligent sage, though be was surrounded by 
women, was once again absorbed in meditation. 

71b-72« It is in this manner that he spent the remaining 
part of the day and that night in the palace of the king» 
O Narada.* 


Her« ends eb. 325 in the Mbh. iinti. 



CHAPTER FIfTYNINE 

T/u diahgui bitivten ^uka and Janaka* 


Sanandana continued: 

1*3a. The next mornings O excellent Brahmana, with 
the family priest at the head (of the procession), the king 
accompanied by his ministers and all the memben of his harem, 
approached the preceptors son (Suka). He carried the articles 
of worship {aegkjfa) on his head and took with him a highly 
valuable seat b^ecked with all (kinds) of precious stones. He 
offered that extremely suitable seat to Suka, the son of his 
preceptor. 

3b^a. When Suka, the son of Kf^*(Dvaipayana Vy&sa) 
occupied the seat, the king worshipped him according to the 
prescribed rites. At first he offered him water to wash his feet. 
He then presented him a cow alongwith articles of worship. 

4b-5d. The excellent Brahma^a accepted the worship 
offered in accompaniment of the prescribed Mantras. The high* 
ly resplendent ascetic enquired after king’s unfailing welfare 
and prosperity. 

5b-6a. The noble*minded monarch with his entourage of 
noble men and officers duly reported about his welfare to the 
son of his preceptor. With his permission, he sat on the ground. 

6b-7a. Conversant with etiquettes and proper procedure 
as he was, the king enquired of Suka, the son of Vyasa after 
his welfare and asked him the object of his visit. 

Suka replied: 

7b*8. Prosperity be unto you 1 My father has informed me 
that *‘the King of Videhas known ail over the world as Janaka, is 
my first^( disciple ?}, is well-versed in the virtuous path leading to 
Mok;a^ you therefore go to him quickly. If you have any doubt 


* This chmpter consUu of ch. 326 sod of s few more verses from 
eh. 327 of the AfM. SMi. 



n.59.9-16 


881 


in your heart regarding the religion oiFravriti (ftacriiices and 
such other ritualistic matter) or about the religious path of 
renunciation (jViff/ti), he will definitely dbpel them all.’* 

9. At the command of my father, I have therefore, come 
hereto you to discuss with you (these matten). Hence, it 
behoves you, O foremost among the upholden of dhama to 
instruct me precisely. 

10. What should be done by a Brahmaria here? What is 
the essence of those religious duties which are conducive to 
Liberation ? How is the Liberation (fromSarhsara) to be achiev* 
ed ? Is it obtainable by (spiritual) knowledge or by penance. 

Janaka replied: 

11. Listen tome, dear child, what are the duties of a 
fir&hma])a since his birth. After the investiture of the sacred 
thread, he should devote himself to the study of the Vedas. 

12. By performing penance, services to his preceptor and 
observance of celibacy and by remaining devoid of greed and 
jealousy, he should do his duties to Devas and Pitrs. 

13. Having studied the Vedas regularly and controlled 
his senses, and after paying off the tuition*fee of his preceptor, 
and after taking the permission of his teacher he should formally 
conclude his stage of religious studentship (by performance of 
Samdvartona ceremony). 

14. After completion of the Somdoartana^ he should betake 
himself to the householder’s stage of life. (After marriage) 
he should live in the company of his spouse, devoid of 
malice and jealousy, and he should duly and continuously 
maintain domestic (sacrificial) fire.* 

15. After procreating sons and grandsons, he should retire 
as a hermit to a forest and continue to worship the same 
(domestic) sacrificial fires and receive lovingly guests with due 
hospitality. 

16. Thereafter, the knower of Dharma should establish 
all (sacrificial) fires within his soul and rising above the pair of 
opposites, and banishing all passionate attachment from his 
soul, he should pass his life in the stage of life called Brchmd- 
frama (or Sannyw). 



882 


Xdrada Purdna 


Suka trupi\rtd\ 

17. (It may be true that) when perfect spiritual knowl¬ 
edge dawns and the eternal entity (the Brahman) is realised 
directly, {Mok^a) is automatically attained). But they say that 
attainment of (true spiritual) knowledge is not possible without 
direct association with and penonal stay with the spiritual 
preceptor. 

18. Is it necessary for a person to go through the three 
stages of life (studenthood, the life of a householder and that 
of a forest-hermit)? This is what I ask you. It behoves you to 
explain this. 

Janoka explaintd\ 

19. Attainment of Liberation from Sarhsira is not 
possible till one accomplishes knowledge (undentanding the 
nature of Brahman etc. theoretically from the scriptural studies) 
and the true conception of Reality. But the knowledge (or the 
nature of Brahman) is not possible without association with 
the (spiritual) preceptor* 

20. The preceptor is the pilot or helmsman, while 
spiritual knowledge is the boat. After attaining knowledge and 
crossing the ocean of Sarhsara, one may abandon both. 

21. In order to prevent the annihilation of worlds and for 
forestalling the destruction of acts (on which the existence of the 
world depends), a person performs both auspicioxis and in¬ 
auspicious deeds. It is only after that, that the Liberation is 
achieved. 

22. When (through performance of peoanee) one be¬ 
comes perfectly purified in one's soul, by means of purificatory 
causes* in the course of many births in the world, he attains 
Liberation from Sathsara even in the first {Brakmacarya) stage of 
iiie. 

23« What paramount desirable object is to be achieved 
by going through the three stages of life by a penon who has 
attained Liberation from Samsara, or by a learned person who 
has seen the Reality. 

24. One should always cast off defects or faults caused by 
the attributes Rajas and Tomas. Adhering to the path characi- 



11,59.25-35 


883 


erised by Sattva^ he should behold the Supreme soul, by 
means of (or within) his own individual soul, 

25. Realizing his own soul in all created beings and 
beholding all creatures within his soul, he should behave (with* 
out being attached to anything in the Somsato) like an aquatic 
animal which does not become wet though moving through 
waters. 

26. Transcending the pairs of opposite attributes and 
associated with auspiciousness, he becomes completely liberated 
(from Sarhsdra) after casting off the physical body and attains 
Infinity in the next world like a bird, soaring up high in the 
sky above (the currents of) the wind. 

27. In this context, listen to the Gdlhds sung in ancient 
times by King Yayaii, They are remembered in their hearts by 
all twice-borns who are experts in the philosophy of Liberation. 

28. The resplendent lustre (i.e. the Supreme soul) is in 
one’s soul. It is a jewel^ there itself. It is possible to be observed 
by oneself, but only with concentrated mind. 

29. He who behaves in such a way that others are not 
afraid of him and when a person b not inspired with fear at 
the sight of another penon, he who neither covets nor hates 
anything, attains to the Brahman. 

30-31. When a person does not entertain evil thoughts 
about any of the living beings, when one abides by the path of 
virtue (or religious duty) called Caturdhama Dkarma (A Dharma 
constituted of four stages of life) which has been practised by 
one’s ancestors, when according to the serial order of these 
ASramas (stages of life) he performs (for many births) good 
actions physically, mentally and verbally, he attains (realizes) 
the Brahman. 

32, If a person, eschewing malice that deludes people 
and having cast off passion and greed (from the mind), unites 
hb soul with penance, he attains the state of (being one with) 
Brahman, 

33, When one b equally dbposed to all beings whether 
vuible or audible, and supersedes the (reactions at) naturally 
opposite pairs (like pleasure and pain), one gels to the Brahman. 

34«3S. When one looks upon with an equal eye (without 
feeling attraction of repubion), to naturally opposite pairs 



884 


Mrada PurUna 


[Dvandvas) like praise and blame, a piece of gold and iron, 
pleasure and pain, cold and heat, attainment of tvorldly pros¬ 
perity and adversity, pleasing and displeasing, life and death— 
then one attains to the Brahman. 

36. Just as a tortoise spreads out its limbs and withdraws 
again (within itself), in the same way, the sense-organs are to be 
restrained by the recluse through his mind. 

37. Just as one’s place of residence plunged in darkness 
is seen with (the light emanating from) a lamp, in the same 
manner it is possible to visuali 2 e the Atman with the brilliant 
light of intelligence. 

38. 1, however, can clearly see that you are endowed 
with all these (within you), O prominent one among the 
intelligents. If there be anything else to be known, your worship 
will know it fundamentally (and correctly). 

39. O Brahmanicai sage, you are already famous as one 
who have transcended (lit. gone to the other end of) worldly 
objects of sense through the grace of your spiritual preceptor as 
well as through your penonal discipline (i.e. disciplined way 
of life). 

40. It is through the grace of that great sage that the 
refulgent divine knowledge has revealed itself to you. You are 
known to me on account of that (spiritual knowledge). 

41. Your knowledge about Mok$a is more profound; your 
understanding is deeper, your spiritual glory is so immense that 
you don’t realize it yourself. 

42. Maybe due to immaturity or due to doubts or fears 
caused by delusion, some people do not attain that spiritual goal 
{Mok^a) even though knowledge leading to Mok$a is dawned in 

43. When all the doubts have been dispelled by persons 
like me, they, by dint of their pure determined efforts, cut the 
knots (of doubt) in their heart and do not fall a victim to dis* 
tress (i.e. are not distressed). 

44. Your honour is a person in whom perfect knowledge 
has been generated and is steady in intellect and are free from 
covetousness. One, however, cannot attain that goal (of Mok$a) 
without determined efforts. 

45. You entertain no differentiation between pleasure 



11.59.46-55 


885 


and pain and attach no importance to objects of senses. You 
have no curiosity and attraction for dancing and music. Nor 
does any passion overpower you. 

46. You feel no bonds to your kinsmen. You are not 
inspired with fear at fearful objects. I find that to you censure 
and praise are all equal. 

47. I see that you are a person among other wise persons 
who have taken to the highest imperishable path devoid of 
ailments. 

48. O Brahma^ you are already existing in that state 
(called Mok^a) which is the fruit attained by a Brahmaoa and 
it is not a particular region. What else do you (want to) ask 
me about ?*• 

Sanandana said\ 

49. * Having heard this exhortation (of Janaka)» Suka 
who was self*controlled and had determined (to see the Atman) f 
began to abide in his soul mentally (by withdrawing himself 
from worldly objects) and he realized the (Universal) soul with* 
in his individual Atman. 

50-5la. Having accomplished his object, he was filled 
with bliss and (mental) tranquillity. He silently proceeded to 
the north. On reaching the $aiSira (the Himalaya) mountain, 
he espied Vyasa, the son of Parasara who was teaching liis 
disciples like Paila and others, the compilations of the Vedas. 

5 lb-52. Suka (the sage bom of Arani) of extremely pure 
mind (soul) and brilliant like the sun-god, respectfully clasped 
his father’s feet and felt delighted at heart. The noble-minded 
$uka reported everything to his father. 

33-54. Having heard the dialogue between Suka and 
kingjanaka on the means of getting Maksa (liberation fiom 
Scjfisdra), Vy^a, the author (arranger) of the Vedas, embraced 
his son with a heart full of ecstatic delight and seated him by his 
side. 

55. Thereafter, the Brahmanas like Paila and othen com¬ 
pleted their course of Vcdic study under Vyasa. They came 
down to the earth from the mountain-summit and engaged 
themselves in teaching Uic Vedas and performing sacrifices. 


•vuU MM. Sdnli 327.1 and 2. 



CHAPTER FIFTyNlNE 


1. NP remds but the tubitantlve qualified by it being ibsent 

I propped **dueipie'*. But Mbh. JOb read* i.e. *for whom 

we perform laerifieei* *our Tajam4fM.* 

2. For dhitAgnir anddrte of the NP. Mbh. {ihid) v. 17 readt dfatdgnu 
(alhaiiM <4. 

3. vide, ‘naifi tarkeina madrftpaneyft* etc.*-*Katha. 12. 9. tadvoUnflr* 
tharh la gurum evftbhigacchet—MuQd^ha I. 2. 12. 

4. Mbb. (ihid) v. 26a read* bhitniaift JUragoi^ In itead of JTdratiaf^ 
of the NP. Tbe Mbh. verw raean* **through penanee performed ia many 
birthi, a man it able to have pure, cleanted tente^organt (of which mind it 
the eleventh one] and the toul'* etc. 

5. NP reads rctna/H iaUraioa <etM tat but Mbh. (tM) v. 32 reads 
utrpa^Jantutu tat samam / 'll (the tool) exists in all beings.* 



CHAPTER SIXTY 


The Dialogue between Suka and Sanatkumdra 
Seuumdana eonimud ^:— 

1. Y/htn the Brahmanas (disciples of Vyasa) descended 
(from the height of Vyisa*s hermitage) or departed, the 
intelligent Vyasa with only bis son (Suka) as the companion, 
remained silently absorbed in meditation in the hermitage. 

2. An incorporeal voice* addressed Vyto along with 

his son : great sage : O descendant of Vasi^fha : (How 

is it that) there is no chantir^ sound of the Vedas (in your 
hermitage] ? 

3. Why are you sitting thus silent and absorbed in medi¬ 
tation, as if you are (anxiously) brooding over something? This 
mountain devoid of the vibrant echoes (of Vedas) docs not 
appear splendid. 

4. O venerable Sir, with a delighted heart, recite the 
Vedas along with your intelligent son who is well-versed in 
the Vedas,” 

5. On hearing that speech addressed to him by the ethereal 
voice, Vyasa began to chant the Vedas along with his son Suka. 

6. While both of them were chanting the Vedas for a 
pretty long time, there arose, O excellent Brahmana, a violent 
wind which was as if driven by the gales that break out on 
the seas. 

7«8. Then Vyasa prohibited his son from continuing the 
Vedic study, as it was not the time suitable for studies (and hence 
a holiday), As soon as he was so bidden (to suspend Vedic 
recitation), Suka, out of curiosity asked his father : ^whence is 
the wind blowing ? It behoves you to explain to me all the 
activities of the wind/* 

9. Vyksa was extremely surprised to hear these words of 
l9uka. He replied to Suka that it was an ill omen which in¬ 
dicated the suspension of the recitation of the Vedas. 

10. ”You are blest with the spiritual vision. Your steady 



888 


Mrada Purdna 


mind has been at ease; you are free from the attributes of 
Rajas and Tames. You are well established in the Truth. 

11. Hence realising the Vedas in your own self do you 
reflect and meditate : the path pertaining to the Supreme soul 
is known as the path of gods [Devaydm ). The path that is made 
of Tamas is called the path of Pitrs [Pitr-ydna ). 

12a. Both of these have come to be realized’—one as 
leading to the heaven and the other to the world below since the 
winds blow over the world and high up in the atmosphere. 

12b-13a. The winds go on blowing both on the surface 
of earth as well as in the sky. They blow in seven courses. Listen 
and understand as I recount them one after another. 

13b«14a. The (physical) body is endowed with senses 
which are domineered over by the (seminjivine beings called) 
S&dhyas and many (other) great powerful beings. They brought 
forth an unconquerable son called Samdna.^ 

14b*15a. From S<mdna was bom a son called Uddna\ from 
Uddna sprang Vydna\ from whom was created Apdna. From Apdna 
arose lastly the vital air called Prdna. 

ISb^lGa. The invincible tormentor of enemies^ the Prdna 
was issueless (as had no further function of such production) 
I shall now recount to you the different functions of these vital 
winds (as they are factually observed). 

15b«17a. The vital wind causes all the various functions 
of all living beings and because living creatures are made to 
be pleased’ (NP) (are enabled to live—Mbh— ibidv. 35). 

17b-18. The wind mentioned first (in the above list) 
and which is known by the epithet Pravaha (or Samana) impels 
the masses of clouds bom of smoke and heat, to go by the first 
track. Moving through the sky and coming in contact with the 
water contained in the clouds, the vdnd manifests itself in its 
brilliance among the flashes of lightning. 

19^20a. The second wind known as Avaha goes on blow* 
ing with a loud noise. It is due to (the power of) this wind 
that Soma and other luminaries rise and appear (our body is 
a replica in miniature of the cosmos). Within the body this wind 
is known as Uddna by the learned and the wise. 

20b-21a. The wind holds (within itself) the waters from 



IL60.21b-31a 


889 


the four oceans and having taken up the water gives it to the 
clouds for the sake of ft'otection.* 

21b*22d. The winds having equipped (filled) the clouds 
with waters, presents it to the presiding deity of rains. 
It is the mighty wind, third in the above enumeration and is 
famous as Udvchd* 

22b*23a. The wind carries the blue big clouds and 
divides them into various portions, which it makes them shower 
rain and the clouds become solidified. 

23b-24a. It is that wind which carries the celestial cars 
of gods. It is that fourth wind (in the list) called Saihvaha which 
is capable of subduing mountains. 

The fifth wind called Vivaka is full of great might and 
speed. By that hard blowing wind, the internal juices of trees 
are made sick or dry. 

24b-2.‘)a. It holds up (supports from below) all the 
heavenly waters in the sky and prevents them from falling 
down. Supporting up the sacred waters of the celestial Ganga, 
the wind blows to prevent them (rotn flowing downwards. 
And the holy river water slays on (high up in the sky). 

25b«26a. The Sim U the source of thousands of rays and 
it throws (a flood of) light on the earth. But it is through the 
obstruction of this. 

26b-28a.* Through the action of that wind, the Moon, 
after waning, waxes again till he shows his full disc. That wind 
is known as Paritaha and it is the excellent among the living 
beings^ and from it Soma, the divine store of nectar, is obtained. 

28b<29a. That wind takes away the life of all living 
creatures at the time of death. His Law is abided by Death and 
god Yama, the son of the sun-god. 

29b-30a. That Law becomes the source of immortality 
which is attained by Yogins of quiescent mind (intellect) who 
are ever engaged in Yogic meditation, 

30b-31a. By resorting to this wind, thousands of Uaksa’s 
grandsons through his (Dak^’s) ten sons quickly and with 

•NP readi yiU 'goes to the earth.* Mbh. (ibid) v. 47 

reads bh^U tmun^kardm 'enlightens or sbetU light on the earth*. I prefer 
the Mbh. Trading. 



890 Mrada Purdna 

speed attained the limits of the universe (broke through them 
to reach Mokfc). 

31b«32a. It is thewind called which is irresistible 

by anybody^ overwhelmed with whose showers he does not 
revert (?) 

32b-33a. In this way all these wind-gods, the sons of 
Aditi, are extremely miraculous. They blow about (without 
being attached to anybody) everywhere. They have access 
everywhere and arc the end of everything.® 

33b-34a. It was indeed a great miracle that this excellent 
mountain was suddenly shaken by the blowing of that wind. 

34b-35. This wind is the exhalation from (the nose of) 
Vis^u. When it blows forcibly, O child, the whole world gets 
agitated. Hence when a stormy wind blows violently persons 
well-versed in the Veda do not recite it. 

36-37a. The Vedas are a form of the wind. If uttered 
with force and loudly (at this time) the external wind gets 
pained.” (Hence one should not recite the Vedas when stormy 
winds blow) 

After addressing these words to his son, the spiritually 
powerful son of Parasara asked his son to resume the recitation 
of the Vedas (when the storm subsides). He then left to take 
his ablutions in the heavenly Ganga. 

37b-38a. Thereafter when Vyasa departed to take his 
bath, 6iika, the foremost among the knowers of the Vedas and 
the master of the Vedas and accessories to Vedas (like 
Kalpa etc.) resumed his self*study (and recitation)of the Vedas. 

38b-39. Then Venerable Sanatkumara'^ approached 
Suka, the son of Vyasa who was engaged in the recitation of 
the Vedas in solitude, O sage. Suka, the son of KrsQa 
Dvaipayana got up and the son of god Brahma (Sanatkumara) 
was received by him. 

40. O excellent Brahmana ! Then Sanatkumara who 
was prominent among the knowers of the Veda enquired, “O 
highly fortunate son of Vyasa, O highly brilliant sage ! What 
are you doing (now)?** 

Suka said : 

41. O son of Brahma, I am now engaged in the self 



II.60.42-52a 


891 


study of the Vedas. It is a (great) holy merit of mine whereby 
I have been able to see you. 

42. I wish to ask you something about the principle 
that is conducive to the attainment of salvation. Please recount 
it^ O highly blessed one, so that I may attain that perfect 
knowledge. 

Sanctkum^a said : 

43. There is no (other) vision on a par with learning, 
there is no (other penance on a par with learning. There is no 
(other misery on a par with sensuous attachment. There is 
no other happiness on a par with renunciation. 

44. Refraining from sinful activities, being continuously 
engaged in meritorious activities, good behaviour and adherence 
to conventional duties* these are the most excellent things 
contributing to welfare. 

45. Having obtained the birth as a human being (the 
life in) which b fraught with sorrow he who becomes 
attached to it becomes stupefied; such a man is incapable of 
being emancipated from sorrow. At tad) meet (to worldly objects) 
b an indication of misery. 

46. The intellect of one attached to the worldly affairs 
heightens one’s vicious snare of delusion. One ensnared by 
delusion attains misery here and hereafter. 

47. Restraint of lust and fury by all means must be 
pursued by one who seeks welfare. These two are conducive to 
the destruction of (spiritual) welfare (the moment) they crop up. 

48. One must continuously guard one’s penance against 
fury; one must save one’s splendour and glory from (indecent) 
rivalry; one must save one’s learning from being over*honoured 
and disrespected; one must save oneself from blunden. 

49. Absence of cruelty b the greatest Z7A4tnn^, forbearance 
b the greatest strength; knowledge of the AiTnan b the greatest 
knowledge and trut^ulness b the greatest of benefits. 

50. He b an erudite scholar who renounces everything. 
He moves about the objects of the sense-organs by means of 
those sense-organs that are fully submissive to himself 

51-52a. He who b not getting enungled; he whose soul 
b quiescent; he who b without abeiration; he who has con- 



892 


Jidjoda 


ccntration;he who does not identify himself with those beings 
that do not become one with the Atman, that is, he who is with 
them and without them, becomes liberated and ere long attains 
the greatest welfare. 

52b-53a. One who never secs othen, never touches others, 
never talks with others, soon accomplishes his summum bonum. 
O sage. 

53b'55. No one shall injure any living being; one shall 
move on friendly terms with all the living beings. After attaining 
this birth no one shall be inimical to anyone. Voluntary in¬ 
digence, perfect contentment, indifference and absence of fickle¬ 
mindedness—these, they say are conducive to the welfare of one 
who 18 the knower of the Atman^ of one who has conquered the 
Atman. 

56-57a. Disengaging oneself from all attachment, O 
child, you subjugate your senses and by that means attain 
the state of sorrowlessness, both here and hereafter. Those who 
have no desire do not feel aggrieved. One shall avoid and eschew 
all types of desire within the Atman. 

O gentle one, by abandoning all desires you will be re¬ 
leased from hosts of miseries. 

57b-58a. You must be permanently engaged in austerities 
and silent self-control. You must restrain yourself. You must be 
desirous of conquering what b not conquered, viz. the Brahman. 
You must not be entangled in any close attachment, 

58b-59a. A Brahmana (one who b engrossed in the 
meditation of (Brahman) uninvolved in the close intimacies due 
to the Gums and always engaged in the only activity (ofmedita¬ 
tion), ere long attains the excellent happiness. 

59b-60a. It b the unfortunate and wretched sage who 
takes delight in the pain of Dvandvas (mutually clashing oppo¬ 
sites). He b satisfied with a little knowledge. But he who is satis¬ 
fied with perfect knowledge docs not feel aggrieved.* 


•This verse in the NP b ft bit obscure; the correspond in; verte 
No. 24 in the Mih. SonH ch. 329 U fts follows : 

tko romU mmih I 

vUdhi pTiijtldnatfptSfk Wk jnina-tfpU na /sce/i // 



II.60.60b-67 


893 


60b«61a. It 19 the auspicious acts that enable the 
individual to attain Devahood, while the mixture of auspicious 
and Inauspicious activities enables one to attain human birth* 
Through inauspicious karmat one attains the birth as lower 
animals. Due to his kamas, he is helpless and cannot avoid it. 

61b-62a. The worldly existence is always tormented by 
death, old age and other miseries. Every creature realises it.* 
Why don’t you get enlightened? 

62b*63a. You have given the term Hita (beneficent) to 
what is Akita (non-bencficent). You regard a thing as Dhruoa 
(permanent) to what is Adhnwa (transitory). You have given 
the term Artkd (Meaningful) to what is/iruirlAtf (hannful). Why 
don’t you get enlightened? 

63b'64a. Just as the silkworm in the cocoon entwines 
itself by means of the threads originating from itself, you are 
also entwined. Why don’t you awake to the correct apprehension 
of these ? 

54b-65a. Enough of attachment to objects of this world, 
for attachment to worldly objects engenders evib. The silk^worm 
which weaves a cocoon round itself u at last bound down by his 
own acceptance of ties. 

65b«66. All beings passionately attached to one’s sons, 
wives and families become the victims of destruction at last, 
even as wild elephants sunk ii\ the mire of a lake become 
gradually weakened (and meetdeath). Have a look at extremely 
miserable creatures who are dragged by the vicious net of 
delusion. 

67. The family, sons and wives, the physical body, 
the mass of accumulated wealth—all belong to others. They are 
unstable. What is that which one can call one’s own ? The 
merits and the sins (committed by oneself). 


That person who leads a self-contented happy life in the midst of people who 
take pleasures in sexual intercoune, shoukl be known at a person whose 
thirst has been satiated by knowledge. And (it is known to all that) a person 
whose thirst or .ovetiousnea is satbhed by perfect (spiritual) knowledge, 
never feels any tnitery. 

*v. I. Saihsdn pa^ti (Mbh. ibid). 26. 

A living being is cooked (in the cauldron of) Saihsira. 



894 


Ndr^Puri!^ 


68 . When one has to leave everything under duress and 
go, helplessly to the next world, why arc you getting involved 
2 n a wrong and harmful activity ? You don’t pursue your own 
interest (your real, durable wealth). 

69. How will you by yourself traverse the pathway en¬ 
veloped in darkness, without rest, without a support, without 
food and drink to be partaken of, and without a guide? 

70. No one will follow you behlud, as you set off from 
here. But the merit and the sin shall follow you (wherever) 
you go. 

71. One seeks* one’s objectives by means of learning, 
acts of bravery (^purity* in the Mbh. original) and great knowl¬ 
edge. When that objective is achieved one becomes liberated 
from Sarhsitra. 

72. The (social) desire that one feels for living in the 
midst of human neighbourhoods (or habitations) is a rope-like 
bondage. People possessing merits succeed to cut it asunder and 
liberate themselves. Sinful persons are incapable of breaking it. 

73. You find men of your own age and caste and having 
the same comely features taken away by the (god of) Death. 
You don’t feel dejected and depressed even nominally. Indeed 
your heart is (made) of steel. 

74-75. The river (called the world or life) has personal 
beauty or form as its banks, the mind, the speed of its current, 
(the sense of) touch, an island (in it), taste, its stream or 
current, smell, the mud, sound its waters. The special part 
leading towards heaven is full of grave difficulties. In this boat 
called intelligence, forgiveness is the oar for propulsion. Truth 
is the material forming the boat {Safya^mayim) and practice of 
dharma is the stabilising baUast. Renunciation is the wind that 
propels (the mast of) the boat. Driven with speed it is with 
this boat (of intelligence) that one should cross the river. 

76-77a. Ahcr eschewing both Dharma and Adharma^ 
eschew both truthfulness and falsehood. Eschew Dharma by 

* NPreadi aftuJirycnU for in the Mbh. Aa the reading 

in (he Mbh. ta appropriate in the context (and U also the original text from 
which the NP borrowed), it ia accepted here. 



II.60.77b-86 


895 


means of non^conception {A^Scifikclpa) and Adhama by means 
of non*violence. With the aid of intelligence eschew both truth 
and falsehood and at last cast off understanding itself by the 
Supreme knowledge. 

77b«79a. Do you throw away this physical body having 
bones for its pillars, sinews for its bindii^ cords, flesh and blood 
as its plaster, the skin (NP reading is ^Dhanna*) for its outer 
binding (packing ?); full of urine and faeces and hence emitting 
putrid smell; exposed to the attacks of sorrow and senility; the very 
seat of diseases and unsteady; dominated by the attribute of 
Rnjas and impermanent^a temporary habitation for the being. 

79b-80a. This whole universe which is both mobile and 
immobile, consists of the great elements and hence is material 
(full of atoms). 

80b-82. Five sense-organs, the three attributes— Tamas^ 
Sdiiva and Rajas. These (together with others mentioned above) 
constitute a group of seventeen and are called Avyakta (unmant- 
feat). 'Fhese with all those which are Vyakta (manifest) vis. the 
five objects of senses, consciousness, Intelligence, form and the 
group of twenty five manifest and unmanifest ones. 

When endowed with all these, it is (still) called the 
impermanent.* 

83*85. He who knows the Trivarga (i.e. virtue, wealth, 
and love) happiness and misery, life and death perfectly well 
uadertands the origins and dissolution. Whatever is perceived 
by means of the sense organ b called Vyakta. That should be 
known as Avyakia which is beyond the scope of the sense 
organs, that which can be grasped only through signs and 
symptoms. By means of the perfectly controlled sense organs, 
the embodied being is propitiated as if by means of continuous 
downpoun. He sees the Atman pervading the world and also the 
world fixed in the Atman. 

86 . Being rooted in spiritual knowledge, the spiritual 


* The NP reads Sam^uktam anifyam ohkidiayaU. But the reading ii 
not satisfactory, though 1 have accepted it Tor translation. Mbh. (ibid) v. 47a 
reads Samfyuktaft pumSH etc. and means **When endowed with (the above 
mentioned twentyfour posiesiioiu) he is called Puman (Man). The Mbh. 
reading U better. 



396 


Jidrada Purd^a 


power is never lost* to a man who perceives the Supreme Soul 
in his own soul—<the man who always sees all creatures in all 
conditions in his soul. 

87-88. He who has become one v/ithBrahman (transcends) 
by his spiritual knowledge ail errors or miseries) never contacts 
any evil by contact with all creatures. Such a man never finds 
fault with practices or course of conduct prevailing in the world. 
A person who knows Liberation well, says that the Lord (or 
the Supreme Soul) is without beginning and end. It abides as 
a witness in all beings and is imperishable. 

89. He (the soul) is inactive> non-stupeAed (Mbh.— 
formless); only the being meets with grief as a result of his 
misdeeds. 

90. For the purpose of counteracting his grief» he kills 
numerous creatures. As a result of these sacriHces, the performer 
has to undergo rebirth and perform (innumerable) new 
Karmas, 

91. Such a person regards that what is really a source of 
misery as happiness. And he continuously becomes unhappy 
like an ailing person who eats unwholesome food not permissi¬ 
ble in that sickness. 

92. By his terrible acts» such a person is bound, pressed 
and tormented. Freed from them^ he being bound by his karmasy 
obtains rebirth and thus rotates like a wheel in Sarftsdra without 
an axle. 

93-94. Receding therefrom and being released from his 
own bondage, he wanden in the wide world as a result of the 
uprising of the activities. He revolves like a wheel without its 
axle (?) Many have attained SuUhis that gave rise to happiness 
and that had not been hindered. (That was possible for them) 
thanks to self-control, refraining from contacts and to the 
power of penance. 


* The NP reads : P^trivara^drfol^ m pafyaii / 

The autement does not lUcid to reason. Hence the original reading from the 
Mbh. (iH^) V. 51 which ti logical it accepted» The traiulaiiou above U of 
the following : 

Pardvara^driah ^aktir jHdna-fnOli ne ndfyaii / 



CHAPTER SIXTY 


1. Vv 1-S6 in this chapter Are m4inly taken from Mbk, Sdnti ch. 328 
•w. 10-57. 

2. In the Mbh. it U Nirada who advises Vyisa to lecite the Vedas. 

3. NP. reads: dccottau pratjfajfoihjrdtau But the second line 12b becomes 
unconnected with t2a. Mbh. (ibid) v. 30 dpdvitau ptttya patiihdnau tit* \i 
better. It means: 'these are the two paths in the worlds hereafter.* 

4. The term denotes the comm<w tendencies of sense-organs or the 
common factors of Sadhyai and other beings. 

5. V. I /Vd<ieadt-^(all are) enabled to live (Mbh. ibid v. 35) 

6. I'he NP. rcsuls : yo.,.dcdat 0 eip9 jImuUbhjiwantHtlab 1 took aMne 
for MRS, for this process is not limited to the forests : Mbh. (ibid) 39 reads: 
ombannilafi *in the sky*. The reading in Mbh. b worth considering. 

7. V. i. pdrab : the foremost of all in energy. 

8. This is (he probable interpretation of the text of the NP. ^enn 
foribh&tds t^njtna Rtt'Ofreir / The Mbh (iPid) v. 52 a reads: y€nQsp^ft<^b 
pdrdM(2b ydijM no nufortcU. Being touched by which he U so overwhelmed 
Chal he goes away permanently (i.e. liberated from Sartisara) and never 
returns (gets Mbkia). 

9. Thus reads NP : andramantd t<irvdfUd tarvaidh /arMt-«drtpo^. But the 
sentence has no predicate. The Mbh. (ibid) reads : andraiam U sofhvd/Ui 
jarpagdb farvadAdrifta/t They blow incessantly, liave access everywhere and 
uphold everything. 

10. Here ends chapter 328 in the Mbh. *^dnti. It is ligiiiticant that 
NK gives a secondary—Yogic—explanation to all these verses. But he, 
however, concludes with the mundane common sense remark : Hence one 
should not recite the Veda while a stormy wind blows.** 

11. Zo Afbh (Sdnfi) ch. 329, it u Nanda who approached 3uka. 



CHAPTER SIXTYONE 


Thi gnatruss of Nivrtti^ Dhama 
Sanatkumdra^ said : 

1. Having heard such scriptural texts as arc auspicious^ 
dispelling sorrow, conducive to mental peace and happiness, 
one attains pure intelligence, whereby one attains really happy 
state. 

2. Every day, thousands of incidents causing delight 
(sorrow^Mbh.) and hundreds of happenings causing sorrow 
affect a penon devoid of wisdom, but not a person endowed 
with understanding and learning. 

3. Persons of little intelligence and understanding become 
overwhelmed with mental sorrow of every kind due to advent 
of, and association with what is undesirable and severance 
from what is agreeable. 

4. One should not nostalgically brood over the merits 
of the articles which one possessed in the past. One who does 
not think of them with reverent affection, becomes free from 
the bondage of love. 

5. One should try to detect faults in things to which 
one feels attached. He should attribute undesirability to them* 
Then alone he becomes resplendent* immediately. 

6 . A person bewails for what is past (and lost perma¬ 
nently), does not acquire either wealth or religious merits or 
fame. He should reconcile himself with their loss. But that 
returns to him (?)• 

7. Living beings sometimes gain and sometimes lose 
worldly objects. It should not be the cause of sorrow, to a 
person. 

8 . He who bewails the past, that which is de^ or lost, 
attains miseries through miseries. He inc\u3 greater loss and 
injury. 

9. When a calamity causing physical or mental grief 
visits and cannot be warded off, one should not brood over it« 

10. This b the antidote against misery that it should not 



IL61.1U2I 


899 

be brooded over. On being mused over, it does not decrease. 
Nay, it increases again. 

11. One shall dispel mental misery by means of intellect 
and remove the physical pain by means of medicines. This is 
the power of knowledge; one should not behave like commoners 
in such matters. 

12. No learned and sensible man shall yearn for these 
evanescent things viz.—the life, (comely) features, youth, 
hoarded wealth, health and association with beloved persons. 

13. Misery is bom of ignorance alone. It does not 
behove any one to bewail over it. Without bewailing, one 
shall try to remedy it, if one finds out its source. 

14. In this life, uf4doubtedly misery is more pleasing* ** 
than happiness; (for) one will (try to) uplift the beloved Atman 
from the miseries of old age and death. 

15. Like the sharp^pointed arrows discharged by a good 
archer, physical and mental ailments affect the bodies deeply. 

16«19. In order to destroy the ailment of a patient, who 
is afraid and who yearns ibr life, the body is being dragged 
about by means of treatments. The ducts of the body con¬ 
tinue to flow. Like the current of the rivers they do not turn 
back. (The sun) takes away the life of men by day and by night 
again and again, during the two fortnights dark and bright; he 
makes the bom man become old; he never tarries even for a 
moment. Hitmcif free from old age, he takes away the lives of 
men overwhelmed by happiness and misery. Again and again, 
the sun sets, again and again he rises. 

20. Taking with them the good and evil incidents that 
befall men according to their destiny and hence are not expected 
by them, the nights too pass away^* ceaselessly. 

21. Whatever one may desire, one shall attain, provided 
the fruit of actions of men does not depend on other factors. 


* Mbb. reads hJuitaram amouot of sorrow and pain b greater 

than that of pleasure in thb world/* 

** matam In the NP is not r^evant. Hence AsUm from Mhk, 

331.1 (the correspoodmg verse of the NP) b accepted. In the NP v. 20 abenre 
iffiitifld matait garrAaali ritrajfak I 

tM/itrn seems to be a mbpHot for mastwn. 



4 


J^drada Putdna 


: 11 


22-23. Clever, intelligent men of unrestrained senses if 
destitute of cflbrts (or kamas) ^ never succeed in earning any 
fruits. Other persons though destitute of intelligence and with¬ 
out any accomplishments and who are useles* and really the basest 
of men, are seen prompted by desires, and are seen indulging in 
all desires. 

24. Another man attempts always to inflict violence on 
all living beings. He becomes old in deceiving but blessed with 
happiness throughout his life. 

25. Fortune blesses someone who never stirs out but who 
sits (idle). Some one does everything but never obtains desired 
objects. 

26. In order to recount the faults of men, the semen 
created in oneself at the sight of another, goes to still another 
person.® 

27. When the semen is absorbed in the womb, it becomes 
a human foetus.® The recession (of semen or failure of concep¬ 
tion) resembles a mango tree which blossoms fully without 
producing a single fruit. 

28. To some persons who desire sons, who wish to per¬ 
petuate their lines and who (by worshipping deities etc.), strive 
for its achievement, not even an egg (an embryo in the womb) 
is bom. 

29. Some persons who dread the birth of an embryo as 
one fean a furious serpent, a long-lived son is born. How 
verily he is like his departed father ! (who has as if returned 
aAer departing from this life—Mbh. ibid. v. 17) 

30. Some persons dejected due to sonlessness and with 
a burning desire for sons, at last get a son after performing 
penance and offering sacrifices to gods. The sons, duly borne 
for ten months (in the wombs by their wives) are born to be 
the banes and disgrace to their families. 

31. Thanks to these blessed rites and observations, others 
inherit the hoarded wealth and grains and other diverse sources 
of enjoyment earned and stored by their fbre&thcn. 

32. When a man and a woman come in contact with 
each other, in the act of sexual intercourse, the embryo is 
formed in the womb like a calamity visiting the woman. 

33-34. Due to excessive attachment to objects of senses 



IL6L35-45a 


90! 


and due to delusion, death becomes unpleasant. A person who, 
gives up both (the concepts of) pleasure and pain transcends 
(these) and goes to Brahman and enjoys the highest bliss. 

It is with great difficulty that wealth (or objects of 
senses) are renounced. Nor it is pleasant or easy to retain them. 

35«36a. One should not be worried on hearing about the 
destruction of riches or when they are not obtained. Some Men 
of peculiar nature become dissatisfied and are doomed on attain¬ 
ing adverse monetary conditions. But learned men are 
contented. 

36b-38a. All things are hoarded only to be destroyed in 
the end. All ascents end in downfall; all contacts and unions 
end in separation; life ends in death; there is no end to the 
thirst (desire to get more and more); satisfaction alone is the 
greatest happiness. Hence, learned men praise satisfaction alone 
as the real wealth or an asset. 

38b*39a. (Defective) When he does not stand even for 
a moment after acquiring (the body), what should he ever 
(constantly) brood over when the bodies (themselves) are 
impermanent and momentary. 

39b-40a. Comprehending the real state of (created) 
beings, those who through the dint of their intelligence have 
traversed the path beyond darkness, do not come to grief but 
see the highest goal. 

40b-41a. Like a tiger pouncing on an animal, the god 
of death picks out and snatches away a person whose desires 
are not satiated. 

41b-42a. For securing escape from this misery, one should 
find a remedy. One should eschew grief, should not undertake 
(sacrifices and secular) activities. He should engage himself (in 
yoga) and be free from this misery (or fruitless efforts). 

42b-43a. Whether in the case of a rich man or a destitute 
there is nothing more higher than merely the enjoyment of 
objects of senses such as sound, touch, taste, colour and smell. 

43b*44a. Not that there is no misery without ailment to 
creatures by employment of speech. It is neither through speech 
nor learning (or knowledge) that all are separated (from life ?) 

44b-45a. Restraining one^s affection or attachment to 
things praised and othen (not sc praised), he who wanders 



902 Ndrada Pur^ 

freely (without the bonds of attachment) is really happy and 
learned. 

45b*46a. Completely absorbed in spiritual pursuits with 
no expectations and free from desires or lustful enjoyments 
(atrdmtVa), he who moves about with his self as his help^^mate^ 
becomes (really) happy. 

46b«47. When an interchange or reversal of pleasure and 
pain takes place, neither his intellectual faculty nor manliness 
protect him from him. He must naturally exert himself. And a 
person who goes on doing efforts, is not lost or ruined. 

48*49a. The embryo takes birth in the womb like an 
undesirable calamity. Those previous bodies (envelop) the soul 
who is eternal. Afrer the suspension of the vital breaths of 
creatures (i.e. after the death of the body in the previous birth) 
he is invested with another (ph)^cal body) constituted of flesh 
and phlegm (according to hss kamas ). 

49b-50a. When the previous body is destroyed, by 
another body which is as weak or strong’ as the previous one is 
kept reserved for the transmigration of the creature whose 
previous body is burnt, like one boat b taking to another boat 
kept stationary and ready for the transfer of passengers. 

50b«51a. (I enquire of you :) By whose efforts you see 
that the foetus continues to be alive (in the womb) when in 
the act of sexual intercourse a drop of inanimate semen b 
deposited in the womb. 

51b«52a. The food stuffr taken in and beverages imbibed 
become digested in the stomach. Why then does not the foetus 
too become digested like the food ? 

52b-53a. It b Nature which has ordained the stay (of 
the jft^) in the urine and ordure in the womb. ThejfM which 
b to take birth b helpless and he b not the agoit (nor has any 
choice) in the matter of residence or escape from the womb. 

53b*54a. Some come out from the womb alive; others 
die there (before birth) as their death b inevitable due to 
the arrival of others (their future bodies ordained by their 
previous Kama). 

54b-55a* The person who in the course of sexual inter* 


* The verse ia NP b obscure. 



IL6L55b*63 


903 


course sprays out (sows) the seed, obtains fioin it some issue* 
The child thus brought forth indulges in the act of copulation 
in due course. 

551>-56a. (It is not the soul but) the gross elements 
(constituting the physical body) at the close of one hundred 
years attain this type of seventh stage* (i.e. old age) and 
then cease to exist. 

56b«57a. There is no doubt that when persons are 
afflicted by diseases, they lose the power of getting up or moving 
about like petty animals attacked by tigen. 

57b-S8. Despite their best possible efforts, physicians 
are not able to alleviate the pains of patients. 

59. Even those various physicians though experts and 
equipped with medicines are themselves dragged (attacked) by 
diseases like beasts assailed by tigen. 

60. Even though they imbibe many astringent and 
different kinds of medicated ghees, they arc seen broken down 
by old age like big trees (luga)** by elephants. 

61. Who administers medicines to ailing animals, birds, 
beasts of prey and povcrty-striken people? These are not gcncr- 
ally seen to be suffering from diseases. 

62. A disease attacks and captures even terrible unassath 

able kings of ferocious energy, just as Cand^^ roasten of 
beasts do to beasts. 

63. In this way, people gagged and unable even to groan, 
submerged in delusion and sorrow are (seen to be) carried 
away in the big powerful current in which they arc thrown. 

9tasmddy<mi~samboii<ihAdy9 ftMH parimue^ / 

na kiM puw <ipauA*fu // 

wbOi while alive, is liberated througb thb Bocual iotercouriedoes not 
get any worship or honour but links in dboadbaj. This is obviously strange. 
Tbe original Mbh. verse bas : 

jc Hjem panmu^cU / pr^^ m hhhaii sajjad // 

The Mbh. verse is translated above. 

•The comm. NK sutei the rollo%ving 10 stages of human life : 
(1) fUy in tbe womb (2) birth (3) in&ncy upto Syears (4} childhood upto 
12 years (5) Paugapda (6) youth (7) old aee (8) decrepitude (9) suspend 
of breath and death. The Mbh (ibid) v. 28 reads for » 

the N? and the body is said to attain tbe 7th or the 9th stage out of the 

above 10 stages. 

in tbe NP is a misprint. 



904 


Mdraia Purity 


64. Neither by wealth nor by power of austere 
penance can embodied beings seeking to conquer nature, 
overcome it. 

65. All persons desire to attain gradually to the top of 
the world. They strive to the best of their ability, But the result 
docs not tally with their cherished desire. 

66. If people were to obtain the fruit of their attempt 
(or cherished objective), tliey would never die, would never 
grow decrepit and would never have to experience anything 

unpleasant. 

67. Persons who are careful as well as crooked, cruel and 
brave pay homage to men inebriated with the flush of affluence 
and puffed up with arrogance (Mbh. reads: those intoxicated 
with spirituous liquors). 

68. In the case of some, griefs or sorrows recede even 
before they are glimpsed (by the prospective sufferer) while 
others who possess nothing of their own overstep* them. 

69. A great disparity is seen in the fruition of the con¬ 
junctions of acts. Some bear a palanquine on their shoulders 
while othen ride in them. 

70. All penons aspire aAer affluence or prosperity. Out of 
them a few have chariots ahead of them in processions. Some 
men have no wealth (v.l. in the MBh. ‘arc wifeless^) while 
others have hundreds of wives. 

71. The opposite pairs—pleasure and pain—exist side by 
side. People have either one or the other. Have a look at this 
or that. You should not succumb to delusion. 

72. Eschew both Dharma as well as Adharma, cast off (the 
duallstic concept of) truth and falsehood. After eschewing all the 
notions, be established in your own Self, be happy and free 
from all ailments. 

73. O excellent sage I have recounted to you in details 
that secret and mysterious teachii^.It is due to such knowledge 
that the gods (who were formerly human beings) could transect 
the earth and go to settle in the heaven.’’ 

Swndajm sciix 

74. Having addressed thus Suka, the son of Vy&sa, and 
bidding good-bye to him, ilic great sage Saxiatkum&ra 



11.61.75-78 


905 


who was worshipped by Suka with deep reverence, went his 
way. 

75. AAer understanding the whole philosophic position, 
Suka, the greatest of the Yogins, became eager to explore the 
region of the Brahman and went to his father. 

76. Thereafter, after meeting his father and bowing him 
down, the great sage Suka circumambulated him (clockwise) and 
proceeded to mount Kaiiasa. 

77. Vyasa, being overcome with filial aiTcction (for his 
son and pained at separation from him and grieved at heart, 
cried out, *'0 son, wait at least foramoment/’ 

78. Suka who was above all expectations, became freed 
from affection and bondage. He thought only of Liberation 
(from SiThsdra) and attained the highest region. 



CHAPTER SIXTYONE 


1. Tfaii dupter is compiled from the Mbh. Sinti chftpten 330 ft, 
the only difference is that here the interlocutor is Senetkumire while in 
the Mbh.» it U NArnda. 

2. Mbh. v. 6. reads : mraiyefs 'gets disgusted with them*. 

3. NP reads : tu 'la* in the NP makes this a confused 

slaiement. The Mbh. reads na nivartau never returns to him and this is a better 
reading. 

4. nifphald(t but Mbh. (ibid) v. It reads 

5. These two itnes in the NP seem independent or unrelated. In the 
Mbh. (ibid) v. 14a reads : '‘you should ascribe the above to the faults 
of man*’* 

6. The Mbh. (ibid) v.l5 reads id na pi for NP mdnwi(t' Mbh. 
means : “When at the sight of some other person semen is created but is 
actually imparted to another women, there may or may not be any 
conception.'* 

7. This verse is the same as Mbh. (ibid) v. 22 with the following 
change : calicalam for boldbiUm in the NP and nivon ipi*kilim for ndpom ivi* 
calim in the NP. 

8. The reading aJhigcc<hati in its original in the Af^A. {^dnli 
331.40) has na kitleid adkigamjmU ‘through possessing no wealth are free 
from miseries of every type.’ 



CHAPTER SKTYTWO 


The ixposition ^ Mokfa^dharma 

SBla said: 

L On hearing these word5> the holy sage Narada asked 
the Brahmanical sage once again about Suka^s departure. 
Jidrada said: 

2. O holy lord, everything has been recounted by you 
with a very sympathetic heart. On hearing it, my mind has 
attained the moat perfect quiescence. 

3. O great sage, impart again unto me the philosophy of 
liberation. The thirst is never quenched by the ocean of the 
attributes of Krstia. 

4. In what region do those persons who are liberated 
from Sarhsara and who are expert in the philosophy of Mok^a^ 
abide ? This is my great doubt. 

5a. O highly fortunate one ! Do dispel that doubt as 
there is no other person (superior to you) amongst the knowers 
(of Mokfa^Sdstra). 

Sanandana said: 

5b-6a. In accordance with the injunctions laid down in 
the Sastras, Suka who was conversant with Krama^Toga (the 
order of the successive process of Yoga) fixed his soul (performed 
Dharana) in due course from his feet (upwards). 

6b«7a. When it dawned (lit. the world became l^hted 
with the light of the sun before its rise) that learned sage Suka 
sat with his face eastward with his hands properly folded in 
an attitude of humility. 

7b-8a. The place wherein the son of Vyasa started to 
proceed by the path of Yoga was free from any flock of birds or 
sounds or any disturbing sight. 

8b*9a. He then beheld his own soul liberated from all 
bonds of attachment. When he saw the (disc of the) sun, he 
gave out a loud laughter (in ecstasy). 

9b-10. With a view to attain the path of liberation, be 



Ndrada PutS^‘ 


908 

again set himself up for Yoga. Becoming the master of the great 
yoga, he transcended the sky (or the element called the sky or 
space). The glorious son of Vyasa became definitely the traverser 
of the path in the sky. 

11. All beings gazed (^ape) at tlie incessantly speeding 
prominent-most Brahmana with the effulgence of Canada 
traversing through the sky with the velocity of the wind or the 
speed of the mind. 

12. According to their ability and with due formalities 
they worshipped him. The residents of heavens rained showen 
of heavenly dowers on him. 

13. All the bevies of celestial damsels and tribes of 
Gandharvas became filled with amazement at his sight. The 
sages as well as the Siddhas (or sages who have mastered 
Siddhis) were wonderstnick as to who was the person who had 
attained such a Siddhi. 

14. Then that highly resplendent Suka, being full of 
(spiritual) joy told those sages his name, O Narada. 

15. *‘If my father follows after me crying out “O Suka**, 
you should respond to him (promptlyand) with attention. 

16. When he was assured by them positively in the matter, 
he gave up the four worlds.* He then shed off the eight varie¬ 
ties of the attribute Tamos and five kinds of the attribute 
Rajas (which tempts men to five kinds of objects of senses.) 

17. Thereafter, the intelligent 8uka cast off the attribute 
Saliva and it was a wonderful miracle. 8uka settled in himself 
that eternal position, devoid of attributes where the Lihga was 
being worshipped. 

18«19 He then (espied) two unparalleled peaks similar to 
the mountains Himalayas and Meru,** in close contacts. They 
were made of gold and silver and hence were yellow and white 
in colour. Those auspicious peaks were a hundred Yojanas in 
height. With a fearless heart Suka alighted there. 

20. Though the peaks were very closely united, they 
were seen suddenly tom asunder into two (at Suka’s impact). 
It was such a wonderful miracle, O excellent Briihnana. 

*Mbh Santi ch. 333.1 records the v. 1. Y^gAn which NX. ocplaini as 
(2) Vitarka (2) Vkara (3) Asmda {^)Amita. 

••vide V. 27 p. 909. 



11.62.21-31 


909 


21. Thereafter, he suddenly broke through* and soared 
away from the two peaks of the mountain and that excellent 
mountain could not obstruct his passage. 

22. Couning from above, the pious-souled Suka beheld 
the river ** Mandakini (the 5th stage in the spiritual progress 
in the (Fjyu-Fi^^-NK) and a forest full of blossoming trees. 

23. In the waters of the Mandakini, a bevy of celestial 
damsels were indulging in sports while bathing. Those naked 
ladies of good form saw the formless sage. 

24. Knowing that Suka was traversing (towards Brchma) 
the father, overwhelmed with affection followed him closely 
from behind taking to that excellent course. 

25. But Suka directed his course far above the aerial 
region of the wind (i.e. above the st^irAtman —NK) and having 
thus shown his Yogic prowess, became all-pervading (identical 
with the Brahman). 

26. Vyisa, the performer of a great, austere penance, 
adopted the path of Yoga and within the twinkling of the eye 
reached the spot where Suka alighted (with a dash). 

27. He saw there the mountain peak split in two and the 
passage through which Suka passed. The Siddhas and sages 
praised the (y<^ic) passage and achievement of his son. 

28. Thereafter, crying out loudly upon the name of $uka 
it was lamented so loudly by the father (Vy&sa) that the three 
worlds resounded with the cry. 

29. The pious-souled Suka who had access everywhere 
(as he became one with the Brahman), was the soul of all and 
hence with faces all round responded by uttering vibrantly the 
word Bhoh (as if in an echo). 

30. Thereupon, echoii^ the mono-syllabic sound 

(O Sire !], the whole world consisting of the mobiles and 
immobiles responded loudly to the reply of Suka. 

31. Since then, even to this day, when sounds are uttered 
in mountain caves or plateaus they still echo them as if in 
answer to Suka. 


*Sce V. 27 below. 

**In the Mbh. (iUd) ch. 953.17 tbii is the adj. of Mand&kinl. In 
view of the next vene, the Mbh. is eorrecl thou^ 1 have followed the NP. 



910 


J^AtadA Puf^a 


32. Having thus displayed bis latent prowess, Suka cast 
off all attributes b^inning with Sattva and attained the highest 
position {Mok^a). 

33. Having witnessed the great (Yogic) prowess of his 
son of unlimited brilliance, Vyasa was consoled by Lord, Rudra 
O N^ada. 

34. ‘^Why are you so much distressed (in mind) and are 
so much agitated for your son, O sage ? Don^ you see O 
Brahmana, your son who has become identical with the Brahman 
coming near you 

35. Thus consoled, the sage Vyasa again returned to his 
hermitage while Suka being one with the Brahman moved 
about in various worlds. 

36. Thereafter, on another occasion, OBrihmaija, Vyksa, 
the son of Satyavatf, went to the hermitage of Badarikkirama 
in order to see Nara and Nirkyaoa. 

37. On seeing those two lords performing great penance 
there, he himself began the practice of penance with the memory 
of Suka still fresh in his mind. 

38. O dear one, while Vyasa stayed there, Suka the knower 
of the great Yoga, went to Svetadipa where you have already 
gone formerly. 

39. The glorious Lord Nkrayana, the God of gods, 
Janirdana is sought after by the Vedas and his prowess was 
witnessed (bySuka). 

40-41. O Narada, the lord was eulogised by Suka of 
divine nature. He became pleased and said t 

Sri Bhagavdn said 

O leading Yogin, I, who am stationed in the mysterious 
secret of all Devas (Vedas), have been seen by you. O 
Vidava (Brahma^) become a Siddha by means of the Yoga 
imparted by Sanatkumara. Stotioned in the path of Sadagati 
(i. e. the wind god), see the worlds as you wish. 

42. Thus advised by Vasudeva, the sage bom of the 
ArapI, O Bribmapa, went to Vaiku^tha the region bowed to by 
all the worlds. 

43. It was resorted to by Devas moving about in 
aerial chariots. It was surrounded by the (river?) Viraji, O 



11.62.44-53 


911 


Narada, zs this world shines so too the other worlds (by its re¬ 
flection) . 

44. The tanks there, are bedecked in diverse ways by 
means of gold and jewels; the steps are studded with corals: They 
(tank8)are fully covered with blue lotuses; they are agitated by 
the sports of celestial women. 

45. The tanks reverberate loudly, thanks to the divine 
flocks of swans; the clear water is always full. The gatekeepers 
have four hands (each) and are bedecked in different kinds of 
ornaments. 

46-50a. He was not prevented by the gate-keepers, followers 
of Vi$nu, the Siddhas like Kumuda and others, from entering 
within. After entering, Suka perceived the four-armed lord of 
Devas, the slayer of Madhu. He was quiescent. His face 
beamed with pleasure. He was clad in yellow silken garments. 
He was served by Sahkha, Cakra, Gada and Padma (lotus) in 
their bodily form. He shone with the Kaustubha jewel on his 
chest. His (consort) Laksml too shone on his chest. He was 
adorned with a girdle, a sacred thread, bangles and bracelets. 
His armlets and coronet as well as the gemset anklets shone 
(brilliantly). He was being served day and night by the groups 
of Siddhas. On seeing him, Suka, overwhelmed with devotion 
eulogised Him thus: 

^uka said: 

50b. (Suka*s prayer) — 

Obeisance unto you, the son of Vasudeva, to the cosmic witness 
of all the worlds. 

51. Bow to one who is in the form of the seed of the 
universe; to the perfect one; to the silent Atman; (obeisance) to 
Hari the resident of SvetadvIpa;toone who is resting on Vksuki. 

52. Hail to Harftsa (the supreme being); to one of the 
form of the fish; to one who had assumed the body of the Boar; 
(obeisance) to the man-lion; to the one adored by Dhniva; to 
the master of Sankhya and Yoga (systems of philosophy). 

53. (Obeisance) to Catussena (one with four armies); to 
Kurma (the divine tortoise); to Prthu (the big being); to one 
of the nature of happiness; to (the Paramount lord); 



912 


Ndf<ida PurUffa 


to the creator of the universe; to the dispenser of destiny; Co 
the annihilator. 

54. Obeisance to the leading scion of the family of Bhrgu 
(i.e. Paraiurima); to Rama, the descendant of Raghu; to the 
great one; (obeisance) to Kr^na, the originator of the Vedas; 
(obeisance) to one, of the form of Buddha and Kalki. 

55. Hail to Caiurvy^ka (having four manifestations): to 
Vedy^ (one who should be known); to i>^^one who should be 
meditated upon); to the Supreme iCtman; to one called Nara and 
Narayana; to ^ipivUfa (one pervaded by rays of light), toVif^u. 

56. Bow to Rudhaman (with the majestic splendour of 
Rta); to Vidhdman (one devoid of abode); to Supariia (of good 
wings); to Svarocif (self-luminous); to ftbhu (Divinity) to one 
of good rites and lustre; to Sudh^mn (one of good abode); to 
Ajita (the unconquered). 

57. Obeisance to one of universal form; to one identical 
with the universe; to the caxise of creation, sustenance and an¬ 
nihilation (obeisance) to the TajHa and the enjoyerof the Tajnas; 
(obeisance) to the biggest one, to the minute one and to the 
Arihin (the suppliant). 

58. Obeisance to one whose eyes are the sun and the 
moon; to one who possesses power, virility and lustre; to one 
worthy of being worshipped; to the witness; to the unborn; to 
one who has many headf, legs and arms. 

59. (Obeisance) to the lord of Sri, to Srinivasa, to one 
who is subservient to the devotees, to SdrAgin (the wielder of 
the bow Sarnga); to the overlord of the eight Prakrtis; to Brah¬ 
man of iniinite power. 

60. Bow to one who is comprehensible (only) through 
Brhaddranyaka Upanifad; to Hr^kesa; to Vedhas; to one whose 
eyes resemble the lotus; the K^traJAa (individual soul); to the 
luminous one. 

61. (Obeisance) to Oovinda, the creator of the universe; 
to the lord of the universe; to the truth; true to promise; Co 
Vaikun(ha, to Acyuta. 

62. Hail to Adhokfaja, to Dharma, to Vimana; to one 
having three DAjtvi; to one who holds lustre; to Vif^u; to you 
she inhnice one, to Kapila. 



IL62.63-73 


913 


63. Obeisance to Virifici (creator); to Trikakud (one 
who has three ensigns of Royalty); to one who has the forms 
of Rk, Yaju and Saman; obeisance to EkaSrnga (one with a 
single supremacy); to one of pure fame; to Sdstrayoni (the 
source of origin of the scripture). 

64. (Obeisance) to Vr^kapi, to the prosperous one, to 
the lord, to one of universal activities; to one of the form 

BhUfjiy Bhuvah and Svafif to the slayer of Daityas; toone 
devoid of attributes. 

65. Bow to the unsullied one; to the permanent one; to 
the unchanging one; to the imperishable one; obeisance to you, 
O Lord favourably disposed to those who seek refuge, Save me. 

66 . On being eulogised thus, the lord, the wielderof 
Safikha^ Cokra and Gcdiy very favourably disposed to those who 
bow down, spoke thus to the sage bom of the Ararti (viz« 
Suka). 

Sri Bkagavdn said : 

67. O son of Vyasa, O highly blessed one of good rites, 
I am delighted with you. Attain learning and devotion; you 
are a perfectly wise one adopting many forms. 

68 . O Brahmana, this is the same form of mine formerly 
seen by you in the Svetadvipa. I am stationed here in the same 
form for my incarnation, in the form of the pervader of the 
Universe. 

69. O blessed one, by (constant) thought over Moksa- 
dharma (virtue leading to liberation) you have become a Siddha. 
(Attain) excellent worlds such as those of Vayu, firmament 
and the sun (?) 

70. You are permanently liberated (from Sarhsara). You 
are worshipped by gods and men. Devotion unto me who am 
gracious unto all is very difficult to obtain. 

71. Once you have attained that devotion, nothing 
remairts to be attained. The sages Nara and Narayana are 
engrossed in penance, till the end of the Kalpa. 

72. At their behest, Vyasa, your father of holy rites, will 
be composing the scripture called the Bhdgavata. Learn it. 
Go down to the Earth. 

73. He is now performing a penance on the mountain 



914 


J^drada Purit^a 


Gandhamadana. He is much dispirited in his mind due to 
separation from you. Make him pacified. He is dear unto me.” 

74. O Brahman, thus advised, Suka bowed to the four* 
armed deity. Returning by the way he had gone, he came back 
to his father. 

75. Thereafrer, on seeing his son near him, the valorous 
son of Par^fara became delighted much in bis mind. He desisted 
from his penance. 

76. After bowix^ to Naraya^ as well as to Nara, the 
most excellent among men, he returned to his own hermitage 
accompanied by his son bom of the Arani. 

77. O leading sage, at the behest of N^ayai>a through 
you he composed the divine compendium that consists of many 
anecdotes, (viz. the Bhdgavata ). 

78. He taught his son Suka engaged in renunciation, 
the compendium of the Bh&gaoata which is on a par with the 
Vedas and which increases devotion to Hari. 

79. Suka, the holy son of Vy^, took utmost delight 
in the Atman. Yet he learned every day that compendium 
which is a favourite scripnire of Vi^pu's devotees. 

80. Thus O sinless one, these Mokfodharmas (virtues 
leading to liberation) have been related to you. They cause 
devotion to Hari of th<Me who read and listen to it attentively. 










