ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION & MYTHOLOGY 


TRANSLATED BY 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


EDITED BY 

Prof. J. L. SHASTRI 


Volume 2 



ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND 
MYTHOLOGY SERIES 

[purAnas in translation] 

VOLUUBI 

Siva m 

LINGA 5-6 
BHAGAVATA 7-11 
GARUJ?A 12-14 
NARADA 15-19 
KORMA 20-21 
BRAHMAlSDA 22-26 
AGNI 27-30 
VARAHA 31-32 
BRAHMA 33-36 


VOLUUEI UNDER PREPARATION 

HHAVI5YA 
BRAHMA VAIVARTA 
DEVlBHAGAVATA 
K.ALIKA 
mArkandeya 

MATSYA 

PADMA 

SKANDA 

VAMANA 

vAyu 

VI§Ij)U 

VI5NUDHARMOTTARA 



THE 


J5 1 V A - PUR AN A 


TRANSLATED BY 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


Part II 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Delhi Varanasi Patna Madras 



First Edition : Delhi , i960 
Reprint : Delhi , 1973 , 1977, 1982, 1987 


MOTILAL B AN ARSID ASS 
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
Branches 

Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

BY JAINBNDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NAR AINA 
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE 1, NEW DELHI 110028 AND PUBLISHED BY 
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSID ASS, DELHI 110007. 



PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean 
or in the depths of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean 
or delve into the rocks to find them out. Similarly truth 
lies concealed in the language that with the lapse of time 
has become obsolete. Man has to learn that language before 
he discovers that truth. 

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark 
for that venture. We have therefore planned to help him 
acquire knowledge by the easier course. We have started the 
series of Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English 
Translation. Our goal is to universalise knowledge through 
the most popular, international medium of expression. The 
publication of the Puranas in English translation is the step 
towards that goal. 




CONTENTS 


rudreSvara samhitA : pArvatIkhanpa 

SECTION III 

Pages 

1. Marriage ofHimacala .. .. 475 

2. Sanaka etc. curse Mena and her sisters .. 478 

3. Gods praise Siva . . . . 482 

4. Goddess Durga consoles the gods . . 485 

5. Mena obtains the boon . . . . 489 

6. Parvati’s birth . . . . 494 

7. Childhood sports of Parvati . . 499 

8. Narada-Himalaya Conversation . . 501 

9. Parent’s advice to Parvati and Siva appears 

before Parvati in dream . . 506 

10. Mars is born and raised to the status of a 

planet . . . . 510 

11. Siva and Himavat meet together .. 512 

12. Siva-Himavat dialogue .. .. 516 

13. Siva-Parvati dialogue .. ... 520 

14. Birth and Penance of Vajranga and Taraka . . 525 

15. Penance and reign of Taraka . . 528 

16. Brahma consoles the gods harassed by Taraka . . 533 

17. Dialogue between Indra and Kama .. 537 

18. Kama causes perturbation in Siva’s grove . . 540 

19. Kama’s destruction by Siva . . 544 

20. The submarine fire . . . . 548 

21. Narada’s instructions to Parvati .. 550 

22. Parvati’s penance . . . . 554 

23. Himavat dissuades Parvati, gods go to meet Siva 560 

24. Siva’s consent to marry Parvati ' . . 564 

25. Parvati’s test by seven celestial sages .. 571 

26. Parvati-jatila dialogue . . . . 578 

27. Fradulent words of Brahmacarin . , 582 

28. Parvati sees Siva . . . . 585 

29. Siva-Parvati dialogue .. .. 589 



( viii ) 


30. Parvati returns home . . . . 593 

31 . Siva’s magic . . . . 597 

32. Seven celestial sages arrive . . . . 602 

33. Appeasement of Himavat . . . . 607 

34. Anaranya .. .. 613 

35. Padma and Pippalada .. • . 617 

36. Speeches of seven sages . . . . 623 

37. Letter of betrothal despached; arrangement 

for the celebration of marriage; arrival of 

the mountain-invitees . . . . 626 

38. Description of the dais . . . . 631 

39. Arrival of the gods and Siva’s preparations . . 634 

40. Marriage procession of Siva . . 639 

41. Description of the altar-structure .. 643 

42. Meeting of Siva and Himavat . . 648 

43. Siva’s wonderful sport . . . . 650 

44. Mena regains consciousness . . 656 

45. Jubilation of the citizens at the sight of Siva . . 664 

46. Arrival of the bridegroom . . 668 

47. Siva enters the palace of Himavat . . 671 

48. Description of Marriage . . 675 

49. Delusion of Brahma . . , . 680 

50. Description of fun and frolic . . 685 

51. Resuscitation of Kama .. .. 690 

52. Marriage party is fed and Siva retires to bed 694 

53. Description of Siva’s return journey ... 697 

54. Siva returns to Kailasa . . . . 7Q6 


rudrasamhitA 
kumArakhanda SECTION IV 


1. Dalliance of Siva .. ## 711 

2. Birth of Siva’s son . . . . 716 

3. Boyhood sports of Karttikeya . . 722 

4. Search for Karttikeya and his talk with Nandin 726 

5. Karttikeya is crowned . . # # 732 

6. Miraculous Feat of Karttikeya . . 738 

7. Commencement of the war . . 741 

8. Battle between the gods and asuras 745 


9. Taraka’s fight with Indra, Vi§nu and Vlrabhadra 749 



754 


( « ) 

10. Death ofTaraka and Jubilation of the gods . 

11. Victory of Kumara and the death of Bana 


and Pralamba . . . . 758 

12. Gods eulogise Siva . . ... 761 

13. Birth of Ganesa .. .. 765 

14. Ganas argue and wrangle . . . . 769 

15. Ganesa’s battle .. ... 775 

16. Ganesa’s head is chopped off .. 780 

17. Resuscitation of GaneSa .. .. 783 

1 8. Ganesa crowned as the chief of Ganas . . 788 

19. GaneSa’s marriage .. .. 793 

20. Celebration of GaneSa’s marriage . . 798 


RUDRASAMHITA : YUDDHAKHANDA SECTION V 


1 . Description of the Tripuras . . 892 

2. Prayer of the gods . . • • 809 

3. Virtues of the Tripuras .. .. 815 

4. Tripuras are initiated . . . . 820 

5. Tripuras are fascinated . . . . 826 

6. Prayer to Siva .. ..831 

7. Gods pray to Siva and Siva’s instructions 

to the gods . . . . 836 

8. Construction of the cosmic chariot . . 840 

9. Siva’s campaign . . . . 843 

10. Burning of the Tripuras .. •• 846 

11. God’s prayer .. •• 850 

1 2. Gods return to their abodes . . 854 

13. Resuscitation of Indra .. .. 858 

14. Birth of Jalandhara and his marriage . . 863 

15. Fight between the gods and Jalandhara .. 866 

16. Battle of the gods . . • • 873 

17. Fight between Visnu and Jalandhara ' .. 877 

18. Dialogue between Narada and Jalandhara . . 881 

19. Jalandhara’s emissary to Siva .. 886 

20. Fight between the Ganas and Asuras . . 891 

21. Description of the Special war .. 896 

22. Jalandhara’s battle ... • • 000 

23. Outraging the modesty of Vrnda . . 904 



(*) 


24. Jalandhara is slain . . 909 

25. God’s prayer to Siva . . ... 914 

26. Vanishing of Vi snu’s delusion .. 917 

27. Birth of Sankhacuda . . . . 923 

28. Penance and marriage of Sankhacuda . . 926 

29. Previous birth of Sankhacuda . . 930 

30. Prayers to Siva . . . . 935 

31. Siva’s advice to the gods . . . . 938 

32. Siva sends emissary to Sankhacuda . . 943 

33. March of Siva . . 946 

34. March of Saiikhacuda . . . . 950 

35. Dialogue between Siva and the emissary 

of_Sankhacuda .. ... 953 

36. Mutual fight ... ... 957 

37. Fight of Sankhacuda ... ... 960 

38. Fight of Kali ’ ... ... 963 

39. Annihilation of the army of Sankhacuda . . 966 

40. Death of Sankhacuda ... .. 970 

41. Curse of Tulasi ... .. 973 

42. Death of Hiranyaksa .. ... 978 

43. Death of HiranyakaSipu . . 984 

44. Andhaka attains the leadership of Ganas . . 989 

45. Andhaka sends his emissary to Siva . . 997 

46. Andhaka ’s fight with Siva . . 1002 

47. Swallowing of Sukra .. 1007 

48. Swallowing of Sukra and his emergence . . 1012 

49. Andhaka obtains the leadership of Ganas .. 1016 

50. Sukra learns Mrtasanjivan? lore .. 1021 

51. Narrative of Osa .. .. 1026 

52. Narrative of Osa ( continued ) 1031 

53. Dalliance of 0?a and Aniruddha .. 1036 

54. Fight among Bana, Siva, Krsna and others .. 1041 

55. Chopping of Bana’s arms and his humiliation . . 1047 

56. Bana attains the position of Siva’s Gana .. 1951 

57. Gajasura is slain . . 1054 

58. Dundubhi Nirhrada is slain .. 1061 

59. Vidala and Utpala are slain .. 1065 



PARVA17KHANDA 

SECTION III 

CHAPTER ONE 

( The marriage of Himdcala 1 ) 

N&rada said : — 

1. O Brahma, how did the goddess Sati, the daughter 
of Daksa who forsook her body in her father's sacrifice, 
become the daughter of Himacala, and the mother of the 
universe ? 

2. How could she secure Siva as her husband after 
performing a severe penance ? Please explain this clearly 
to me who ask you about it. 

Brahma said 

3. O foremost of sages, listen to the story of Siva 
which is excellent, sanctifying, highly divine, auspicious and 
destructive of all sins. 

4-5. When the great goddess Sati, the daughter of 
Daksa, was sporting about on the Himalayas with Siva, 
Mena, 2 the beloved of Himacala thought that she was her 
own daughter and loved her like a mother with all kinds of 
nourishments. 

6-7. When the great Goddess Sati, the daughter of 
Dak$a who had been to her father's sacrifice and who did 
not receive his due attention became angry and cast off 
her body, at the very same time, O sage, Himacala’s 
beloved Mena wanted to propitiate her in Sivaloka. 


/• Himavat or Him&cala is represented in two forms (i) the mobile 
and (a) immobile. The former is the subtle human form while the latter 
18 t " c 8 roM t stationary form identical with the mountain Himalayas 
. . , P rclcnt section recounts the marriage of Himavat with Men* in 

his mobile form. See RS III. i. 15. 


a. Men* or MenakS, the wife of Himavat and the mother of 
rarvatf, was one of the three daughters of SvadhS, the wife ofKavi, a 
class of Pitr*. Svadhi was one of the sixty daughters of Daksa and Pra- 
iQu who gave birth to Mena, Dhanyi and Kalavati. 



476 Sivapurdna 

8. Satl thought to herself : — “I shall be her daughter’* 
and cast off her body in order to become the daughter of 
Himacala. 

9. At the proper time Satl who had cast off her body 
and who was worshipped and eulogised by the gods became 
the daughter of Mena out of sheer joy. 

10. On being advised by Narada, the goddess who 
was named Parvatl, performed a severe penance and thereby 
secured Siva as her husband. 

N&rada said : — 

11. O Brahma, of great intellect and foremost of 

eloquent gods, please tell me the origin and details of the 
marriage of Mena. 

12. Blessed indeed is the gentle lady Menaka of 

whom Sati was born as a daughter. Hence that chaste 

lady is worthy of the honour and blessings of everyone. 

Brahmd said : — 

13. O sage Narada, you listen to the story of the 
origin of Parvati’s mother and her marriage and other 
details both sanctifying and conducive to the growth of 
devotion. 

14. O excellent sage, there in the northern region is 
a mountain called Himavat who is the lord of mountains 
and has great splendour and prosperity. 

15. His twofold aspects— that of a mobile nature and 

that of the immobile one — are well known. I succinctly 

describe his subtle form. 

16. He is beautiful and is the storehouse of multi- 
farious gems. Extending from the eastern to the western 
ocean he appears like a measuring rod of the Earth. 3 

17. He abounds in various trees. Being of variegated 
shape and features he is adorned by many peaks on him. 
Lions, tigers and other animals frequent it. Many happy 
persons live there for ever. 

18. He is the storehouse of snow (and yet) very fierce. 
He is the resort of wonderful things. He is resorted to by 

3. For the similarity of ideas and verbal expression, compare Kili* 
disa’s Kumarasambhava I. i. 



Rudrasathhitd 477 

the gods, sages and seers. He is a great favourite of 
Siva. 

19. He is of pure soul, an abode of austerities. He 
sanctifies even the great souls. He is the bestower of the 
benefit of austerities. He is the auspicious storehouse of 
multifarious minerals. 

20. He is of a divine form. He is beautiful in every 
part. He is the unaffected part of Vi$nu. He is the king 
of leading mountains and a great favourite of the good. 

21. Due to the desire for the benefit of the manes 
and the gods and for the stabilisation of his race as well as 
for the increase of virtue, Himacala wanted to marry. 

22. At that time, considering their own interest 
entirely, O excellent sage, the gods approached the celestial 
forefathers and said lovingly to them. 

The gods said : — 

23. a O ye forefathers, listen to our words with 
pleasure. If you desire that the affairs of the gods be ful- 
filled you must act accordingly soon. 

24-25. Uniting your eldest daughter Mena of auspicious 
features with Himacala, a great benefit will accrue to every- 
one. At every step, the miseries of the gods and those of 
yours as well can be reduced”. 

Brahma said : — 

26. On hearing these words of the gods, pondering 
over them and remembering the curse incurred by their 
daughters, the forefathers said “Amen” to their proposals. 

27. They gave their daughter Mena to Himavat. In 
that auspicious marriage there were great festivities. 

28* Visnu, the other gods and the sages reached there 
with their hearts set on Siva. 

29. Giving many charitable gifts they made the 
celebration a great success. They praised the celestial fore- 
fathers and the Himavat. 

30. All the gods and the sages rejoiced and returned 
to their own abodes with their hearts set on Siva. 

31. After receiving many articles as gifts and 



marrying the beloved lady Mena, the lord of mountains 
returned to his abode and rejoiced. 

Brahma said : — 

32. O excellent sage, the pleasing details of the 
splendid marriage of Himavat with Mena have been re- 
counted to you thus. What more do you wish to hear ? 


CHAPTER TWO 

{Mend and others incur the imprecation of Sanaka etc.) 
N&rada said : — 

1. O Brahma, the intelligent one, please now tell me 
reverently about the origin of Mena as well as the impreca- 
tion. Please clear my doubts. 

Brahma said : — 

2. O Narada and the sages, listen to the narrative of the 
origin of Mena. O excellent son, O great scholar, I shall 
mention it now. 

n. O sage, I have already told you about my son 
Daksa. He had sixty daughters all of whom were the 
instruments of creation. 

4. He celebrated their marriages with Kasyapa and 
other bridegrooms. You know all that already. O Narada, 
now, listen to the present story. 

5. Among those, the daughter Svadha was given to 
the forefathers. She had three daughters all of whom were 
of handsome features and virtuous forms. 

6. O excellent sage, listen to their holy names which 
remove obstacles and confer blessings. 

7. Mena was the eldest. Dhanya was the middle. 
Kalavatl was the youngest. All these were mentally 
conceived daughters of the forefathers. 

8. They were not born of the womb of Svadha. 
They were conventionally considered her children. On 
reciting their names, men can achieve their desires. 



Rudrasafhhitd 


479 


9. The mothers of the worlds are worthy of reverence 
of the entire universe always. They are the bes towers of 
great joy. They are great yoginis, storehouses of knowledge. 

They pervade the three worlds. 

10. O excellent sage, once the three sisters went to 
Svetadvipa (white island) 4 in the world of Visnu for sight- 
seeing purpose. 

11. After bowing to and eulogising Vi?nu with great 
devotion they halted there at his bidding. A great con- 
course of people was held there. 

12. O sage, at the same time, Siddhas, sons of Brahma — 
Sanaka and others came there. They bowed to and 
lauded Visnu and stayed there at his bidding. 

13. On seeing those sages Sanaka and others and the 
persons who had assembled there, stood up. When they, the 
elders of gods respected by the people, sat they all bowed 
to them. 

14. Helpless by misfortune and deluded by lord Siva’s 
illusion O sage, the three sisters did not stand up. 

1 5. Siva’s illusion is weighty and capable of deluding 
the worlds. The entire universe is subservient to it. It is 
also called Siva’s Will. 

16. The same is also called an action that has begun 
to fructify. Its names are many. Everything takes place 
on Siva’s wish. There is nothing to be pondered over in 
this respect. 

17. Becoming a victim thereof, the sisters did not 
make obeisance to them. They remained surprised and 
stunned thereaftar seeing them. 

18. On seeing such a behaviour on their part the 
great sages, Sanaka and others, despite being wise, became 
unbearably furious. 

19. Himself deluded by Siva’s illusion Sanaka, a 
perfect Yogin, furiously told them giving a curse as punish- 
ment. 

Sanatkum&ra said : — 

20. Inspite of being the daughters of the forefathers, 

4. It has not been possible to identify this island. Colonel Wilford 
attempted to identity it with Britain. See. H. M. P. 315. 



ye three sisters are foolish, bereft of wisdom and ignorant 
of the essence of the Vedas. 

21. You did not stand up nor did you pay any 
respects to us. You were haughty and deluded and so 
evinced a deluded disposition of human beings. Hence all 
of you shall leave heaven. 

22. May the three sisters deluded by ignorance be 
born as human womenfolk. May ye reap this fruit as a result 
of the power of your own action. 

Brahmd said : — 

23. On hearing this, the chaste maidens got perplexed. 
The three fell at his feet and spoke with their heads bent 
down. 

The daughters of the forefathers said : — 

24. “O excellent sage, ocean of mercy, be pleased 
now. Because we were mentally confounded we did not 
bow to you. 

25. O Brahmin, the result thereof has been achieved 
by us. O great sage it is not your fault. Bless us now 
whereby we shall regain heavenly abode again.” 

Brahma said : — 

26. On hearing their words, O dear, the sage spoke 
to them. He had been induced by Siva’s illusion to give 
them redemption from the curse. He was a bit consoled. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

27. “O ye three daughters of forefathers, listen 
with pleasure to my words that will dispel your sorrow and 
bestow happiness on you. 

28. May the eldest among you become the wife of 
Himavat the mountain that is a part of Visnu. Parvati 
shall be her daughter. 

29. The second daughter Dhanya shall be the Yogini, 
the wife of Janaka. Her daughter shall be Mahalaksmi in the 
name ofSfta. 

30. The youngest Kalavat! shall be the wife of the 
Vaifya — Vr?abhana. At the end of Dvapara, Radha shall be 



Rudrasarhhitd 


481 


her daughter. 

31. The Yoginl Mena shall attain the great region 
Kailasa along with her body and in the company of her 
husband due to the boon of Parvati. 

32. Janaka shall be blessed by Sita born in Janaka's 
race and he shall be a living liberated soul. A great Yogin, 
he will attain Vaikuntha. 

33. Kalavati by the virtue of Vrsabhana shall become 
a living liberated soul and attain Goloka 6 along with her 
daughter. There is no doubt about it. 

34. Without adversity how can one attain greatness ? 
To persons of good rites, if misery vanishes happiness is 
likely to be difficult of access. 

35. Ye the daughters of forefathers shall shine in 
heaven. By the vision of Visnu your evil actions have been 
quelled.” 

36. After saying this, the sage was freed of his fury 
on thinking of Siva, the bestower of wisdom, worldly 
pleasures and salvation. 

37. Listen further to my words always pleasing to you. 
You are all blessed by Siva’s pleasure. Hence you will be 
worthy of honour and respect immediately. 

38. Mena’s daughter, goddess Parvati, the mother of 
the universe shall become Siva’s beloved after performing 
severe penance. 

39. Dhanya’s daughter Sita will become Rama’s wife. 
Based on worldly conventions she will sport about with Rama. 

40. Kalavati’s daughter Radha, resident of Goloka 5 
shall become the wife of Krsna united with him in secret love. 

Brahma said 

41. After saying this, that holy sage Sanatkumara vani- 
shed there itself along with his brothers after he was eulogi- 
sed duly. 

42. The three sisters, the mentally conceived daughters 
of the forefathers were freed of their sins and attained happi- 
ness. They returned to their residence quickly. 

5. Goloka : It is a modern addition to the original series of fourteen 
lokas. It is identified with Gokula, a pastoral district on the* Yamuna 
about Mathur& where Kf$Qa passed his boyhood with the cowherd. 



CHAPTER THREE 

( Hymn to Siva by Vitfu and other gods) 

N&rada said : — 

1. O Brahma, the best of eloquent ones, of great wis- 
dom, please tell me. What is the subsequent story of the 
good auspicious mountain ? 

2. You have narrated the wonderful story of the auspi- 
cious antecedents of Mena. The details of the marital rites 
too are heard. Please continue the subsequent narrative. 

3. After marrying Mena what did the mountain do 
afterwards ? How was Parvati, the mother of the universe, 
born of her ? 

4. How did she secure Siva as her husband after perf- 
orming a severe penance ? Narrate all these things in detail 
regarding the glory of Siva. 

Brahma said : — 

5. O sage, lovingly listen to the auspicious glory of 
Siva on hearing which even a slayer of a brahmin becomes 
pure and attains all desires. 

6 O Narada, there was great pomp and ceremony in 
the three worlds when Himacala returned to his abode after 
marrying Mena. 

7. The delighted Himacala too celebrated a great festi- 
val. With good intention he worshipped and revered brahmins, 
kinsmen and others. 

8. The contented brahmins returned to their respective 
abodes after blessing them. The kinsmen and the others also 
returned. 

9. The delighted Himacala 8 sported with Mena in his 
cosy abode, Nandana and other parks as well as in several 
nice places. 

10. At that time, O sage, Vi?nu, the gods and the 
noble-sould sages approached the mountain. 

11. On seeing the gods after their arrival, the noble 


6. It is a grove of Indra, lying to the north of Meru. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


483 


Himacala bowed to them gladly and honoured them with 
devotion. He praised his own good fortune. 

12. With the head bent down and palms joined in 
reverence, he eulogised them with great devotion. Himacala’s 
hair stood on end and tears of love fell from his eyes. 

13. O sage, after bowing to them, the delighted 
Himacala spoke thus to Visnu and other gods. 

Himacala said : — 

14. Today my life has become fruitful. My good pena- 
nce has become fruitful. Today my knowledge has become 
fruitful. Today my sacred rites have become fruitful. 

15. I have become blessed today. My entire kingdom, 
my wife and family have become blessed. Everything has 
become blessed. There is no doubt about it. 

16. Wherefore have all of you come in a body ? 
Lovingly command me, considering me your own servant. 

Brahma said: — 

17. On hearing these words of Himacala, Visnu and 
other gods considered their affair fulfilled and were delighted. 
They spoke. 

Gods said : — 

18. “O Himacala of great intellect, please listen to our 
beneficent words. We shall gladly tell you why we have 
come. 

19. O Himacala, the mother of the universe Uma, 
who was born as Daksa’s daughter, became Rudra’s wife and 
spotted for a long time on the earth. 

20. On being disrespected by her father, Satl rememb- 
ered her vow, abandoned her body and returned to her own 
region. 

21-22 O Himacala, this story is well known 'in the world. 
You too know it. If this takes place it will be an asset to 
all gods as well as to you. The gods too will be under your 
control.” 

Brahma said : — 

23. On hearing these words of Vi?nu and others the 



484 Sivapvr&Qa 

delighted lord Himacala said — “So be it” and worshipped 
them with respect. 

24. After instructing him in the method to be followed 
with great devotion they approached Uma, the consort of 
Siva. 

25. They stationed themselves in a good place and 
remembered the mother of the universe, and bowing to her 
repeatedly eulogised her with devotion. 

The gods said : — 

26. O goddess Uma, mother of the universe, resident 
of&ivaloka, favourite of Siva, O great goddess, O Durga, we 
bow to you, 

27. With great devotion we bow to the illustrious Ene- 
rgy* the h°ly> the tranquil, the holy nourishment and the one 
with the forms of Mahat and the Avyakta. 

28. We worship you, Siva the cause of welfare, the 
pure, the gross, the subtle, the great goal and the one deli- 
ghted with the inner and good learning. 

29. You are faith, fortitude and prosperity. You alone 
have control over everything; you are the splendour and 
energy of the sun illuminating your own universe. 

30. We bow to her who promotes robustness in all the 
beings of the universe from Brahma to a blade of grass in the 
whole Cosmos. 

31. You are Gayatrl, the mother of the Vedas, Savitri, 
Sarasvatl, the sustenance of all the universe; you are the triad 
of the Vedas having Dharma for its form. 

32. You are sleep in all living beings; you are hunger, 
satiety, thirst, splendour, brilliance and contentment. You are 
the delighter of every one for ever. 

33. To those who perform meritorious actions you are 
the goddess of fortune. To the sinners you are the eldest 
sister, the deity of Ignominy; you are peace for the universe, 
and the mother sustaining lives. 

34. You are the essential feature of five elements. You 
are Justice in those who uphold justice. You are endeavour 
personified. 

35. Of the Rgveda you are the invocation; of the 
Yajurveda you are the blending knot of the mantras; of 



Rudrasarhhitd 


485 


Samaveda you are the song and of the Atharvana Veda you 
are the measure of time, you are the final goal. 

36. She who is the Tamasika power of all the Gods, 
she who is visible in the Rajasika quality of the Creator,- she 
who is heard by us as the benefactress and of the form of 
Siva is eulogised here. 

37. Let us bow to her who is interested in residing on 
the Vindhya mountains; 7 who is clever in the playful activity 
of affording protection to A$tanga Yoga; who is devoid of 
cessation and who acts like a raft that enables the crossing 
of the ocean of worldly existence with its terrible miseries. 

38. May she be pleased with us, for keeping up the 
sustenance of the world, she, who in the form of slumber 
that is extremely exhilarating to all born in the universe, ex- 
tends pleasure in the nose, eyes, face, arms, chest and the 
mind. 

Brahma said : — 

39. Thus eulogising the great Goddess Satl, the 
mother of the universe, all of them stood waiting lovingly 
desirous of seeing her. 


CHAPTER FOUR 

(The Goddess consoles the Gods ) 


Brahma said : — 

1 . Thus eulogised by the Gods, the Goddess Durga, the 
mother of the universe, the destroyer of impassable distress, 
appeared in front of them. 

2. She was seated in a wonderful divine gem-set 
chariot over which a soft cushion had been spread and which 
was decorated with tinkling ornaments. 

3. She was shining with the brilliance of her limbs that 
surpassed even the lustre of a crore of suns. She was sur- 

7. As Vindhyavasini, dweller in the Vindhyas, the Goddess is 
worshipped at a place where the Vindhyas approach the Ganges, near 
Mi rz a pur. 



rounded by a halo created by her own lustre. She was of 
symmetrical splendour. 

4. She was the unequalled supreme illusion, the beauti- 
ful wife of Sada3iva. She had all the three qualities and was 
devoid of attributes 8 also, she had been staying in the region of 
Siva. 

5. She was the mother of the three deities 9 , Carujtt, 
Siva, the destroyer of the distress of all, the mother of all 
supreme slumber and the redeemer of all her own people. 

6. Siva was seen by the gods through the power of 
huge column of brilliance. Again the gods eulogised her in 
order to have a sight of her. 

7. Then Visnu and other gods who were desirous of 
seeing her saw the mother of the universe there itself after 
receiving her favour. 

8. The dwellers of heaven were extremely pleased, 
they bowed to her again and again and particularly eulogised 
her. 


The gods said : — 

9* O Siva, O great Goddess, O mother of the universe 
we gods bow to you, the destroyer of all distress. 

10. O Goddess, neither the Vedas nor the sacred texts 
know >ou perfectly. Your greatness, O Siva, is beyond the 
scope of speech and mind and cannot even be meditated 
upon. 

11. Even the Vedas mention you, trembling with 
fright, by negating what you are not. What will be the 
matter in regard to others ? 

12. Many devotees know the same after getting your 
favour through devotion. There is no cause for fear to the 
devotees who seek refuge in you. 

13. O great Goddess listen to our submission which we, 
your slaves for ever, are going to explain. 


representing thedhree an^Tama^ 

called ‘Tr*un&’ i.e. possessed of tW qualities Hu?? the ™fied 
ca»S y N[r fe W OU thc SuprCmC Bcin *> d '™ d of attributed she 's 
9. She is the mother-goddess of Vitnu, Brahma and RnJ,« .u. 

‘ be "-‘‘nance' 



Rudrasarfihita 


487 


14. Formerly you were born as the daughter of Dak$a 
and were married to Siva. You destroyed the great misery 
of Brahma and others. 

15. Being disrespected by your father, you cast off your 
body in accordance with your vow. You then went to your own 
world and Siva became miserable. 

16. O great Goddess, the purpose of the gods has not 
been completely carried out. The sages are agitated. 
Hence we, Gods, have sought refuge in you. 

17. O great Goddess, please fulfil the desire of the God, 
O Siva, so that the words of Sanatkumara may be fruitful. 

18. O Goddess, incarnating again on the earth please 
be the wife of Rudra ( Siva) again. Carry on your sports in 
a fitting manner and let the Gods be happy. 

19. O Goddess, may Rudra too, the resident of Kailasa 
be happy. Let all become happy. Let misery perish entirely. 

Brahma said : — 

20. Saying so, Visnu and the other gods, full of loving 
devotion remained waiting silently and humbly. 

21-22. Siva too was delighted on hearing the eulogy of 
the gods and ascertaining the course of the same after 
remembering her lord Siva, the compassionate Uma addressed 
smilingly the gods, chief of whom was Visnu. The Goddess, 
favourably disposed to her devotees, said: — 

Uma said : — 

23. O Visnu, O, Brahma, O Gods and sages who are 
free from sorrow and pain ye listen to my words. I am 
delighted undoubtedly. 

24. My activities are conducive to happiness every- 
where in the three worlds. The delusion of Daksa and other 
things were carried out by me alone. 

25. I shall take a full incarnation on the earth. There 
is no doubt in this. There are many reasons for the same. I 
shall mention them with respect. 

26. Formerly, O gods, with great devotion Himacala 
and Mena rendered service to me in my life as Sati, like my 
parents. 

27. Even now they continuously render me service and 



488 Sivapur&Qa 

Mena particularly (does so). There is no doubt about my 
becoming their daughter. 

28. Just as you, Rudra too, desires my incarnation in 
the abode of Himavat. Hence I shall incainate. That shall 
be the end of misery in the world. 

29. All of you return to your abodes. You shall be 
happy for a long time. After incarnating I shall give Mena 
full happiness. 

30. I shall become Siva's wife. But this desire is a 
great secret with me. Siva’s divine sport is wonderful. It 
deludes even the wise. 

31-32. Ever since I cast off my body born of Dak§a 
on seeing my lord’s disrespect at the hands of my father at 
the altar of sacrifice, my lord Rudra is tormented by thoughts 
about me. 

33-34. He saw my anger at the altar of my father's 
sacrifice. Thinking that the virtuous lady had cast-off her 
body out of love for him he became a Yogin and abandoned 
home-life. He assumed an unearthly form and features. But 
he could not bear my separation. 

35. On account of me he was much distressed. He 
put on an abnormal dress. Ever since he forsook the excellent 
pleasure of love. 

36. Hear further, O Visnu, O Brahma, O sages and 
O gods, the divine sports of the supreme lord Siva, that 
protect the universe. 

37. Oppressed by the pangs of bereavement He wrea- 
thed a garland of my bones. Although He is the sole en- 
lightened god He did not get peace anywhere. 

38. Like a non-god, like a helpless creature he roamed 
about here and there and cried aloud. The lord Himself 
could not distinguish between the proper and the improper. 

39. The lord Siva did this just to show the behaviour 
of a love-lorn lover. He blabbered like a lover in despair 
due to separation. 

40. But really the supreme lord has no aberrations, is 
not distressed and remains unconquered. My master Siva is 
perfect, lord of all and the controller of illusion. 

41. He is not tarnished by illusion. Of what avail 
are illusion, love and other emotions for Him? 



Rudrasamhita 


489 


42. Rudra, the lord, is anxious to marry me and hence 
my incarnation on the Earth at the residence of Mena and 
Himacala, O gods. 

43. In order to propitiate Rudra, I shall incarnate as 
the daughter of Mena, the wife of Himacala, in accordance 
with the way of the world. 

44. After performing a severe penance as His devotee 
I shall become Rudra’s beloved and then perform the work 
of the gods. This is truth, real truth, there is no doubt 
about it. 

45. All of you return to your abodes. Continuously 
worship Siva. Undoubtedly your miseries will be quelled by 
His favour. 

46. By the grace of merciful lord Siva, you will achieve 
auspicious results. As the wife of that lord I shall be hono- 
ured and worshipped in the world. 

Brahma said : — 

47. O dear, even as the gods were watching, Siva, 
the mother of the universe, vanished after saying this and 
returned immediately to her world. 

48. After making obeisance to the direction in which 
she went, the delighted Visnu and others, sages and the 
gods, returned to their abodes. 

49. O excellent sages, thus I have narrated to you 
the auspicious narrative of the goddess Durga. It is always 
pleasing to men and it bestows worldly pleasures and salva- 
tion. 

50. Whoever hears or recites this with concentration, 
reads or teaches this, will obtain the fruits of all desires. 


CHAPTER FIVE 

(Mend obtains the boon) 


Ndrada said : — 

1. When the Goddess Durga vanished and the gods 
returned to their abodes, what happened next? 



490 Sivapurdna 

2. O dear, how did Mena and the lord of the 
mountains perform the great penance ? How did he beget a 
daughter of Mena. Please narrate. 

Brakmd said : — 

3. O best of brahmins, O most excellent of my sons, 
listen to that great account. After bowing to Siva with 
devotion I shall narrate that story which increases devotion. 

4. When Visnu and other gods returned after instruc- 
ting him, the lord of the mountains and Mena performed a 
great penance. 

5. Meditating on Siva and Siva day and night with 
devout mind, the couple worshipped them continuously. 

6. The beloved of the mountain worshipped the god- 
dess along with Siva, joyously. She gave charitable gifts 
always to the brahmins for their satisfaction. 

7. Desirous of obtaining a child, she worshipped Siva 
everyday for twenty-seven years beginning it in the month of 
March-April. 

8. Observing a fast on the eighth day of the lunar fort- 
night, she made charitable gifts of sweets, offerings of oblation 
rice cakes, puddings and fragrant flowers on the ninth day. 

9. She made clay idol of the Goddess and worshipped 
her by offering various things on the banks of the Ganga in 
Ausadhiprastha. 10 

1 0. On some days she observed a complete fast. On 
some days she observed sacred rites. Some days wind alone 
constituted her food and some days she drank only water. 

11. With her mind fixed on Siva, Mena passed twenty 
seven years with pleasure and brilliant lustre. 

12. At the end of twenty-seven years, Uma the beloved 
of Siva, the mother of the world and identical with the uni- 
verse became highly delighted. 

13. The goddess Siva, delighted by her good devotion 
appeared in front of Mena in order to bless her. 

14. Appearing to her in a form of divine limbs 
through a lustrous zone, she smilingly said to Mena. 

to. It was the capital of Himavat. Cf. Kalidasa's Kum&ra 6. 3*1,36. 
The name indicates that it was a market place for the mountainous herbs. 



Rudrasarhhitd 

The Goddess said : — 


491 


15. O beloved of the mountain, I am delighted by 
your penance. O chaste lady, tell me what you desire in 
your mind. 

16. O Mena, whatever is desired by you by penance, 
sacred rites and ecstatic contemplation I shall grant you and 
that too whenever you wish for it. 

17. Then seeing the goddess in her presence Mena 
bowed and spoke these words: — 

Mena said : — 

18. O Goddess, your form has been perceived by me 
directly, just now. I wish to eulogise you. Be pleased. 

Brahma said: — - 

19. On being thus requested by Mena, the goddess 
Uma, the enchantress of everyone, embraced Mena and was 
highly delighted. 

20. Acquiring very great wisdom, Mena eulogised 
Siva, who had appeared in person, by means of pleasing 
words with great devotion. 

Mend said : — 

21. I bow to the great goddess, 11 the bestower of all 
desires, I bow to her who wields great illusion, the creator 
and sustainer of the universe. 

22. I bow to her of contemplative sleep, and to her the 
wielder of great illusion and the cause of permanent bliss. I 
bow to the mother of the universe. I bow to Siddha having 
the garland of auspicious lotuses. 

23. I bow to the grandmother, of perpetual bliss. I 
bow to the goddess who dispels the sorrow of, the devotees, 


ii. The Goddess Siva is mentioned here under a variety of names, 
forms, attributes and actions She is contemplated upon by the ascetics for 
the deliverance from the bondage of this world. She is propitiated for the 
satiation of desires with the bloody sacrifices performed according to 
Atharvanic rites. 

She is represented in her milder and fiercer forms. In her milder 
form she is pleasing as the moon, gracious as the motherl In her terrible 
aspect she is furious as the fire and scorching as the sun. 



492 Sivapurdfia 

who is a model for all women and who constitutes the 
intellect of all living beings. 

24. You are the cause of the snapping of all fetters of 
ascetics. Which one of your powers can be sung by women 
like me? You are violence mentioned in the Atharvaveda. 
You (of such powerful means) fulfil my desire. 

25. The living beings are being united to the different 
principles of the nature of permanence and otherwise and 
those without substance are discarded. You are the inherent 
power of those permanent principles. In the proper time you 
become a woman of ability with Yogic powers. 

26. You are the origin and the sustainer of the worlds. 
You are the eternal Prakrti, the great, by whom even the 
Brahman is brought under control. O you, of noble nature, 
O mother, be pleased with me. 

27. You are the great power latent in fire; you are 
the burning power of the sun’s rays; you are the pleasing 
power of the extensive moonlight. O Goddess, I bow to you. 

28. To good women you manifest yourself as their 
beloved; to persons of perfect self-control and sublimation you 
manifest yourself as eternal; to the entire universe you mani- 
fest as desire; as of Visnu you are the Maya so you are of 
Siva. 

29. You assume different forms as you please for the 
purpose of creation, sustenance and annihilation and give 
birth to the bodies of Brahma, Visnu and Siva. You, of such 
potentiality, be pleased. Obeisance to you again. 

Brahma said : — 

30. Thus eulogised, the goddess spoke to Mena desiring 
her to choose a boon. 

Umd said : — 

31. O Himacala’s beloved, you are as favourite to me 
as my vital air. Whatever you desire I shall give you. There 
is nothing that I can withhold from you. 

32. On hearing these nectar-like words of the Goddess, 
the delighted Mena, the wife of Himacala, said. 



Rudrasarhhitd 493 

Mend said : — 

33. O Siva, Hail, Hail ! O great goddess, If you con- 
sider me worthy of a boon, I shall choose one. 

34. O mother of the universe, at first let me have a 
hundred sons endowed with longevity, heroism, prosperity and 
accomplishments. 

35. After that let me have a daughter of comely feat- 
ures and good qualities who will delight both the families 
and who will be revered by the three worlds. 

36. O Siva, be my daughter for fulfilling the needs of 
the gods. O Goddess, be Rudra’s wife and indulge in divine 
sports with the lord. 

Brahma said : — 

37. On hearing the words of Mena, the delighted godd- 
ess spoke smilingly, fulfilling her desire. 

The Goddess said : — 

38. May hundred heroic sons be born to you. One of 
them very strong will be born at first. 

39. I shall be born as your daughter since I am deligh- 
ted by your devotion. Since I have been served by the gods 
I shall fulfil their desire and carry out their activities. 

Brahma said : — 

40. Saying so, the Goddess Siva vanished from there 
even as Mena was watching. 

41. O dear one, on getting the desired boon from 
the Goddess, Mena attained immeasurable joy. Her misery 
occasioned by penance vanished. 

42. Bowing down in that direction, the chaste lady of 
delighted mind returned to her abode repeating the benedic- 
tory word “Jaya” (be victorious). 

43. She told her husband about the boon, which had 
already been understood by him through good omens, by 
her words which were rendered useless. 

44. On hearing the words of Mena, the lord of moun- 
tains became delighted. He praised his wife who was devoted 
to Siva lovingly. 

45. O sage, when their mutual sexual intercourse took 



15. The intelligent lord of mountains performed all the 
sacred rites befitting his love for his wife, the loftiness of his 
mind, the vastness of riches earned by him and the injunctions 
of the Vedas. 

16-17. At the proper time, he saw his wife Mena about 
to be delivered of the child, with delight, as one sees the 
sky enveloped with clouds. The lord of the mountains felt 
greatly rejoiced on seeing his wife of sound and auspicious 
in limbs the “labour-chamber” presided over by physicians. 
She felt very brilliant with the mother of the universe in her 
womb. 

18. In the mean time, O sage, Visnu, and other gods 
as well as the sages came there and eulogised Siva who was 
in the womb. 

The gods said : — 

19. O Goddess, be victorious, O intelligent one, O 
mother of the universe, O great Goddess, O you of true rites, 
prone to truth, true in three things, O truth-formed. 

20. O you stationed in truth, we have sought refuge in 
you. O you delighted with truth, Origin of truth, Truth of 
Truth, of truthful sight. 

21. O beloved of Siva, great goddess, O destroyer of 
the miseries of gods, you are the mother of the three worlds, 
consort of Siva, pervasive and favourably disposed to your 
devotees. 

22. O goddess of the three worlds, manifest yourself 
and perform the function of the gods. O goddess, all of us 
are well protected only due to your favour. 

23. Happy persons attain their happiness only from you. 
Nothing shines in the three worlds without you. 

Brahma said : — 

24. Thus eulogising, in many ways, the great goddess 
stationed in the womb, the gods returned to their abodes, 
highly delighted in their minds. 

25. When nine months were completed, in the tenth 
month, the goddess, the mother of the universe, bore all the 
states of a child in the womb in the complete form. 

26. The time was good. The planets, stars and the 



Rudrasarhkitd 497 

luminary heavenly bodies were quiet; the sky was clear and 
there was brilliance in all the quarters. 

27. The earth consisting of forests, villages and oceans 
was very auspicious. Lotuses blossomed in lakes, rivers and 
tanks. 

28 O excellent sage, diverse winds gentle to the touch 
blew; good men rejoiced and bad people became unhappy. 

29. The gods stood in the sky and sounded big drums. 
A shower of flowers fell. Excellent Gandharvas sang sweet 
songs. 

30. Vidyadhara women and the celestial nymphs danced 
in the sky; in the heavenly region great festivities were cele- 
brated by the gods and others. 

31. At that time Siva, Sati of perfect power formerly 
appeared in front of Mena in her real form. 

32. She was born at midnight when the constellation 
Mfga£iras was in conjunction with the moon on the ninth day 
in the month of Madhu (March-April ) in the spring season 
like the Gariga from the moon’s sphere. 

33. Coming out of the belly of Mena at the proper 
time in her real form, she resembled Laksml coming out of 
the ocean. 

34. When she was born, Siva was glad. A slow, fra- 
grant and auspicious wind blew favourably. 

35. Along with the rain there was a shower of flowers. 
Fires calmly glowed and the clouds rumbled. 

36. At the time of her birth, riches and prosperity 
flourished in the city of Himavat. All miseries perished. 

37. Visnu and other gods reached there in time and 
saw the mother of the universe. They were delighted and 
happy. 

38. They eulogised Siva the mother of the universe, 
the beloved of Siva, of great illusory power, of divine 
features and resident of Siva’s region. 

The Gods said : — 

39. O great goddess, O mother of the universe, O 
achiever of all accomplishments, you alone can carry out the 
work of the gods. Hence we bow to you always. 

40. O you favourably disposed to the devotees, do 



498 Sivapurdna 

everything conducive to the happiness of the Gods. You 
have fulfilled the desire of Mena. Now, you fulfil that of 
Siva. 

Brahmd said : — 

41. After eulogising Siva thus, Visnu and other gods 
bowed to her again delightedly and returned to their abodes 
praising her great divine ways. 

42. O Narada, Mena rejoiced much on seeing goddess 
Uma of the splendour of the blue lotus as her daughter. 

43. On seeing her divine features, the beloved of the 
mountain attained perfect knowledge. After that realisation 
she eulogised the supreme Goddess with very great delight. 

Mend said : — 

44. “Great favour has been shown by you, O Goddess, 
O mother of the universe, inasmuch as you have manifested 
yourself in front of me brilliantly. 

45. You are the primordial one among all Energies. 
O Siva, you are the mother of the three worlds. O Goddess 
you are the beloved of Siva, you are great goddess eulogised 
by the gods. 

46. O great Goddess, be pleased. Remain in my 
meditation in this form, but have the form of my daughter 
in public view ” 

Brahma said : — 

47. On hearing these words of Mena, the wife of the 
mountain, the delighted goddess Siva replied to Mena, the 
beloved of the mountain thus. 

The Goddess said : — 

48. “O Mena, formerly you served me excellently. I 
am delighted by your devotion. I have come near you to 
grant you a boon. 

49. On hearing my words 4 'Express your wish and 
choose a boon” you had chosen the boon “great Goddess, 
become my daughter. Do what is beneficent to the gods.” 

50. Accordingly granting you the boon I returned to 



Rudrasarhhiid 499 

my abode. O beloved of the mountain, I have become your 
daughter at the proper time. 

51. I have assumed the divine form now, so that 
you may be reminded of me. In a human form if I had 
appeared, it would have put you out of knowledge about me. 

52. Constantly thinking of me in the form of your 
daughter, or in the divine form with love, both of you will 
surely attain my region, the great goal. 

53. I shall do the work of the gods showing my wonder- 
fully divine sports. I shall become the wife of Siva and red- 
eem good men,” 

Brahma said : — 

54. After saying thus Siva kept quiet. Even as the 
mother was watching with pleasure, she assumed the body 
of a daughter by her power of illusion. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

( The childhood sports of Pdrvati) 

Brahma said : — 

1. The goddess of great brilliance assumed the form of 
her baby child in front of Mena and began to cry in accor- 
dance with the ways of the world. 

2. On account of her splendour that diffused all round 
the lying-in-couch, the midnight lamps that burnt in the 
lying-in-chamber were rendered dim in a trice, O sage. 

3. The women in the house were extremly glad on 
hearing the gentle cry of the child. In their excited flutter 
and great pleasure they rushed in. 

4. The superintendent of the harem immediately infor- 
med the king about the birth of Parvatl which was pleasant 
and conducive to the work of the gods. 

5. To the superintendent of the harem who brought 
the news, there was nothing which the king could notgive 
even including his royal white umbrella. 

6. Accompanied by the chief priest and learned brah- 



mins, the lord of mountains came there and saw the child 
who shone in her lovely clothes. 

7. The lord of mountains rejoiced on seeing the child 
shining in dark splendour like that of the blue lotus. 

8. All the citizens there, both men and women, rejoic- 
ed much. There were great festivities. Different sorts of 
musical instruments were played. 

9 Auspicious songs were sung. The dancing girls 
exhibited their saltatorial skill. The lord of mountains per- 
formed post-natal sacred rites and made charitable gifts to 
the brahmins. 

10. Himavat came to the outer gate of the palace and 
joined the festivities. With a delighted mind he distributed 
monetary gifts to the beggars. 

11. In an auspicious hour, in the company of the sages, 
Himavat named his daughter Kali and assigned other plea- 
sing names to her. 

12. He gave charitable gifts to the brahmins out of love 
and respect. Varieties of festivities were gone through with 
suitable music. 

13. Though he had many sons, the lord of mountain 
and his wife rejoiced more on seeing Kali frequently, after 
these celebrations. 

14. There in the palace of the lord of mountains the 
goddess Siva grew up like Ganga in the rainy season and 
like the moon-light in the autumn. 

15. The goddess Kali of exquisite body and comely 
appearance acquired more and more splendour like the disk 
of the moon acquiring more and more digits day by day. 

16. The child was fondly attached to every member of 
the family, Hence the kinsmen called her Parvati, a name 
befitting her family. The girl had all the qualities of good 
conduct and behaviour. 

Afterwards when Kali wanted to perform a pena- 
nce she was forbidden by her mother who said — “O, no (U ma) . 
Hence O sage, the sweetfaced Jady came to be called Uma 
in the world. 

18-19. Although he had many sons, the eyes of the moun- 
tain were never satiated on seeing the child Parvati endowed 
with good fortune. In the spring season there may be many 



Rudrasamhitd 


501 


flowers in full bloom but the swarms of bees, O excellent sage, 
are specially drawn to the mango blossom. 

20. The mountain Himalaya was both embellished and 
sanctified by his daughter like a learned man by his speech 
of grammatical purity. 

Just as a lamp in the house is praised by leaping flames 
of brilliance, just as the path of the good by the Ganga, so 
also the lord of mountains was respected on account of 
Parvatl. 

22. During her childhood, the goddess played frequen- 
tly on the sandy banks of the Ganga in the middle of her 
playmates with balls and dolls. 

23. O sage, the goddess Siva when the suitable time 
for her education arrived learnt all the lores from a good 
preceptor, with concentrated mind and great pleasure. 

24. Just as the flock of swans returns to the Ganga in 
the autumnal season and just as the brilliant lustre manifests 
itself in the medicinal herbs during the night, so also all the 
learning of the previous birth returned to Kali. 

25. O sage, thus I have described one of the divine 
sports of Siva. I shall narrate another one of her divine sports. 
You listen to it lovingly. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

[Ndrada -Hi ma lay a Conversation ) 


Brahma said : 

1. Once, induced by Siva, you went to the abode of 
Himacala lovingly, you who have the knowledge of Siva and 
who are the foremost among those who know the divine 
sports of Siva. 

2. O sage Narada, on seeing you, the lord of the 
mountains bowed to you and worshipped you. He called his 
daughter and asked her to fall at your feet. 

3. O excellent sage, he bowed to you again. Himavat 
joined his palms in reverence and bent his head considering 
it his duty and spoke to you. 



Himavat said : — 

4. O sage Narada, of good knowledge, O lord, fore- 
most among the sons of Brahma, you are omniscient. You 
are sympathetic. You are engaged in rendering help to 
others. 

5. Please read the horoscope of my daugther and tell 
me about her good and bad fortune. Whose beloved wife 
will my fortunate daughter be ? 

Bramhd said : — 

6-7. O excellent sage, being thus requested by Hima- 
vat the lord of mountains, you looked at Kali’s palm and 
the limbs as well. O dear, you are wise. You know many 
facts. You are eloquent in speech. You then spoke. 

Narada said : 

8. “ O Mena, O king of mountains, this daughter o 
yours has all auspicious signs. Like the first digit of the 
moon she will increase day by day. 

9. She will delight her husband, and heighten the 
glory of her parents. She will be a great chaste lady. She 
will grant bliss to everyone always. 

10. I see all good signs in the plam of your daughter, 
O lord of mountains. There is an abnormal line also. Listen 
to the indication thereof. 

11. Her husband will be a naked Yogin, without any 
qualities. He will be free from lust. He will have neither 
mother nor father. He will be indifferent to honours. His 
dress and manners will be inauspicious. 

Brahma said : — 

12. On hearing your words the couple thought them 
true. Both Mena and Himavat were much distressed. 

13. O sage, on hearing your words, and inferring that 
indications referred to Siva, Parvati’s joy knew no bounds. 

14. Convinced that Narada’ s words could not be false, 
Siva turned her mind and love to Siva’s feet. 

15. The lord of mountains who was very much grieved 
in mind spoke to you, “O Narada, O sage, what is the way 
out ? What shall I do ? A great misery has befallen us”. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


503 


16. On hearing that, O sage, you who are eloquent 
in speech, delighted Himavat by your sweet words of auspi- 
cious import and spoke to console him. 

J Vdrada said : — 

17. “O lord of mountains, listen to my words with 
affability. They are true. They cannot be false. The lines 
in the palm are the lines of Brahma. They cannot be un- 
true. 

18. O lord of mountains, there is no doubt that her 
husband will be such a person. You now hear what you have 
to do whereby you will be happy. 

19. There is a bridegroom like that. He is lord Siva 
who has sportively assumed a physical form. In Him all bad 
characteristics are equal to good characteristics. 

20.1n a majestic person a defect does not produce 
misqry. It may well cause misery in a non-majestic person. 
Sun, fire and Gariga may be cited as examples. 

21. Hence you give your daughter in marriage to Siva. 
That will be a wise step. Lord Siva who. is the sole lord, 
unchanging and without any aberration is worthy of being 
resorted to. 

22. By performing penance, Siva can be propitiated 
quickly and He will accept her undoubtedly. 

23. In every respect, Siva, the lord of all, is the most 
suitable person. He cannot be slain even by thunderbolts. 
He can render Brahma and others distressed.” 17 

24. O dear sage, after saying this you continued. You 
delighted him with auspicious words. You spoke to the king 
of the mountains. 

25. “O lord of mountains, she will be the wife of Siva 
and will remain his favourite always. She will be a chaste 
lady of good rites. She will increase the pleasure of her 
parents. 

26. Performing a penance she will fascinate Siva’s 
mind towards herself. He too will marry none else except 
her. 


! 7 - 


Our translation is based on the following emended text : 

i^n^?n*wsrc:’’ 



27. A love akin to this pair will not be found any- 
where. Never in the past was it seen nor will it occur in 
future. Nor it is current now. 

28. O best of mountains, the two will fulfil the work 
of the gods. They will resuscitate those who have breathed 
their last. 

29. O lord of mountains, Siva will become Ardhana- 
ri£ vara (half male and half female), with your daughter forming 
half the part of your body. Their meeting once again will be 
delightful. 

30. After propitiating lord Siva, the lord of all, by the 
power of her penance, your daughter will take away half 
the body of Siva. 

31. By propitating Siva with her penance she will 
acquire the lustre of gold and will be known as Svarnagauri. 
Your daughter will be as fair-comp lexioned as lightning. 

32. This girl will be famous in the name of Gauri. 
She will deserve the respect of Visnu, Brahma and the 
other Gods, 

33. O excellent mountain, you shall not give her to 
anyone else. This is a secret of the gods. This shall not 
be revealed to any one else. 

34. O celestial sage, Narad a, on hearing these words 
that you spoke O, sage, the eloquent Himavat spoke thus: 

Himavat said : — 

35. O sage Narada, O intelligent one, I have one sub- 
mission to make. Please listen to it lovingly and make us 
delightful. 

36. It is heard that the great God abhors all attach- 
ments. He has perfect self-control. He is ever busy in 
penance and is out of reach of even the Gods. 

37. O celestial sage, He is in the path of meditation. 
How can He withdraw His mind from the supreme 
Brahman ? I have a great doubt in this respect. 

38-39. The supreme Brahman is great and imperishable. 
It is like the streak of a lamp. It is termed Sadasiva. It is 
without aberration. It is beyond Brahma. It is both full 



RudrasarhhitS 


505 


and devoid of qualities. It has no special traits, no desires. 
It sees within 18 and not without. 

40. O sage, from the Kinnaras who come here, such 
are the things heard about Him. Can it be untrue ? 

41. This is also heard that Siva had entered into a 
contract with the lady Satl. Listen to what I say ? 

42. “O Sati, Daksayani, my beloved, I shall not take 
the hand of any woman except you as my wife. This is the 
truth that I say.” 

43. This was the agreement that He made with Sati 
formerly. She is dead. How then will He take another 
woman to be His wife. 

Brahma said '. — 

44. After saying these words, the lord of mountains 
kept quiet in your presence. O celestial sage, on hearing 
that, you spoke words that revealed the truth. 

Ndrada said : — 

45. “O lord of mountains, of great intellect, you need 
not worry. This daughter of yours, Parvati, was formerly the 
daughter of Daksa. 

46. Sati was her auspicious name. Sati who was 
Daksa’s daughter became Rudra’s wife. 

47. Being dishonoured at the sacrifice of her father, 
and being the witness of Siva’s dishonour she was furious 
and she cast off her body. 

48. She herself is born in your house as Parvati. 
There is no doubt that she will become Siva’s wife.” 

Brahma said : — 

49-50. O sage, all these details you mentioned to the 
lord cf mountains. You told the previous history of Parvati 
that increased her pleasure and on hearing which, the lord of 
mountains, his wife and children were freed from all sus- 
picions. 

51. On hearing the story from Narada, Parvati bent 

1 8 . Wc have adopted the reading for 3RT: 



506 Sivapurana 

down her head in bashfulness but her smile heightened the 
beauty of her face. 

52. On hearing the story, the lord of mountains strok- 
ed her fondly, kissed her on the head and placed her on his 
seat. 

53. O sage, on seeing her seated there you spoke 
again delighting the lord of mountains, Menaka and her 
sons. 

54-55. “O king of mountains, she will have a better 
throne than this. Siva’s thigh will be her permanent abode. 
On getting the seat on the thigh of Siva your daughter will 
go to the world where no eye or mind can reach.” 

Brahma said : — 

56. O Narada, after saying this to the lord of mount- 
ains, you went to heaven immediately. The lord of mountains 
too, whose mind was filled with joy, returned to his palace 
endowed with all riches. 


CHAPTER NINE 

(The parents advise Parvati to propitiate Siva . Siva appears 
before Pdrvati in dream) 

Ndrada said : — 

1. O Brahma, O dear one, O foremost among the 
devotees of Siva, O intelligent one, taking pity on me you 
have narrated a wonderful story to me and have increased 
my pleasure thereby. 

2. O Brahma, when I, of divine vision, had gone to 
my abode what happened thereafter? Please tell me now. 

Brahmd said : — 

3. After you had gone to heaven, some time passed. 
Once Mena approached the lord of mountains and bowed 
to him. 

4. After waiting there for some time with humility, the 



Rudrasarhhitd 


507 


beloved of the mountain addressed her lord; the chaste lady 
who loved her daughter as ardently as her own life spoke 
to the lord of mountains thus. 

Mend said : — 

5. As but is natural to women, the words of the sage 
have not been understood by me well. (I think it is better) 
that you perform the marriage of our daughter with a hand- 
some bridegroom. 

6. Let the bridegroom of Parvati be born of a good 
family endowed with good characteristic signs. In every res- 
pect that marriage will yield an unprecedented happiness. 

7. Obeisance to you. Do everything necessary to fnake 
our daughter, as beloved to us as our own lives, very happy 
and delighted after being united with a good bridegroom. 

Brahma said : — 

8. After saying this, with tears in her eyes Mena fell 
at the feet of her husband. Raising her, the lord of moun- 
tains, the most excellent among intelligent people, made a 
true statement. 

Himacala said : — 

9. O gentle lady Menaka, listen. I shall tell you the 
truth. Do not be under false impressions. The sage’s state- 
ment will never be false. 

10. If you feel affectionate towards your daughter, 
zealously instruct your daughter. Let her perform the penance 
with Siva as the object, devotedly and steadily. 

11. If Siva is delighted, O Menaka, He will marry her. 
Everything shall be auspicious. The inauspicious features 
indicated by Narada will perish. 

12. All inauspicious things are auspicious in Sadasiva. 
Hence immediately teach your daughter to hasten to perform 
the penance for attaining Siva. 

Brahma said : — 

13. On hearing these words of the lord of mountains, 
Mena was greatly delighted. She approached her daughter to 
advise her to take interest in penance. 



506 Sivapurdna 

down her head in bashfulness but her smile heightened the 
beauty of her face. 

52. On hearing the story, the lord of mountains strok- 
ed her fondly, kissed her on the head and placed her on his 
seat. 

53. O sage, on seeing her seated there you spoke 
again delighting the lord of mountains, Menaka and her 
sons. 

54-55. “O king of mountains, she will have a better 
throne than this. Siva’s thigh will be her permanent abode. 
On getting the seat on the thigh of Siva your daughter will 
go to the world where no eye or mind can reach.” 

Brahmd said : — 

5f>. O Narad a, after saying this to the lord of mount- 
ains, you went to heaven immediately. The lord of mountains 
too, whose mind was filled with joy, returned to his palace 
endowed with all riches. 


CHAPTER NINE 

(The parents advise Pdrvali to propitiate Siva. Siva appears 
before Pdrvati in dream) 

Ndrada said : — 

1. O Brahma, O dear one, O foremost among the 
devotees of Siva, O intelligent one, taking pity on me you 
have narrated a wonderful story to me and have increased 
my pleasure thereby. 

2. O Brahma, when I, of divine vision, had gone to 
my abode what happened thereafter ? Please tell me now. 

Brahmd said : — 

3. After you had gone to heaven, some time passed. 
Once Mena approached the lord of mountains and bowed 
to him. 

4. After waiting there for some time with humility, the 



Rudrasarhhitd 


507 


beloved of the mountain addressed her lord; the chaste lady 
who loved her daughter as ardently as her own life spoke 
to the lord of mountains thus. 

Mend said : — 

5. As but is natural to women, the words of the sage 
have not been understood by me well. (I think it is better) 
that you perform the marriage of our daughter with a hand- 
some bridegroom. 

6. Let the bridegroom of Parvati be born of a good 
family endowed with good characteristic signs. In every res- 
pect that marriage will yield an unprecedented happiness. 

7. Obeisance to you. Do everything necessary to /nake 
our daughter, as beloved to us as our own lives, very happy 
and delighted after being united with a good bridegroom. 

Brahma said : — 

8. After saying this, with tears in her eyes Mena fell 
at the feet of her husband. Raising her, the lord of moun- 
tains, the most excellent among intelligent people, made a 
true statement. 

Himacala said : — 

9. O gentle lady Menaka, listen. I shall tell you the 
truth. Do not be under false impressions. The sage’s state- 
ment will never be false. 

10. If you feel affectionate towards your daughter, 
zealously instruct your daughter. Let her perform the penance 
with Siva as the object, devotedly and steadily. 

11. If Siva is delighted, O Menaka, He will marry her. 
Everything shall be auspicious. The inauspicious features 
indicated by Narada will perish. 

12. All inauspicious things are auspicious in Sada£iva. 
Hence immediately teach your daughter to hasten to perform 
the penance for attaining Siva. 

Brahma said : — 

13. On hearing these words of the lord of mountains, 
Mena was greatly delighted. She approached her daughter to 
advise her to take interest in penance. 



508 Sivapw&no 

1 4. On seeing the tender limbs of her daughter, Menaka 
was greatly distressed. Her eyes welled up in tears immediately. 

15. The beloved of the lord of mountains was una- 
ble to advise her daughter to perform penance. Parvati 
understood the implied wish of her mother quickly. 

16. Then the omniscient supreme goddess Parvati 
immediately spoke to her mother after consoling her again 
and again. 

Parvati said : — 

1 7. O mother, of great intelligence, listen in the early 
dawn to-day. At night I had a dream I shall tell you. Be 
pleased. 

18. A brahmin sage advised me lovingly and compass- 
ionately to perform the penance of Siva, O mother. 

Brahma said : — 

19. On hearing that, Menaka called her husband there 
and told him the dream as seen by her daughter. 

20. After hearing the dream of his daughter from 
Menaka, the lord of the mountains was pleased and he spoke 
thus to his wife. 

The lord of the mountains said : — 

21. O dear, at the end of the latter half of the night, 
I too had a dream. Please listen to it lovingly. I shall zeal- 
ously explain it. 

22. A great saint of exquisite limbs, as mentioned by 
Narada, arrived near my city with very great pleasure in 
order to perform penance there. 

23. Delighted much I took my daughter there with me. 
He was recognised as Lord Siva, the bridegroom as mentioned 
by Narada 

24. Advising our daughter to render service to that 
saint I requested him to approve of it but He didn’t. 

25. A great discussion took place ( between her and Siva 
based on Sarikhya and Vedanta. 19 Thereafter at His bidding 
my daughter stayed there. 

19. Compare a dialogue between Siva and Parvati who represent 
the different phases and aspects of Purusa and Prakj-ti respectively. Cf. 
Ch. 13 of this section. 



Rudrasarhhita 


509 


26. Concealing her love in the heart she served Him 
with devotion. This is the dream I had, O bright-faced 
lady and I have told you all. 

27. Hence, dear Mena, for some time the result of 
this has to be watched. Certainly know this to be the 
proper step for me. 

Brahma said : — 

28. O excellent sage, the lord of the mountains having 
thus explained to Menaka, both of them remained watching 
its result, pure in mind. 

29-30. When a few days passed by, lord Siva, the 
goal of saintly men, the cause of protection and enjoyment 
wandering here and there in his flutter and excitement due 
to the separation from Satl, came there with pleasure 
accompanied by a few of his Ganas, in order to perform 
penance. The lord was completely agitated due to Sati’s love 
and separation from her. 

31. He performed his penance there. Parvatl engaged 
herself in His service continuously accompanied by two of 
her maids. 

32. Although the lord Siva was hit and wounded by 
the arrows of Kama who was sent thither by the gods to 
enchant Him, He was not swayed at all. 

33. Burning Kama there by His fiery eye, on remem- 
bering my words, the lord became angry with me and 
vanished from the scene. 

34. After sometime, Lord Siva quelled the pride of 
Parvatl but he was propitiated by her again performing great 
penance. 

35. Following the conventions of the world, the lord 
married Parvatl after being sponsored by Visnu. Then 
everything auspicious ensued. 

36. O dear, thus the story of the lord, the divine 
story of Siva, has been narrated in brief. What is it that 
you wish to hear again ? 



CHAPTER TEN 


(Mars is born and is raised to the status of a Vianet by 
Siva's grace ) 


Ndrada said : — 

1. O Brahma, the fortunate disciple of Visnu, O lord, 
foremost among the devotees of Siva, please narrate the 
divine sport of Siva in detail to me. 

2. What did Siva, separated from Satl, do ? When 
did He go to the excellent ridge of the Himavat to perform 
penance ? 

3. How did the discussion between Siva and Siva 
take place ? How did Parvatl attain Siva by performing 
penance ? 

4. O Brahma, these and other things, connected with 
the divine life of Siva, pleasing and auspicious, you kindly 
narrate. 

Suta said : — 

5. On hearing this inquiry of Narada, Brahma, the 
excellent lord of the worlds, remembered the lotus-like feet 
of Siva and spoke. 

Brahma said : — 

6. O celestial sage, most excellent among the devotees 
of Siva, listen to His glory that sanctifies, renders every- 
thing auspicious and increases devotion. 

7. Returning to His mountain, Siva in his excitement 
caused by his separation from his beloved, remembered Sati, 
who was dearer to Him than his very life. 

8. Addressing His Ganas, He bewailed her and narrated 
her good qualities heightening love. In this way He showed 
the way of the world to the people. 

9. Abandoning the polished manners of a householder, 
He cast off his dress and roamed about all the worlds, clever 
in divine sports that He was. 

10-11. Not seeing her anywhere, the pangs of his 
separation from Sati increasing, Siva, the benefactor of His 
devotees, returned to His mountain and entered into trance 



Rudrasartihitd 511 

for the destruction of misery. Thereupon He saw His 
imperishable real form. 

12. Thus Siva remained for a long time eliminating 
the three attributes, and unaffected by aberrations. The lord 
Himself, the controller of illusion remained in the state of 
the Supreme Brahman. 

13. Then He gave up trance. Many years elapsed. 
What happened thereafter, I shall now recount to you. 

14. The drops of sweat caused by exhaustion fell on 
the Earth from the lord’s forehead and took the shape of a 
child immediately. 

15. O sage, the child was tawny-coloured and had 
four arms. He was comely in features. His brilliance was 
supermundane and unbearable to others. 

16. Like a common child he cried in front of the Great 
lord who was engaged in worldly activities. 

17. Afraid of Siva, the Earth pondered deeply over 
it and appeared before him in the guise of a good lady. 

18. She lifted up the child immediately and held him 
to her chest. Lovingly she suckled the child with her 
excellent breast milk that flowed over her body. 

19. She kissed the child’s face lovingly and petted 
him smilingly. In the absence of Satl she herself acted as 
his mother in the interest of lord Siva. 

20. Siva knew that she was the Earth. Siva, the cause 
of protection and enjoyment, the immanent soul, on seeing 
her activities became contented and eagerly said to her 
laughingly. 

21. "O Earth, you are blessed. Rear this child of 
mine lovingly, born of my glittering drops of sweat over you. 

22. Although the child is born of the sweat of my 
body, O Earth, he will be famous in the world after your 
name. He will be a bestower of pleasures and will be free 
from the three distresses always. 

23. This boy of yours wiM be a bestower of lands and 
will have good qualities. He will make me too happy. 
Accept him with pleasure”. 

Brahma said : — 

24. After saying this He stopped. He was a bit 



512 Sivapurana 

relieved of His pangs of separation. Siva, free from aberra- 
tions, and a lover of good men, acted thus only for following 
the worldly conventions. 

25. The Earth too, as Siva bade her, returned to her 
abode along with the child. She was extremely happy. 

26. The child acquired the name Bhauma (son of the 
Earth) . He attained youth immediately. For a long time 
he worshipped lord Siva at Kasl. 

27. By the grace of lord Siva, the son of the Earth, 
acquired the status of a planet. He went to the heavenly 
sphere beyond the region of Venus. 

28. O sage, thus I have told you the story of Siva 
and His separation from Satl. Now listen to the story of 
His performance of penance. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

(Siva and Himavat meet together) 

Brahma said : — 

1-2. O Narada, the daughter of the mountain, honoured 
in the three worlds, was brought up in the palace of Himacala. 
When she was eight years old, Siva distressed by Satl’s 
separation came to know of her birth. Keeping her wonder- 
ful memory within his heart He rejoiced much. 

3. In the meantime, following the conventions of the 
world, Siva wished to perform penance in order to con- 
centrate his mind properly. 

4-5. Taking some important Ganas of quiet nature, 
Nandin and others, with Him, He went to the excellent 
Himalayan ridge— Gangavatara, O sage, where the great 
holy river Ganga flowed from Brahmapura 20 formerly, in order 
to quell sins. 


20. Cunningham (A. G. P. 299) identifies Brahmapura (the Po-lo- 
ki-mo-pu-lo of Hwen Thsang : Waters, I. P. 329) with the capital city 
Vairatapattana of the hilly country lying between the AlakanandS and the 
Karnali rivers. The territory covered the districts of Garhwal and Kumaon 
(Cf. Br. S. ch. 14 and G.D. P. 40) and was stretched within 667 miles 
in circuit. # 



Rudrasarhhitd 


513 


6-7. Staying there, Siva of full self-control, started 
His activities of penance. With full concentration and alert- 
ness He thought on His own Self, the cause of mental know- 
ledge, the eternal, the luminous, free from affliction, identi- 
cal with the universe, consciousness and Bliss, without a second 
and having no support. 

8-9. When Siva began His meditation, the Pramathas 
also began their meditation as well as some Ganas, Nandin, 
Bhrngi etc. Some of the Ganas rendered service to Siva, the 
Supreme Self. Some of them became His gatekeepers. They 
observed silence and did not shout. 

10. In the meantime on hearing that Siva had come 
to Ausadhiprastha 21 , the mountain Himavat too went there. 

11. Accompanied by his attendants, the lord of the 
mountains bowed to the lord Siva, worshipped Him with 
pleasure and eulogised Him with palms joined in reverence. 

Lord Himavat said : — 

12. O great god, lord of the gods, O lord Siva, the 
three worlds are sustained by you alone who are lord of the 
worlds. 

13. Obeisance to Thee, O lord of gods, obeisance to the 
one who has assumed the form of a Yogin, obeisance to Thee 
that art possessed and devoid of attributes and obeisance to 
Thee who art sportive. 

14. O Siva, obeisance to the resident of Kailasa, 
obeisance to one who wanders all over the worlds, obeisance 
to thee the great lord, to the one indulging in divine sports, 
obeisance to the trident- holder. 

15. O lord, of complete and perfect qualities, obeisance 
to Thee, devoid of aberrations. Obeisance to Thee without 
aspirations. Obeisance to Thee without desires. Obeisance to 
the bold one, to the great soul. 

16. O overlord of the three attributes, O lord of 
delusion, favourably disposed towards the people, obeisance 
unto you, who grant inner pleasures of the soul. Obeisance 
to Brahman, the great soul. 

17. Obeisance to Thee, worthy of being served by Visnu 


2i. See Note No. io 



514 


SioajM&Q* 

Brahma and others; obeisance to Thee of the form of Visnu 
and Brahma; obeisance to Thee, the creator of Visnu and 
Brahma, obeisance to Thee O one favourably disposed to the 
devotees. 

18. O one engaged in penance, O one the 

venue of penance; obeisance to Thee the bestower of 
fruits of penance; obeisance to Thee who lovest penance; 
obeisance to Thee of the form of Brahman and quiescent. 

19. Obeisance to Thee who lay down the principles of 
dealings and worldly conventions; obeisance to the great 
Siva full of attributes; obeisance to Thee the great soul. 

20. O great lord, your divine sports are 

incomprehensible. They bestow happiness on saintly men. 
Your nature is subservient to the devotees and you are under 
their control. You are the performer of all activities. 

21. O lord, you have come here because my fortune 
is in its ascendancy. You have been described as a bestower 
of favours to the distressed. You have put me under your 
patronage and protection. 

22. Today my life has borne fruit, in fact everything 
connected with me has become fruitful since you have come 
here. 

23. Knowing me to be your slave of great composure, 
O great lord, you can freely command me. With my mind 
not fascinated by other things I shall serve you with great 
pleasure. 

Brahma said : — 

24. On hearing these words of the lord of mountains, 
lord Siva slightly opened his eyes and cast a glance on the 
lord of mountains who was accompanied by his attendants. 

25. On seeing the lord of mountains with his fol- 
lowers, the bull-bannered god Siva, the lord of the universe 
permanently engaged in meditation and Yogic practice said 
smilingly. 

Lord Siva said : — 

26. I have come to perform penance in secret on your 
top. Make arrangements so that none should be able to come 
near me. 



Rudfasarhhitd 


515 


27. You arc a noble soul, the abode of penance and 
permanent residence of sages, gods, demons and other great 
men. 

28. You are the permanent residence of brahmins and 
others; you are always sanctified by Gahga; you render help 
to others and you are the lord and king of all mountains. 

29. O king of mountains, delighted in resorting to you 
and controlling my senses and mind I am going to perform 
penance here at Garigavatarana. 22 

30. O lord of mountains, O best of mountains, now 
put forth all endeavour whereby my penance can be con- 
ducted without obstacles. 

31. O excellent Mountain, this alone is the greatest 
service that you can render. Please arrange for it with 
due effort. Please return to your abode with your mind 
full of pleasure. 

Brahmd said : — 

32. After saying this, the lord of the worlds, the cause 
of protection and enjoyment kept silent. The lord of the 
mountains then spoke to Siva with affection. 

Himdcala said : — 

33. O great lord of the universe, I have come myself 
and worshipped you. What shall I ask you who stay in my 
own kingdom? 

34. O great lord, you cannot be attained by great 
penance even by the gods who put forth great efforts. But 
you yourself have come here. 

35. There is none more fortunate than me; there is 
none more meritorious than me, since you have come to 
perform penance on my summit. 

36. O great lord, I consider myself greater than the 
god of gods. You have come here with your Ganas and 
made me blessed. 

37. O lord of gods, independently and without any 

22. It is a sacred place celebrated in the Matsya ayid Vayu 
Pur&iias where the river Gahg& emerges from the Vindu Sarovara through 
visible outlets and subterranean channels. 



516 SivapurSna 

obstacles perforin your great penance. O lord,- I am your 
slave always. I shall do all service to you. 

Brahma said : — 

38. After saying this, the lord of the mountains 
returned at once to his abode and enthusiastically narrated 
everything to his beloved wife. 

39. O Narada, calling together all his attendants with 
the members of their families, the lord of the mountains 
said emphatically. 

Himdcala said : — 

40. From now onwards, none of you shall go to the 
ridge of mine, called Garigavatarana. This is my command. 

I am telling you the truth. 

41. If anyone of you goes there I shall punish that 
rogue particularly. This is the truth I am speaking. 

42. O sage, after thus checking all of his attendants, 
the mountain made other arrangements also. I now tell you 
all about the same. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

(Siva-Himavat dialogue) 

Brahma said 

1. Then, the delighted lord of the mountains, took some 
fresh flowers and fruits with him and approached Siva along 
with his daughter. 

2. Approaching the lord of the three worlds, engaged 
in meditation and bowing to Him he mentally dedicated to 
Him, his wonderful daughter. 

3. Placing the fruits and flowers in front of Him and 
making his daughter stand before Him, the lord of the 
mountains spoke to Siva. 

Himdcala said : — 

4. O lord, my daughter who is eager to serve you, the 



Rudrasarhhitd 517 

moon-crested lord, I have brought here with a desire to 
propitiate you. 

5. Let her serve you, the benefactor, for ever, along 
with two of her maids. O lord, if you wish to bless me, 
please permit her. 

Brahma said : — 

6-10. Then Siva looked at her in the first flush of her 
youth. Her complexion resembled the full blown blue lotus 
petals. Her face appeared as the full moon. Her auspici- 
ous dress and features were the repositories of all graceful 
charms. Her neck had the shape of the conchshell. Her 
eyes were wide and her ears shone exquisitely. On either 
side, her long-rounded arms resembling a lotus-stalk shone 
beautifully. Her two breasts resembling lotus-buds were stout, 
plump and firm. Her waist was slender and the curly locks 
of her hair shone well. Her feet resembled the land-lotus and 
were comely in appearance. She was competent to shake 
the minds of even the sages deeply engrossed in meditation, 
even at the very sight. She was a crest-jewel of all the 
maidens in the world. 

11-12. On seeing her in that exquisite form as increased 
the pleasure and love of even those who meditate, the great 
Yogin Siva closed His eyes immediately and meditated upon 
His real form, the great principle that is beyond the three 
attributes and is imperishable. 

13-14. On seeing Siva the lord of all, the chief of 
those devoted to penance, the lord with the moon as his 
ornament, who can be known through spiritual insight 
and who was sitting in the meditative posture closing His 
eyes, Himacala saluted Him again. Though he was not 
disheartened, he entertained some doubts. Thus he, the lord 
of mountains, foremost of the eloquent, spoke to Siva, the 
sole kinsman of the universe. 

Himacala said : — 

15. O great lord of the gods, O Siva, the merciful, O 
lord, open your eyes and look at me who have sought refuge 
in you. 

16. O Siva, O gr$at lord, the delighter of the universe, 



0 great God, I bow to you who destroy all adversities. 

17. O lord of gods, the Vedas and the sacred lore do 
not know you entirely. Your greatness is beyond the sphere 
of words and minds, inexpressible by means of words and 
incomprehensible. 

18. Not to speak of others, even the Vedas describe 
you with awe and timidity not positively but negating what 
you are not. 

19. Securing your grace through devotion, many devot- 
ees become acquainted with you. Seeking refuge in you they 
get correct knowledge about your real self. 

20. Please listen to my entreaty with a long heart. 

1 am your slave. O dear lord, in humility I shall explain 
the same to you. 

21. O great god Siva, by your favour I feel most fort- 
unate. O lord, consider me your slave and be sympathetic 
towards me. Obeisance to you. 

22. O lord, I shall be visiting you daily along with 
my daughter. O lord, be pleased to command me accord- 
ingly. 

Brahma said : — 

23. On hearing his words, the great lord of the gods 
broke His meditation, opened His eyes, thought a little 
and spoke. 

Lord Siva said : — 

24. “O mountain, you shall come every day to see me, 
leaving your daughter in your abode. Otherwise I cannot be 
seen” 

Brahma said : — 

25. On hearing the words of Siva in that view, the 
father of Siva the mountain, bowed his head and replied to 
Siva. 

Himdcala said : — 

26. “Let this be kindly mentioned why this girl cannot 
accompany me here. Is she unworthy of your service ? I do 
not know the reason thereof.” 



Rudrasarhhiti 


519 


Brahma said : — 

27. Particularly pointing out the worldly conduct of 
fake ascetics, the bull-bannered god Siva laughingly spoke to 
the mountain. 

Siva said : — 

28. This auspicious slender-bodied maiden of comely 
hips and moon-like face should not be brought near me. I 
forbid you again and again. 

29. A woman is a phase of illusion. As the scholars 
who have mastered the Vedas say particularly, a young damsel 
is a hindrance to ascetics. 

30. O mountain, I am an ascetic, a yogin, never affected 
by illusion. Of what avail is a woman thrust on me ? 

31. O friend resorted to by great ascetics, you shall 
not say so again, since you are an adept in Vedic religion, 
a scholar and one foremost among the wise. 

32. O mountain, by contact with a woman, worldliness 
springs up; non-attachment perishes and the virtuous penance 
is destroyed. 

33. Hence, O mountain, no ascetic shall have any truck 
with women. A woman is the root of all worldly attachments. 
She destroys all wisdom and detachment together. 

Brahma said:— 

34. Speaking these and many other similar things to 
the lord of mountains, lord Siva the great Yogin, stopped. 

35. On hearing these ruthless words of Siva free from 
sickness and desire, the father ofParvati became nervous, O 
celestial sage, and a little agitated. But he kept quiet. 

36. On hearing the words of the ascetic and finding her 
father, the lord of the mountains, frightened, Parvatl bowed 
to Siva and spoke these words clearly. 



CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

(i Siva-Parvati dialogue) 


Parvati said : — 

1. O Yogin, O lord, wise and clever, please listen to 
the reply to what you, as an ascetic, said to the lord of 
mountains. 

2. O Siva, you perform this great penance because you 
possess the energy of penance. Your intellect is inclined to 
perform penance because you are a noble soul. 

3. That energy is the Prakrti, the cause of all activities. 
Everything is created, sustained and destroyed by it. 

4. O lord, please ponder over who you are and who 
this subtle Prakrti is. Without Prakrti how can the great 
lord of the phallic form exist ? 

5. You arc worthy of the worship, respect and 
meditation of all living beings for ever, thanks to Prakrti. 
Thinking of this in your heart, please reply. 

Brahma said : — 

6* On hearing these words of Parvati, the great lord 
engaged in the causation of great enjoyment and protection 
became delighted. He laughed and said. 

The great lord said : — 

7. I ain destroying the Prakrti with my great penance. 

I remain in reality without Prakrti. 

8* Indeed Prakrti should not be taken in by good 
people. They should remain unaffected eschewing all worldly 
conduct. 

Brahma said: — 

9. O dear one, this was said by Siva in accordance 
with worldly conventions and dealings. Parvati thereupon 
laughed to herself and spoke these sweet words. 

Parvati said . — 

10. O Yogin, O lord Siva, based on what you said 



Rudrasarhhitd 521 

how can that Prakrti cease to exist and how can you 
be considered beyond that Prakrti ? 

11. You shall ponder over this and say with reference 
to the facts as they are. All these (the universe etc) are 
bound by Prakrti continuously. 

12. Hence you shall not say anything, not do any- 
thing. Know that speaking, doing etc. is a Prakrta activity. 

13. What you hear, what you eat, what you see and 
what you do — all these are (essentially) the activities of 
Prakrti. To say that it is unreal is meaningless. 

14. O lord, if you are greater than Prakrti, wherefore 
do you perform penance, O Siva, now, on this mountain 
Himavat. 

15. O Siva, you have been swallowed by Prfckfti, 
you do not know your own situation. O lord, if you do 
not know your own situation why do you perform penance ? 

16. O yogin, what have I to do with an argument 
with you ? Scholars say that without perception inference 
has no authority at all. 

17. As long as the embodied beings remain the objects 
of the sense-organs, everything is Prakrta. Wise men 
consider it so. 

18. O lord of ascetics, a longwinded talk is of no 
avail. Listen to my emphatic statement. I am Prakrti 
and you are Purusa. This is the truth. There is no 
doubt about it. 

19. With my blessings you become qualitative and 
embodied. Without me, you are attributeless and incompe- 
tent to perform any activity. 

20. Being always subservient to Prakrti you per- 
form all activities. Self-controlled, free from aberrations and 
untainted by me how can you perform them ? 

21. If you are really superior to Prakr i, if what 
you say is true, you need not be afraid to be near me, O 
Siva. 

Brahma said : — 

22. On hearing these words of Parvati based on the 
Samkhya system, Siva replied to her, upholding the Vedantin’s 
point of view. 



Lord Siva said : — 

23. O Parvati, O upholder of the Samkhya system 
if you say so, O sweet- voiced lady, you render me unfor- 
bidden service every day. 

24. If I am the Brahman, the supreme lord, unsullied 
by illusion, comprehensible through spiritual knowledge and 
the master of illusion what will you do then ? 

Brahmd said : — 

25. Having spoken to Parvati thus, the lord, the 
conciliator and the blesser of the devotees spoke to the 
mountain thus. 

Siva said : — 

26. O lord of mountains, here itself on your beautiful 
excellent ridge, I shall perform my penance showing to the 
world my real blissful form and nature. 

27. O lord of mountains, permission shall be given to 
me to perform penance. Without your permission it is not 
possible for me (or any one else) to perform any penance 
here. 

Brahmd said : — 

28. On hearing these words of Siva, the lord of gods, 
Himavat bowed to Siva and said. 

Himavat said : — 

29. The entire universe consisting of gods, Asuras 
and human beings, is yours. O great god, though insigni- 
ficant, I blabber something to you. 

Brahmd said : — 

30. Thus addressed by Himavat, Siva, the benefactor 
of the worlds, laughingly permitted him to go. 

31. Permitted by Siva, Himavat returned to his abode 
along with Parvati. He wanted to visit Him daily. 

32. Even without her father but accompanied by her 
maids, Parvati approached Siva everyday for serving Him 
with devotion. 

33. O dear, at the bidding of lord Siva, none of the 



Rudrasarhhitd 523 

Garias, NandlSvara and others, purely carrying out the orders 
of Siva, prevented her. 

34. The discourse of Siva and Siva who represented the 
principles of Samkhya and Vedanta and who, if thoughtfully 
considerd, are not different from each other, was very happy 
and pleasing for ever. 

35. At the request of the lord of mountains, Siva permi- 
tted Parvati to remain with Him being true to His words 
though with all gravity and seriousness. 

36. He, the lord of individual souls, said to Parvati in 
the company of her maids — “You can serve me everyday 
You can go (as you please) . You can stay here fearlessly.” 

37. Saying this, He accepted the goddess in his service. 
Siva is free from aberrations. He is a great Yogin, the lord 
who indulges in different kinds of divine sports. 

38. This is the supreme courage of great ascetics poss- 
essed of fortitude that though surrounded by obstacles they are 
not overpowered by them. 

39. Then, the lord of mountains, returned to his city 
and rejoiced in the company of his wife, the sages and 
attendants. 

40. Siva mentioned the Yoga of meditation on the 
great Atman with His mind freed from obstacles. 

41. Parvati, along with her maids, continued her daily 
service to the moon- crested lord, coming and going without 
any hindrance. 

42. She washed Siva’s feet and drank that holy water. 
With a cloth heated in fire she wiped his body. 

43. After worshipping Him with sixteen types of offer- 
ings duly, and bowing to Him repeatedly she used to return 
to her father’s abode. 

44. O excellent sage, a long time elapsed as she conti- 
nued her service to Him who was engrossed in meditation. 

45. Sometimes accompanied by her maids, she sang 
exquisite songs of good note that increased love in the hermi- 
tage of Siva. 

46. Sometimes she brought Kusa grass, flowers and sac- 
rificial twigs. Sometimes, assisted by her maids, she scubbed 
and cleaned the place. 

47. Sometimes she stayed in the house of the moon-cre- 



524 


scent lord, pure and holy. Sometimes she used to gaze at the 
lord lovingly and with surprise. 

48-49 In the course of his penance sometimes the lord of 
the goblins thought about her as free from attachment. But 
as she was in her physical form He did not take her as His 
wife though she was near Him, though she was endowed 
with every feature of beauty, though she was capable of 
deluding even the sages. 

50. On seeing her with perfect control over her sense- 
organs and engrossed in serving Him always, the lord merci- 
fully thought. 

51. “I shall take her only when the last seed of ego 
goes away from her; when she herself performs a penance.” 

52. Thinking thus, the lord of the Bhutas reverted to 
meditation. The lord who could indulge in great sports bec- 
ame a great Yogin. 

53. O sage, when Siva, the great Atman, sank into 
meditation, no other thought entered His mind. 

54. As for parvati, she served Him everyday with great 
devotion, always thinking on the form of that Great Soul. 

55. Siva who was engrossed in meditation saw her every 
day in full composure. Forgetting His previous thoughts 
about her, He did not see her although He saw her. 

56. In the mean time Indra, other gods and the sages 
eagerly sent Kama there at the bidding of Brahma. 

57. They had been harassed by the demon Taraka. the 
demon of great strength. Hence they wanted to unite Parvati 
and Siva in love. 

58. After reaching there Kama tried all his tricks but 
Siva was not at all agitated. He reduced Kama to ashes. 

59. O sage, Parvati too was divested of her ego. At 
his bidding she performed a penance and obtained Him as 
her husband. 

60. Parvati and Siva were very happy. Engrossed in 
helping others they carried out the work of the gods. 



Rudrasarhhitii 


525 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

( The Birth of Tdraka and Vajranga and their Penance) 
Ndrada said : — 

1 . O Brahma, great devotee of Siva and disciple of 
Vi§nu, this great story of Siva and Siva has been narrated 
very well by you. 

2. Who was this Taraka demon, O Brahma, by whom 
the gods were harassed. Whose son was he ? Narrate his 
story with reference to Siva. 

3. How did Siva of full control reduce Kama to 
ashes ? Please narrate that too with pleasure. The story 
of the lord is indeed wonderful. 

4. How did Siva perform the severe penance for the 
sake of happiness ? How did the primordial energy who is 
greater than the universe secure Siva a.s her husband ? 

5. O great scholar, narrate all these complete in 
every detail to me, your son, who has dedicated his soul to 
Siva and who has developed full faith in Him. 

Brahma said : — 

6. O celestial sage, of great intellect, O foremost of 
my sons, whose sacred rites are laudable, I explain the entire 
story after thinking on Siva. Listen. 

7. O Narada, first of all, you hear the birth of Taraka 
himself, to secure whose death great effort was made by the 
gods depending on Siva. 

8. My son Marici begot KaSyapa who married thir- 
teen daughters of Daksa. 

9. The eldest of them Diti bore two sons: Hiranya- 
kaSipu the elder and Hiranyaksa the younger. 

10. When these two began to harass the gods, Vi$nu 
assumed the forms of Man-lion and Boar and killed them. 
Then the gods became fearless and happy. 

11. The distressed Diti sought refuge in KaSyapa and 
and serving him with devotion and observing the sacred rites 
she conceived. 

12. On coming to know of it, Indra entered her womb 
forcibly and cut it off many a time with his thunderbolt. 



526 


Sivapurdna 


1 3. By the power of her sacred rites, the child in the 
womb did not die as she was sleeping at that time, by a 
stroke of good luck. They were cut into seven pieces and 
so she had seven sons. 

14. These sons became gods by the name of Maruts. 
They all went to heaven along with Indra and were taken 
as his own attendants by the king of gods. 

15. Did resorted again to her husband repenting for 
her action. She made the sage pleased by means of great 
service. 

Kafyapa said : — 

16. Be pure and perform penance for ten thousand 
years of Brahma. When it is completed you will have a son. 

17. O sage, the penance was completed by Did who 
performed it with faith. Thereafter from him she conceived 
and delivered of a son. 

18. That son of Diti named Vajrariga (of adamantine 
limbs) was on a par with the gods. Befitting his name, his 
body was strong and powerful even from his very birth. 

19. At the bidding of his mother, he immediately 
abducted Indra, the lord of gods, the other gods and punished 
them in various ways. 

20. Seeing the distress of Indra and others, Diti became 
very happy. Indra and other gods became miserable due 
to their own actions. 

21. Always engaged in the welfare of the gods, I went 
there accompanied by Kasyapa. Employing gentle and 
peaceful words I got the gods released. 

22. Releasing the gods with respect, Vajrahga, a 
great devotee of Siva, was delighted in his heart, and he of 
pure soul, without any aberration, spoke. 

VajrdAga said : — 

23. In order to achieve his interest, Indra killed the 
foetus of my mother. He has now tasted the fruit thereof. 
Well may he rule over his kingdom. 

24. O Brahma, I did this only at the bidding of my 
mother. I have no desire for the enjoyments of any one of 
the worlds. 



Rudrasathhitd 


527 


25. O Brahma, foremost of Jthose who know the Vedas, 
tell me the essence of real philosophy whereby I can ever 
remain happy, pleased in heart and free from aberrations. 

26. On hearing that, O sage, I said — “SSttvika feelings 
constitute the essence of real philosophy. I shall lovingly 
create an exquisite lady.” 

27. After offering her who was named VarSngi, to 
that son of Did, I went to my abode in great delight. So 
also Kafyapa, his father. 

28. Thereafter the demon eschewed his diabolical 
feelings and resorted to sublime thoughts. Since he was free 
from fiendish feelings he became happy. 

29. But no sublime feeling entered in the heart of 
Varangi. With chasdty and faith she served her husband 
lovingly in diverse ways. 

30. Her husband Vajranga of great lordly status was 
glad very soon on account of her service . He then spoke 
thus: — 

Vajrdriga said : — 

31. O beloved, what do you wish ? What is it that 
you cherish in your mind ? On hearing that, she bowed to 
her husband and revealed her desire. 

Varangi said : — 

32. <c O my good husband, if you are so pleased grant 
me a powerful son who will conquer three worlds and 
cause misery to Visnu.” 

Brahma, said : — 

33. On hearing the words of his beloved, he was 
disagreeably surprised and vexed. He was free from in- 
imical thoughts. With perfect wisdom and Sattvika feelings 
in his heart he said : — 

34. My beloved wishes enmity with the gods. It does 
not appeal to me. What shall I do ? Where shall I go ? 
How can my vow be preserved from destruction ? 

35. If my wife’s wishes are fulfilled, the three worlds 
will be much distressed, so too the gods and the sages. 

36. If my beloved’s desires are not fulfilled, I am sure 



528 Sivapurfya 

to be cast into hell. In either case righteousness will be lost. 
This is what we have heard. 

37. O sage, thus Vajrariga whirled a lot in a dilemma. 
Intelligently he considered the corresponding strength and 
weakness of both the alternatives. 

38. O sage, as willed by Siva, though intelligent the 
king of demons agreed to the proposal. He told his wife 
“So be it.” 

39. For that purpose he performed another very diffi- 
cult penance with great zeal with me as the object of 
worship, for number of years. 

40. On seeing the great penance I went to him for 
granting the boon. With a delighted mind I told him 
“speak out the boon you wish to have.” 

41. On seeing me in the firmament in the pleasant 
mood he worshipped and eulogised me as well as craved 
for the boon as desired by his wife. 

Vajrdrga said : — 

42. O lord, give me a son who will be carrying out 
what is beneficent to his mother, who will be strong, valorous 
and efficient, who will be a storehouse of penance. 

Brahma said : — 

43. On hearing his words, O sage, I said “So be it.” 
After granting the boon I returned to my abode thinking on 
Siva, though a bit distressed. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

(The penance and reign of Tdrakdsura ) 

Brahma said : — 

1. Then that Varangl, devoted to him, conceived. 
The child within her body developed in many years with its 
brilliance. 

2. That Varangl, when the time was complete, delivered 

of a son of huge body and great strength dazzling the ten 

quarters. 



Rudrasarhhiid 


529 


3. At the same time, several phenomena of evil portent 
forboding misery and distress happened, when the son of 
Var&ngi was born making the gods miserable. 

4. O dear, the phenomena of three varieties indicat- 
ing great calamity and terrifying the worlds occurred in the 
sky, heaven and earth. I shall narrate them. 

5. With a terrifying noise, thunderbolts fell along with 
comets; shooting meteors rose up, making the world miserable. 

6. The earth with all the mountains quaked; the 
quarters blazed; the rivers and oceans were particularly agi- 
tated. 

7. The rough wind blew with a hissing noise. Gusts 
of wind with troops of tempests and dust for banner uprooted 
several trees. 

8. O great brahmin, the misty haloes around the sun 
and the moon in the grip of Rahu became the harbingers of 
great fear and unhappiness. 

9 At that time terrifying sounds that resembled those 
of the chariot issued forth from cracks and crevices in the 
mountains. 

10. Within villages, inauspicious vixens howled hide- 
ously vomitting fires; as it were, through their mouths along 
with the hissing and twanging sounds of the hootings and 
howlings of owls and jackals. 

11. Lifting up their necks, the dogs barked in diverse 
ways producing sounds of singing or lamenting here and there. 

12. O dear, groups of mad asses ran here and there 
braying loudly and digging the ground with their hoofs. 

13. Terrified by the asses, birds flew up from their 
nests. In their excitement and flutter they honked and 
cronked. They did not find a peaceful perch anywhere. 

14. Beasts in sheds and forests roamed here and there 
in great fright as though beaten and driven about, passing 
urine and shitting dungs as they pleased. 

15. Frightened cows sprayed blood through their 
udders; their eyes brimmed with tears, clouds showering 
putrid matter became terrifying. 

16. Idols and images of deities appeared to cry and fly 
up. Even when there was no gale, trees fell down. Planets 
in the sky clashed with one another. 



17. O excellent sage, these and similar portending 
phenomena occurred : Ignorant persons thought the sub- 
mersion of the whole universe was imminent. 

18. Then KaSyapa Prajapati thought well and named 
the powerful demon Taraka. 

19. That heroic demon, with his manliness and valour 
manifesting quickly grew and developed with his steely frame 
like the lord of mountains. 

20. Then the demon Taraka, of great strength and 
exploit, endowed with a lofty mind, requested permission of 
his mother for performing penance. 

21. The permission having been secured, that demon 
possessing great power of illusion and capable of deluding even 
experts in the magical art, thought of performing penance in 
order to conquer all the gods. 

22. Strictly adhering to the directions of his elders 
and preceptors he went to the forest of Madhu and perfor- 
med a severe penance duly, having Brahma as his objective. 

23. For a hundred years he performed penance with 
his hands lifted up, standing on only one leg and gazing 
at the sun. With his mind steady and firm he observed 
all sacred rites. 

24. Then for a hundred years, the lord and king of 
Asuras, Taraka performed the penance : stood steady 
touching the ground with the single big toe. 

25. For hundred years he performed penance by 
drinking only water; another hundred years by sustaining 
himself on air alone, another hundred years standing in 
water and another hundred years standing on dry land. 

26. A hundred years he performed the penance amidst 
fires, a hundred years in a topsy-turvy position and a 
hundred years supported on the ground by the palms of his 
hands. 

27. O sage, a hundred years he remained with his 
head down and feet up clinging fast to the branch of a tree 
and inhaling the pure smoke of the sacrificial fire. 

28. Thus with ardour, the king of the demons perfor- 
med the severe penance duly unbearable even to those who 
heard about it. 

29. O sage, in the process of such a penance, a huge 



Rudrasaitihitd 531 

mass of light shot up from his head and spread all round. 
It caused great havoc. 

30. All the worlds of the gods were well nigh consu- 
med by it alone. O sage, all the celestial sages were hard 
hit and distressed. 

31-32. Indra, the lord of gods, was extremely terrified. 
He thought “Some one is performing a penance. Surely he 
will usurp my position. This master mind shall in a trice 
destroy the whole cosmos”. All those who entertained similar 
doubts could not decide what to do. 

33. Then all those gods and sages consulted one another 
and in their great fright they came to my world and appro- 
ached me in a piteous plight. 

34. Bowing to and eulogising me with palms joined in 
reverence, all of them explained everything to me distressed in 
mind that they were. 

35. Coming to a definite conclusion with adequate thou- 
ght as to the reason for the same, I went where the demon 
was performing penance in order to grant him the boon. 

36. O sage, I told him thus— “Tell me what boon you 
want. A severe penance has been performed by you. There 
is nothing which cannot be granted to you”. 

37. On hearing these words of mine, Taraka, the great 
demon, bowed and eulogised me and requested for a terrible 
boon. 

Taraka said : — 

38. “O Pitamaha, if you are glad and ready to grant 
me the boon what is it that cannot be achieved by me ? 
Hence I request you for this boon. Please listen. 

39. O lord of gods, if you are pleased and if a boon is 
to be given to me, be kind enough to grant me two boons. 

40. O great lord, there should certainly b$ no man 
equal to me in strength in this entire universe created by you. 

41. If a son born of Siva becomes the commander-in- 
chief of an army and discharges weapons against me, let my 
death occur then”. 

42. O excellent sage, thus requested by that demon, I 
granted him two boons and hastened back to my abode. 



532 Sivafmrdna 

43. Securing the excellent boon in accordance with his 
cherished desire, the demon was very glad and went to the 
town Sonita* 3 . 

44. That great demon was crowned the king of the 
three worlds with the permission of Sukra, the preceptor of 
the demons. 

45. Then the great demon became the leader of the 
three worlds. He inaugurated his commanding position 
by harassing the mobile and immobile beings. 

46. He duly established his suzerainty over the three 
worlds. He protected his subjects but inflicted pain on the 
gods and others. 

47. Then the demon Taraka seized gems and jewels of 
all the guardians of the quarters, Indra and others, offered 
under duress by them on being afraid of him. 

48. Afraid of him, Indra surrendered his Airavata 
(white elephant) and Kubera all his nine treasures. 

49. White horses were surrendered by Varuna, the wish- 
yielding cow Kamadhenu by the sages and the sun out of fear 
for him surrenderad his divine horse DccaihSravas. 

50. Wherever a fine article was espied by the demon, 
he seized it immediately. The three worlds became void of 
all valuable things. 

51. O sage, the oceans tho offered him their gems on 
account of fear. The entire earth became exuberant in pro- 
ductivity without being tilled and yielded what his subjects 
desired. 

52. The sun glowed gently and mildly as not to make 
him distressed. The moon was always visible with his bril- 
lant light and the wind blew always favouring him. 

53. Whatever riches the gods possessed or the manes 
or others had, were forfeited by the wicked demon. 

54. Bringing the three worlds under his control, he 
declared Indra himself. He became the undisputed lord and 
ruled over them with perfect self-control. 

23. It was the capital of the Asura territory, later on called 
B&napura, as it was ruled by the powerful Asura Baga, the devotee of 
Siva. According to Dey (G. D. PP. 21, 189) Sogitapura is still called by 
that name, and is situated in Kamaun on the bank of the river Kedara- 
Gafigfi or Mandakini about 6 miles from U$&matha at a short distance 
from Guptak&£i”. 



Rudrasarhhitd 533 

55. Dismissing the gods he installed demons in their 
places. Some gods he engaged in his personal service. 

56. O sage, the gods harassed by him, led by Indra, 
sought refuge in me. They were helpless and extremely 
agitated. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

(Brahma consoles the gods harassed and frightened 
by the demon Taraka) 

Brahma said : — 

1. The gods terribly tormented by Taraka, bowed to 
and eulogised me, the lord of subjects with great devotion. 

2. On hearing the eulogy of the gods pleasing and true 
to facts I was highly pleased and replied to the heaven- 
dwellers thus. 

3. O gods, welcome to you. I hope you are all 
fulfilling your duties without obstacles. Why have you all 
come here ? Tell me. 

4. On hearing my words those gods bowed to me 
duly and spoke. Being tormented by Taraka they were in a 
piteous plight. 

The gods said : — 

5. O lord of the worlds, thanks to the boon received 
from you. The demon Taraka is very haughty. Driving us 
out with force he has taken possession of our positions. 

6. Is it not known to you what misery has befallen 
us ? Please dispel our misery quickly. We seek refuge in 
you. 

7. He torments us wherever we happen to stay by 
day or at night. Wherever we flee we see Taraka. 

8. O dear, lord of all, we are extremely harassed 
and agitated due to Taraka. 

9. Agni, Yama, Varu^a, Nirrti, V&yu and other 
guardians of the deities are under his control. 



534 Sivapurdna 

10. None of them is ever independent. All serve him 
in the manner of human beings accompanied by their followers. 

11. Being harassed by him, the gods have become 
subservient of him. They are engaged in carrying out his 
wishes. All of us are his servants. 

12. Our woman folk, the groups of heavenly nymphs 
have been captured by Taraka, the powerful. 

13. No sacrifice is in the making. No ascetic is in 
penances. The charitable and virtuous activities are being sel- 
dom pursued in the worlds. 

14. His commander-in-chief is a simple demon-Kraufica. 
He has now gone to the nether worlds and is harassing the 
people very much. 

15. The regions of our three worlds have been forcibly 
taken, O Brahama, by this Taraka of sinful and ruthless tem- 
perament. 

16. O lord of the worlds, we were in heaven but now 
that we have been turned out by that demon we shall go to 
any place which you may kindly suggest. 

17. You are our final resort. You are our ruler, 
creator, and protector. But we are scorched in the fire of 
the name Taraka. We are extremely agitated. 

18. Our ruthless activities against him have turned 
out to be weak and ineffective, even as medicinal herbs of 
great potency are rendered ineffective in an ailment brought 
about by the combination of all deranged humours. 

19. We had some hope of victory in Sudar£ana the 
discus of Vi$nu. But even that discus has become ineffect- 
ive in his neck where it has fallen as though it were a floral 
offering to a deity. 

Brahmd said : — 

20. O sage, on hearing these words of the gods, I told 
them befitting the occasion. 

21. “O gods, the demon Taraka has flourished, thanks 
to my words of blessings. His destruction through me does 
not seem proper. 

22. Improper is the destruction through that source 
wherefrom he has flourished. Even a poisonous tree tended and 



Rudrasarhfntd 


535 


nurtured by one cannot be cut and felled down by oneself. 84 

23. Siva is the most suitable agent to carry out your 
task. But I myself cannot do anything remedial in this case. 

24. Taraka will be destroyed by his own sin. How 
that shall be done you know from me. I shall advise you. 

25. Thanks to the power of the boon granted by me. 
Taraka cannot be killed by me or by Vi$nu or by Siva or 
by any one of the gods. It is true. 

26. O gods, if there is a son born of Siva, he alone 
can kill the demon Taraka. 

27. O best of gods, you carry out the remedy I am 
suggesting. By the grace of lord Siva, it can be successfully 
accomplished. 

28. Sati, the daughter of Daksa, formerly cast off her 
body. She is now born of Menaka’s womb. That event is 
already known to you all. 

29. O gods, it is certain that lord Siva will marry her. 
Still you shall pursue your endeavour. 

30. Make such arrangements as to ensure the discharge 
of semen into Parvati, the daughter of Menaka. 

31. Siva is a great Yogin who can make semen flow 
upwards in the body. Only Parvati can make him discharge 
the semen downwards, out of the body. There is no other 
woman capable of it. 

32. That daughter of the lord of the mountains is now 
in her prime of youth. She is serving Siva in his penance on 
the Himalayas. 

33. As a result of the tenacious pleadings of her 
father, she is serving Him in meditation. 

34. She is the most beautiful lady in the three worlds. 
She stands in front of Him and worships Him. Still lord 
Siva who is engrossed in His meditation is not distracted by 
her presence. 

35. It is your duty to ascertain means to nlake Him 
desire Parvati for His wife. O gods, do something in that 
direction very quickly. 

36. I shall go to the demon’s abode and try to dissuade 
him from his obstinacy. O gods, you can go to your -abode 

24.. For the similarity of idea and verbal expression, cp. Kllid&sa'g 
Kumftra. 



536 


37. After saying thus to the gods I hastened to the 
demon Taraka. 1 addressed him thus. 

BrahmS said : — 

38. You are ruling over our heaven which contains 
the essence of all brilliance. You are desirous of getting 
more than what you bargained for at the time of your 
penance. 

39. I granted you a boon but not the kingdom of 
heaven. Hence leave off this region. You can rule over the 
earth. 

40. O best of Asuras, even there you can achieve the 
fruit of your activities as here in Devaloka. There is 
nothing to hesitate in this matter. 

41. After thus exhorting the demon to leave off heaven 
I, the lord o f all, remembered Siva and Siva and vanished 
from the scene. 

42. Leaving the heaven, Taraka descended to the earth. 
Stationed in the town Sonita, he ruled over the entire king- 
dom. 

43. On hearing my words, the gods bowed to me 
and went to Indra’s abode. They were duly received by 
Indra. 

‘44. After reaching there and consulting one another, the 
gods in a body lovingly told Indra. 

The gods said : — 

45. “O lord, you should carry out the suggestions of 
Brahma and see that Siva is lovingly inclined towards 
Siva. 

Brahmi said : — 

46. After explaining every thing to the lord, the gods 
went in all directions to their respective abodes with great 
pleasure. 



Rudrasarhkitd 


537 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

[The dialogue between Indra and KSmadeva) 

Brahmd said 

1 . When the gods had gone, Indra remembered Kama. 
He was so afflicted by Taraka, the wicked demon. 

2. In an instant, Kama, the lover of Rati, came there 
along with Vasanta. He was accompanied by Rati too. 
Being powerful enough to conquer the three worlds he was 
very haughty. 

3. Making due obeisance standing in front of Indra, 
the lofty-minded Kama joined his palms in reverence* and 
said : — 

Kama said : — 

4. “What is the matter that has cropped up now ? 
Wherefore was I remembered ? Please tell me. I am here 
to carry it out”. 

Brahmd said : — 

5. On hearing the words of Kama, Indra, the lord of the 
gods, said praising him lovingly saying “well done, very 
proper”. 

Indra said : — 

6. O Kama you arc blessed indeed, since you are 
in readiness to carry out the affair I have on hand. You 
have begun well. 

7. Listen to what is relevant to the context. I shall 
tell you everything. My job is equally your job and not 
otherwise. 

8. I have many friends and great friends at that. 
But, O Kama, I have no other friend on a par with you 
anywhere. 

9. O dear, for my conquest, the unparallelled thunder- 
bolt has been made. Even that weapon may sometimes be 
ineffective but you are never so. 

10. Who can be dearer than the person from whom 



538 Sivapur&qa 

one derives benefit ? Hence you, my greatest friend, must 
carry out my task. 

11. Time being accursed, a great irremediable misery 
has befallen me. None other than you can dispel it. 

12. The test of a donor is at the time of famine; the 
test of a warrior is at the time of battle; the test of a friend 
is at the time of ad/ersity and the test of a woman is in the 
financial weakness of the family. 

13. O dear, the test of a real friend is in the time of 
distress and is also based on what he does behind the back. 
It is not otherwise. This is truth. 

14. Now that an adversity has befallen me, which 
cannot be thwarted by anyone else, O dear friend, it shall 
be a test for you today. 

15. This is not a matter that brings pleasure to me 
alone. This is a matter that concerns all the gods and 
others too. 

Brahma said : — 

16. On hearing these words of Indra the fish-bannered 
god Kama spoke smilingly in words indicating love and 
gravity. 

Kdma said : — 

17. Why do you say like this ? I make no answer 
to you. A helping unreal friend is neither seen nor 
spoken of in the world. 

18. He who speaks much at the time of adversity 
will not turn out much. Yet, O king, my lord, I shall say 
something. Please listen. 

19. O dear friend, I shall cause the downfall of that 
enemy of yours who is performing a severe penance to 
usurp your position. 

20. I shall topple gods, sages, demons and others 
through the side-glances of a beautiful woman. I do not at 
all take human beings into consideration. 

21. Let your thunderbolt and other weapons of in- 
numerable varieties be set aside. What will they do when I, 
your friend, am present ? 

22. I can undoubtedly make Brahma and Vi?nu go 



Rudrasarhhitd 


539 


astray. Others are of no consideration. I shall make even 
Siva fall. 

23. I have only five arrows that are soft and flowery. 
My bow is of three types. That too is flowery. The bow- 
string consists of bees. 

24. My support and strength is my beloved wife 
Rat! Spring is my minister. O god, I am having five 
forces. The moon, the storehouse of nectar, is my friend. 

25. The sentiment of love is my commander-in-chief. 
The coquettish gestures and emotions are my soldiers. All 
these are soft and gentle. O Indra, I too am of that sort. 

26. An intelligent man shall put together things that 
are mutually complementary. You shall therefore engage me 
in a task that accords with my capacity. 

Brahma said : — 

27. On hearing his words, Indra was much pleased. 
Pleasing Kama, the bestower of cherished happiness, by 
means of his words, he spoke. 

Indra said : — 

28. O dear Kama, you are competent to carry out the 
task which I have conceived in my mind. It cannot be 
realised through anyone else. 

29. O Kama, foremost among my friends, listen. I 
shall explain truly for what I remembered you and desired 
your presence, O Kama. 

30. Securing a wonderful boon from Brahma, the great 
demon Taraka has become invincible and a pest for everyone. 

31. The entire world is harassed by him. Many virtu- 
ous rites are destroyed. The gods have become miserable and 
so also the sages. 

32. He had been fought by the gods to the utmost of 
their ability formerly. But the weapons of all the gods became 
quite futile. 

33. The noose of Varuija, the god of waters, snapped. 
When hurled at his neck by Visnu, the discus Sudar£ana was 
blunted. 

34. The death of this wicked demon has been foretold 



540 


by Brahma, the lord of the people, at the hands of the boy 
born of Siva, the great Yogin. 

35. O dear friend, this task must be achieved by you 
diligently. Then we, the gods, can be very happy. 

36. It will be beneficent to me. It will render the 
whole world happy. Realising the duties of a friend you are 
now to act. 

37. Siva is at present engaged in a great penance. The 
supreme lord is always independent. It is not to achieve 
any desire that He performs the penance. 

38. For the sake of gods, at the bidding of her father, 
Parvatl is attending on Him, I hear. 

39. O Kama, you shall certainly do everything neces- 
sary to bring about an interest in her in the mind of Siva 
who has self-control. 

40. You will become contented after this. Your mis- 
eries will be destroyed. Your exploit will be permanently 
established in the world. Not otherwise. 

Brahma said : — 

41. On being thus addressed, Kama was glad, his face 
beaming like a full blown lotus. He lovingly said to the 
lord of gods, “I shall undoubtedly do it.” 

42-43. After saying this when he said “So be it” he 
said “yes.” Kama accepted it because he was deluded by 
Siva’s illusion. Accompanied by his wife and Spring he went 
to the place where Siva, the Yogin, was performing penance. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

(Description of (he perturbation caused by Kama) 

Brahmd said : — 

1. After going there, the haughty Kama, deluded by 
Siva’s magic power, stationed himself, after first spreading the 
enchanting power of Spring all around. 

2» The enchanting influence of Spring spread every- 



Rudrasarhkitd 541 

where azound 0$adhiprastha, the penance-grove of Siva* the 
supreme lord, O excellent sage. 

3. O great sage, the groves bloomed with special ex- 
uberance, O excellent sage, due to his power. 

4. The fragrant flowers of Mango and ASoka trees 
shone heightening feelings of love. 

5. The water lilies with bees hovering on them proved 
to be the causes for the rise of love in the minds of everyone. 

6. The sweet cooings of the cuckoos heightened emo- 
tions of love. They were exquisite and pleasing to the 
mind. 

7. O sage, diverse sounds of the hummings of the bees 
rang sweet in the ears of everyone heightening temptations of 
love. 

8- The bright light of the moon scattered all around 
appeared to be the emissary of lovers and their beloveds. 

9. At that time the Kaladlpika (brilliant lamp) in- 
duced reticent haughty persons to love. O good sir, the wind 
blew gently but distressed those who were separated from 
their beloveds. 

10. Thus the vast diffusion of Spring caused the dis- 
play of emotions of love. It was unbearable to the forest- 
dwelling sages. 

11. O sage, then, even the insentient beings had the 
emotions of love. What about the state of sentient ones ? 

12. Thus spring employed his unbearable power heigh- 
tening the love of all living beings. 

13. On seeing the untimely display of spring, Siva the 
lord, who had assumed a physical body indulging in divine 
sports, thought it surprising. 

14. But He, the chief of the self-controlled and the 
remover of man’s misery continued his severe penance. 

15. When spring spread everywhere, Kama accom- 
panied by Rati stood on his left side, with the arrow of mango 
blossom taken out and kept in readiness. 

16. Enchanting all people, he spread his influence. 
Who was not enchanted on seeing Kama in the company of 
Rati ? 

17. Thus they initiated their dalliance. The senti- 
ment of love too accompanied by coquettish gestures and 



emotions reached the vicinity of Siva along with his attend- 
ants. 

18. Kama, usually stationed within the mind mani- 
fested himself outside. But he could not find any vulnerable 
loop-hole in Siva whereby he could enter Him. 

19. When Kama did not secure any entry within the 
great Yogin, he became deluded and frightened much through 
the magical power of Siva. 

20. Who could gain access to Siva in meditation, who 
could fix an eye in his forehead that resembled fire with 
shooting blazing flames ? 

21. In the mean time Parvatl came there along with 
her two maids and brought various kinds of flowers for Siva’s 
worship. 

22. Certainly Parvatl had a greater beauty than the 
most exquisite lady described by people on the earth. 

23. When she wore pretty flowers of the season how 
could her beauty be described even in a hundred years ? 

24. No sooner did she enter within the proximity of 
Siva than He came out of his meditation for a short while. 

25. Profiting by that opportune moment, Kama, by 
means of his arrow Harsana delighted the moon-crest god 
Siva who was nearby. 

26. O sage, in assistance to Kama, Parvatl reached 
the place near Siva with emotions of love and accompanied by 
Spring. 

27. In order to make the trident-bearing lord take 
interest in her, Kama drew his bow very carefully and dis- 
charged his flowery arrow on Him. 

28. As was her usual practice she approached Siva, 
bowed to Him, worshipped Him and stood in front of Him 
(awaiting further instructions). 

29. Parvatl was stared at by lord Siva, while she was 
laying bare some of the limbs bashfully, as is natural to 
women in such circumstances. 

30. Remembering the boon granted to her by Brahma 
formerly, O sage, lord Siva began to describe her limbs joy- 
fully. 



Rudrasarhkitd 543 

Siva said : — 

31. “Is this your face or the moon ? Arc these your 
eyes or lotus petals ? These two eyebrows are the bows of 
K&ma of noble soul. 

32. Is this your lower lip or Bimba fruit? Is this 
your nose or the beak of a parrot ? Do I hear your voice 
or the cooing of the cuckoo ? Is this your slender waist or 
the sacrificial altar ? 

33. How can her gait be described ? How can her 
comely appearance be described ? How can the flowers be 
described ? How can the clothes be described ? 

34. Whatever is graceful and sweet in the creation has 
been incorporated here. Indeed, all her limbs are exquisite 
in every respect. 

35 How blessed is this Parvati of mysteriously wonder- 
ful features. There is no other woman equal to her in beauty 
in the three worlds. 

36. She is a storehouse of the finest beauty. She has 
wondrous beautiful limbs. She is an enchantress of even sages. 
She increases great happiness.* * 

Brahma said : — 

37. After describing her body again and again, recoll- 
ecting the boon granted by Brahma, Siva stopped. 

38. When Siva put His hand within her garment and 
moved it, she, as is natural to women, bashfully withdrew 
and kept aloof. 

39. O sage, then Parvati smilingly laid bare some parts 
of her body and cast graceful glances at Him with great 
pleasure. 

40. On seeing these movements and gestures Siva 
became fascinated. Lord Siva indulging in great divine 
sports spoke these words. 

^41. “I feel great pleasure on merely seeing her. What 
pleasure shall I derive by embracing her ?” 

42. Thinking thus only for a moment, the enlightened 
Siva became detached, honoured Parvati and spoke. 

43. “How wonderful and mysterious is the situation that 
has arisen ! How is it that 1 have been deluded and fascin- 



544 Sivapurdna 

ated ? Though I am the lord and master, I have been pert- 
urbed by Kama. 

44. If I, the master, were to yearn for the touch of a 
woman’s limbs what will not be done by other incompetent 
and insignificant creatures”. 

45. Thus resuming detachment, lord Siva forbade her 
sitting on the couch. How can there be a downfall for the 
great lord Siva ? 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

[Kama's destruction by Siva) 


Ndrada said : — 

1. O Brahma, the most fortunate one, what happened 
then ? Be pleased to tell me that story that destroys our sins 
altogether. 

Brahma said : — 

2. O dear one, hear the story of what happened there- 
after. Out of love for me I shall recount Siva’s sports that 
bring about joy. 

3. On seeing the dissipation of His courage, lord Siva, 
the great Yogin, thought within Himself wondering much. 

Siva said : — 

4. How is it that obstacles have cropped up while I 
am performing the great penance ? Who can be that wicked 
person who has made my mind highly perturbed ? 

5. With love I have described in bad taste another 
man’s woman. I have contravened rules of virtue and 
transgressed the bounds of the Vedas. 

Brahma, said : — 

6. After thinking like this, the great Yogin, the goal 
of the good, surveyed all round, his suspicion having been 
aroused. 

7. He saw Kama stationed on His left side with his 



Rudfasarhhitd 


545 


bow fully drawn and ready to discharge the arrow. Kama 
was haughty and so was very senseless. 

8. O Narada, on seeing Kama in that attitude, instan- 
taneously anger was aroused in lord Siva, the supreme soul. 

9. O sage, standing high up in the air, holding the 
arrow and the bow, Kama discharged his arrow, usually 
unerring on Siva 

10. The infallible weapon became futile on the great 
lord. The furious weapon calmed down in regard to the 
great soul, Siva. 

11. Kama was frightened when his weapon failed. 
Standing there and seeing lord Siva, the conqueror of death 
in front, he trembled. 

12. O great sage, when his endeavour became futile, 
Kama who was frightened much remembered Indra and all 
other gods. 

13. O great sage, remembered by Kama, Indra and 
other gods came there, bowed to and eulogised Siva. 

14. When the gods eulogised thus, a great flame of fire 
sprang up from the third eye of the infuriated Siva. 

15. That fire originating instantaneouly from the eye in 
the middle of His forehead blazed with flames shooting up 
and resembling the fire of final dissolution in refulgence. 

16. After shooting up in the sky, it fell on the ground 
and rolled over the earth all round. 

17. Even before the gods had the time to say “Let him 
be forgiven, let him be excused” it reduced Kama to ashes. 

18. When the heroic Kama was thus slain, the gods 
became miserable. In their agitation they lamented much 
and saying “O what has happened ?** they cried aloud. 

19. With pallid face and limbs, the extremely agitated 
daughter of the king of mountains returned to her palace tak- 
ing the maids along with her. 

20. Due to the misery on account of the death of her 
husband, Rati fell down unconscious, as if dead. 

21. When she regained consciousness after a while, 
Rati in her great agitation lamented loudly and said: — 

Rati said : — 

22. “What shall I do ? Where can I go ? What is it 



that the gods have done in making my husband a victim 
thus ? They have called him here and destroyed him. 

23. O ! O ! O lord Kama, dearer to me than my 
vital airs, O bestowcr of happiness, what has happened here ? 
Ha, HI, my dear, my dear f” 

Brahma said : — 

24. Lamenting thus and crying out various piteous 
words she beat with her hands, kicked with her legs and 
plucked her hairs. 

25. O Narada, on hearing her lamentation even the 
beasts and residents of the forest, nay all the immobile trees 
and bushes became miserable. 

26. In the meantime Indra and other gods remem- 
bered lord Siva and consoled Rati saying as follows: — 

The gods said : — 

27. Take some ashes and preserve them. With effort 
check your fear. The lord will resuscitate your lover. You 
will regain your lover again. 

28. There is none who gives us happiness or misery. 
All enjoy and experience the fruit of what they do. In 
vain do you curse the gods. 

Brahma said : — 

29. After consoling Rati thus, all the gods approached 
Siva and propitiated Him. With great devotion they spoke 
these words to Him. 

The gods said : — 

30. O lord, O great god, favourably disposed to those 
who seek refuge in you, be pleased to listen to these well 
intended words of ours. 

31. O Siva, be pleased to ponder over the action of 
Kama. O lord Siva, there is no tinge of selfishness in what 
Kama has done. 

32. O lord, he had been induced to do so by all the 
gods harassed by the wicked Taraka. O Siva, please know 
that it is not otherwise. 

33. O lord, the chaste Rati is lonely and miserable 



Rudrasamhitd 547 

now. O lord Siva, she is in great lamentation, O bestower 
of everything, please console her. 

34. If you have finally disposed off Kama, O Siva, you 
are desirous of annihilating all the gods by means of your 
fury. 

35. On seeing the distress of Rati, the gods are almost 
doomed. Hence you must remove the distress of Rati. 

Brahmd said : — 

36. On hearing their words, lord Siva was pleased. 
He said this to all the gods. 

Siva said : — 

37. O gods, O sages, all of you listen attentively to 
my words. What has happened, thanks to my fury, cannot 
be altered. 

38. The lord Kama, the husband of Rati, shall 
remain bodiless till Visnu incarnates as Kr§na on the earth 
and marries Rukmini. 

39. Krsna will beget Kama in Rukmini when he 
goes to Dvaraka 25 and begins to procreate children. 

40. His name will certainly be Pradyumna. The demon 
Sambara will abduct the boy at the time of his very birth. 

41. After abducting the boy, the great demon, Sambara, 
will throw him in the sea. The foolish fellow will take him 
for dead and will return to his city. 

42. O Rati, you shall stay in his city till then. There 
alone you will get back your husband Pradyumna. 

43. Kama in the name of Pradyumna will regain his 
wife after killing Sambara in a battle. O gods, he will be 
happy thereafter. 

44. After taking all the valuable properties of Sambara, 
O gods, he will go to the city again along with her. These 
words of mine are true. 

Brahmd said — 

45. On hearing these words of Siva, the gods heaved a 
sigh of relief. Joining their palms in reverence and bowing 
to Him they said : — 

25 This town, associated with Lord Krwa, is situated in Kathiawar. 



548 Skapurtya 

The gods said : — 

46. “O great god, lord of the gods, O lord, the ocean 
of mercy, please resuscitate Kama quickly. O Siva, save the 
life of Rat!.” 

Brahma said : — 

47. On hearing these words of the gods, great God 
became delighted. The lord of all, the ocean of mercy, spoke 
again. 

Siva said : — 

48. O gods, I am delighted. I shall resuscitate Kama 
within myself. He will be one of my Ganas and will sport 
about always. 

49. O gods, this story should not be narrated in the 
presence of any one. All of you return to your abodes. I 
shall destroy all miseries. 

Brahma said : — 

50. After saying this Rudra vanished even as the gods 
were eulogising Him. The gods became delighted and free 
from mental suspense. 

51. O sage, abiding by the directions of Siva and 
consoling Rati by means of the conciliatory words of Siva, 
the gods returned to their respective places. 

52. O excellent sage, then Rati, the wife of Kama 
went to the city and waited for the time mentioned by Siva. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

( The story of the submarine fire) 

Ndrada said : — 

1. O Brahma, please tell me “Where did the flame of 
fire emerging from the eye of Siva go ?” Please tell me also 
the further story of the moon-crested lord. 

Brahma said : — 

2. When the fire from the third eye of Siva reduced 



Rudrasarhhitd 549 

Kama to ashes it began to blaze all round without burning 
anything. 

3. A huge hue and cry was raised in the three worlds 
consisting of the mobile and immobile creatures. Immediately 
the gods and sages sought refuge in me. 

4. All of them in their agitation bowed to and eulo- 
gised me with their palms joined in reverence and the heads 
bent down. They intimated to me their grief. 

5. On hearing that I pondered over the reason for 
the same, and remembering Siva humbly I went there in order 
to protect the three worlds. 

6. That fire, out to burn everything, very brilliant with 
its shooting flames, was thwarted by me as I had the capa- 
city by Siva’s grace. 

7. O sage, then I made that fire of fury, out to burn 
the three worlds, tender in its blaze and mare-like in 
shape. 

8. Taking that fire mare-like in form, at the will of 
Siva, I, the lord of the worlds, went to the sea shore, for the 
benefit of the worlds. 

9. O sage, on seeing me arrived there, the sea took 
a human form and approached me with palms joined in 
reverence. 

10. Bowing to and duly eulogising me, the grand- 
father of all the worlds, the ocean said lovingly. 

The ocean said : — 

11-12. “O Brahma, the lord of all, why have you 
come here ? Please command me with pleasure knowing me 
to be your servant”. On hearing the words of the ocean 
I remembered Siva. I spoke with love in order to benefit 
the world. 

Brahmd said : — 

13. O dear, intelligent one, causing the welfare of all 
the worlds, O ocean, induced by Siva’s will, I shall explain 
to you. 

14. This is the fire of fury of lord Siva, the great 
lord. It is in the form of a mare now. After burning 
Kama it was about to burn everything. 



550 


Sivapurtifa 


15. At the will of Siva I was requested by the gods 
who were harassed by it, and so I went there and suppressed 
the fire. 

16. I gave it the form of a mare. I have brought 
it here. O ocean, I ask you to be merciful. 

17. This fury of lord Siva, now in the form of a 
mare, you will bear till the final dissolution of all living 
beings. 

18. O lord of rivers, when I shall come and stay 
here, you shall release it. This is Siva’s wonderful fire of 
fury. 

19. His perpetual diet shall consist of your waters. 
This shall be preserved by you with effort lest it should go 
down. 

20. Thus requested by me, the ocean agreed. None 
else could have grasped Siva’s fire of fury thus. 

21. That fire in the form of a mare entered the ocean 
and began to consume the currents of water. It blazed 
with all its shooting flames. 

22. O sage, then, delighted in mind I returned to 
my abode. The ocean of divine form bowed to me and 
vanished. 

23 O great sage, the entire universe, freed from the 
fear of that fire became normal. The gods and the sages 
became happy. 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 

(Narada instructs Pdrvati) 

. N&rada said : — 

1. O dear Brahma, O disciple of Visnu, of great 
intellect, O Creator of three worlds, this is a very wonderful 
story of the great soul Siva that has been narrated. 

2. When Kama had been reduced to ashes by the 
fire from the third eye of Siva and when that fire had been 
deposited in the ocean what happened thereafter ? 

3. What did Goddess Parvati, the daughter of the lord 



Rudrasarhhitd 551 

of mountains, do? O storehouse of mercy, please tell me 
now where she went along with her maids. 

Brahmd said : — 

4. O dear, of great intellect, listen to the story of the 
moon crested lord, my master and the cause of great enjoy- 
ment and protection. 

5. A wonderfully loud sound arose covering the 
whole firmament when the fire issuing from Siva’s eye 
burnt Kama. 

6. On hearing that loud report and seeing Kama 
burnt, Parvatl was terribly frightened and she returned to 
her abode along with her maids. 

7. Himavat along with his attendants and relatives 
was surprised on hearing that loud report. He was agitated 
on remembering that his daughter had gone there. 

8. On seeing his daughter excessively agitated, the lord 
of the mountains was sorry. The lord of the mountains 
approached her gently as she was crying due to her separa- 
tion from Siva. 

9-10. Approaching her and wiping off her eyes with 
his hand he said — “Dear daughter, do not be afraid, do not 
cry. He took her on his lap and consoled her. The lord 
of the mountains took her immediately to his palace. 

11. When Siva had vanished after burning Kama, 
Parvatl became extremely agitated due to His separation. She 
did not attain pleasure anywhere. 

12. Returning to her father’s abode and meeting her 
mother, Siva, the daughter of the mountain, considered 
herself born again. 

13. She cursed her own beauty. She said to herself. 
"O. I am doomed”. The daughter of the lord of mountains 
did not regain composure though consoled and assuaged by 
the maids. 

14. She did not achieve happiness and peace in 
sleeping, drinking, bathing, or sitting amidst her maids. 

15. Remembering the various gestures and movements 
of Siva, she muttered to herself ever and anon — “Fie upon 
my beauty. Fie on my birth and activity”. 

16. Thus Parvatl was much distressed in mind due to 



552 Sivapurdna 

separation from Siva. She did not at all feel happy. She 
always muttered “Siva, Siva.” 

17. O dear, with her consciousness centred round the 
Pinaka-bearing lord, she continued to stay in the palace of 
her father. Siva bewailed much and fainted frequently. 

18. The lord of the mountains, Menaka, and their sons 
chief of whom was Mainaka of undisturbed mind, tried to 
console her but still she did not forget Siva. 

19. O celestial sage, O intelligent one, employed by 
Indra, the slayer of Bala, you came to Himalaya mountain 
roaming here and there as you pleased. 

20. You were then worshipped by the noble-souled 
mountain. You enquired of his health and happiness and 
you were seated in a noble seat. 

21. Then the lord of I he mountains told you the story 
of his daughter from her service to Siva to the burning of 
Kama by Him. 

22. O sage, on hearing that, you told the lord of the 
mountains — “Worship Siva.” You stood up, remembered 
Siva mentally and took leave of him. 

23. O sage, leaving him you hastened to meet Parvati 
secretly, you a favourite of Siva, perfectly wise and engaged 
in helping the world. 

24. Approaching Parvati and addressing her, you spoke 
to her respectfully. You are foremost among the wise and 
you were interested in her welfare. Your words were true. 

Ndrada said: — 

25. O Parvati, listen. I am sympathetic to you. I 
shall speak truly. My words will be beneficent to you in all 
respects. They will lead to the achievement of your desire. 
They are free from aberrations. 

26. The great god has been served by you without 
austerities. You had some pride which He, the blesser of the 
distressed, eradicated. 

27. O Siva, after burning Kama, lord Siva though 
favourably disposed to His devotees, left you, since the lord 
is a great Yogin and so unattached to you. 

28. Hence you shall propitiate Him by performing a 



Rudrascatihitd 


553 


great penance. Siva will take you as His wife, after you 
have been sanctified by austerities. 

29. You will never forsake the auspicious Siva. O god- 
dess, you will not take any one other than Siva as your 
husband. 

Brahmd said : — 

30. On hearing your words, O sage, Pfirvati, the daugh- 
ter of the mountain, heaved a sigh of relief and gladly spoke 
to you with palms joined in reverence. 

PdrvaH said : — 

31. O sage, O omniscient one, you help all the worlds, 
please tell me a formula for the propitiation of lord Siva. 

32. No sacred rite will ever fructify without a good 
preceptor. Truly this eternal statement of the Vedas was 
heard by me before. 

Brahmd said : — 

33. On hearing these words of Parvati, O excellent sage, 
you taught her the five-syllabled mantra of Siva* in accord- 
ance with the sacred law. 

34. O sage, generating her faith you told her the 
supreme efficacy of the great formula thus. 

Ndrada said : — 

35. O goddess, listen to the wonderful efficacy of this 
formula on hearing which Siva becomes excessively pleased. 

36. This formula is a king of all formulas. It yields 
all cherished desires, bestows all worldly pleasures and salva- 
tion, and appeals much to Siva. 

37. Repeating this formula in accordance with the in- 
junctions you shall propitiate Siva. He will certainly 
appear before you. 

38. O Siva, meditate on His form, observing all restr- 
aints. Repeat the five-syllabled mantra. Siva will be pleased 
quickly. 

39. O chaste lady, perform the penance thus. Lord 
* The five-syllabled Mantra of §i\a : 



554 Sioapur&Qa 

Siva can be attained through penance. Every one attains the 
desired fruits in penance and not otherwise. 

Brahmd said : — 

40. O Narada, after saying thus to ParvatT, you, the 
favourite of Siva, went to heaven, a casual visitor engaged in 
the welfare of the gods. 

41. O Narada, on hearing your words and securing 
the excellent five-syllabled mantra, Parvatl was extremely 
pleased. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 

( Description of PdrvatVs penance) 


Brahmd said : — 

1. After your departure, O celestial sage, convinced 
that Siva could be achieved by means of penance, Parvatl 
became glad and decided to perform penance. 

2. She took her maids Jaya and Vijaya into confidence 
and through them made her parents acquainted. 

3. First she wanted her father Himavat, the lord of 
mountains, to hear her humble words. 

The maids said : — 

4-5. O Himavat, let the words of your daughter be 
heard through us. She wishes to make her body, beauty and 
family fruitful. This can be achieved through penance and 
not otherwise. 

6. O excellent mountain, the permission may kindly be 
given — “Let Parvatl go to the forest and perform penance 
there”. 

Brahmd said : — 

7. O excellent sage, thus requested by Parvatl through 
the maids, the lord of the mountains carefully considered the 
proposal and said: 

Himdcala said : — 

8. This appeals to me. I it appeals to Men! as it 
ought to be, what else can be a better course ? 



Rudrasarhhitd 


555 


9. There is no doubt about it that my House will be 
fortunate. If her mother also likes this, what can be more 
auspicious than this ? 

Brahmd said : — 

10. After hearing the words spoken by her father and 
(in a way) commanded by him, the two maids went to her 
mother along with her. 

11. O Narada, approaching ParvatPs mother, they 
bowed down and with palms joined in reverence they respect- 
fully spoke thus. 

The maids said : — 

12. O mother, O gentle lady, please listen to the words 
of your daughter. Obeisance be to you. You will listen 
with pleasure and act accordingly. 

13. For the sake of attaining Siva, your daughter wishes 
to perform a severe penance. She has secured the permission 
of her father. She now wants to seek it from you. 

14. O chaste lady, she is desirous of making her beauty 
fruitful. If your permission too is received, the penance can 
be performed. 

Brahmd said : — 

15. O excellent sage, after saying this, the maids 
became silent. Distressed in mind, Mena did not accept the 
proposal. 

16. Then Parvati herself spoke to her mother joining 
her palms in humility and remembering the lotus-like feet of 
Siva. 

Parvati said : — 

17. O mother, I shall be going in the morning for 
performing penance to achieve Siva. Please permit me to go 
to the penance-grove for the task. 

Brahmd said : — 

18. On hearing the words of her daughter, Mena was 
distressed. That chaste lady called her daughter near and 
spoke to her in dejection. 



556 SivapurdQa 

MM said : — 

19. O daughter Siva, if you are distressed, if you wish 
to perform penance, you can do it at home. O Parvati, do 
not go out. 

20. Where do you wish to go for performing penance ? 
All the deities are in my house. All the holy centres and the 
different temples too are here. 

21. Do not be stubborn, dear daughter. You shall not 
go out of your home. What did you achieve when you went 
out previously ? What are you going to achieve at present ? 

22. Dear child, slender is your body and hard is the 
penance. Hence you shall perform penance here. You shall 
not go out. 

23. For a woman to go to a penance-grove for the 
realisation of her desire is what we have never heard of 
before. Hence, dear daughter, do not go out for penance. 

Brakmd said : — 

24. Thus, in various ways, the daughter was dissuaded 
by her mother. But she did not find any pleasure except in 
propitiating Siva. 

25. Parvati acquired the name Uma since she was 
prevented from going to forest by Mena and forbidden to 
perform penance. 

26. O sage, on realising that Parvati was quite deject- 
ed, Mena, the beloved of the mountain, permitted her to 
perform penance. 

27. O excellent sage, on getting permission from her 
mother, Parvati remembered Siva and felt happy. 

28. Bowing to her parents with joy, Parvati remember- 
ed Siva and set out for performing penance along with her 
maids. 

29. Discarding all the fine clothes of her taste, she 
wore tree-barks and the fine girdle of Muiija grass. 

30. She eschewed necklace and wore the pure deer 
skin. She arrived at Gangavatarana ?6 for performing penance. 

31. The Gaiigavatarana was in the Himalayan ridge 


96. See No. 22, P. 515 



Rudrasarhhitd 557 

where K&ma was burnt by Siva who was performing medi- 
tation. 

32. Oh dear, that Himalayan ridge devoid of Siva was 
painfully seen by Parvatl, the mother of the universe, the 
daughter of the mountain. 

33. She stood for a while in the place where formerly 
Siva had performed penance and became dispirited by the 
pangs of separation. 

34. Crying aloud “Alas O Siva” she, the daughter of 
the mountain, lamented sorrowfully and anxiously. 

35. Suppressing the delusion with fortitude after a 
long time Parvatl, the daughter of Himavat, got berself initia- 
ted for the observance of ritualistic activities. 

36. She performed penance in the excellent holy 
centre Srngitirtha which (later) acquired the title “Gauri- 
Sikhara 27 ” due to her performance of penance thereon. 

37. O sage, many beautiful holy plants were laid there 
by Parvatl for testing the fruitfulness of her penance. 

38. Neatly cleaning the ground, the beautiful lady 
built the altar. Then the penance, difficult to be performed 
even by the sages, was begun. 

39. Suppressing her sense-organs with her mind, she 
started the great penance in a place within the proximity. 

40. In the summer she kept a perpetually blazing fire 
all round and remaining within continued muttering the 
mantra. 

41. In the rainy season she continuously remained 
sitting on the bare ground on the rock and got herself drench- 
ed by the downpour of rain. 

42. During the winter, with great devotion she remain- 
ed in water throughout. During snowfall and in the nights 
too she performed her penance observing fast. 

43. Performing such austerities and engrossed in the 
muttering of the five-syllabled mantra, Parvatl meditated on 
Siva, the bestower of fruits of our cherished desires. 

* 44 . Everyday during leisure time she used to water the 
trees planted by her along with her maids and extended acts 
of hospitality. 

27. It it one of the famous peaks of the Himalaya*. 



558 $ivapur&9& 

45. Chill gusts of wind, cool showers, and unbearable 
heat she bore with equanimity. 

46. Different sorts of worries she did not mind at all. 
O sage, fixing her mind in Siva alone she remained firm and 
steady. 

47. The first year she spent in taking fruits, the second 
in taking leaves, in the course of her penance. She spent 
many years thus. 

48. Then Siva, the daughter of Himavat, eschewed 
even the leaves. She did not take any food. She was 
engrossed in the performance of penance. 

49. Since she, the daughter of Himavat, eschewed 
leaves from her diet she was called Aparna by the gods. 

50. Then Parvati performed great penance standing on 
one leg and remembering Siva, she continued muttering the 
five- syllabled mantra. 

51. Clad in barks of trees, wearing matted hair and 
eager in the meditation of Siva, she surpassed even sages by 
her penance. 

52. Parvati thus spent three thousand years in the pen- 
ance-grove performing penance and meditating on lord Siva. 

53. Remaining for a short while in the place where 
Siva had performed penance for sixty thousand years, Parvati 
thought like this. 

54. Does not the Supreme lord know me observing 
these ritualistic activities now ? Wherefore am I not followed 
by him though engaged in penance ? 

55. In the Sastras and the Vedas, lord Siva is always 
sung m praise by the sages as the bestower of welfare, omni- 
scient, all-pervading and all-seer. 

56. The lord is the bestower of all riches, the moulder 
of fine emotions, the bestower of the desires of devotees and 
the remover of their distress. 

57. If I am devoted to the bull-bannered lord, dis- 
carding all desires, may He be pleased with me. 

58. If the mantra of the Narada Tantra, consisting of 
five syllables has been continuously repeated by me with 
great devotion may He be pleased with me. 

59. If I am a devotee without aberrations of Siva, the 
lord of all, may He be extremely pleased with me. 



Rudrasaifihitd 


559 


60. Pondering frequently like this incessantly, she per- 
formed penance for a long time, with her face turned down- 
wards, her apparel of bark and mind without any aber- 
rations. 

61. She performed penance difficult to be performed 
even by the sages, so much so that people were struck with 
surprise. 

62. All of them came there to witness her penance. 
Considering themselves blessed, they proclaimed thus approv- 
ingly. 

63. “To follow the standard of the virtuous personages 
is declared to be conducive to greatness. There is no delimi- 
tation in penance. Virtue shall be honoured by the wise 
always. 

64. After seeing or hearing about the penance of this 
lady what penance will be pursued by a man ? A penance 
greater than this has never been before, nor will it 
ever be”. 

65. Saying thus, they praised the penance of Parvati 
and joyously returned to their abodes. Even persons of 
sturdy countenance praised her penance. 

66. O sage, listen to another surprising influence 
of the penance of Parvati, the mother of the universe. 

67. Even the naturally inimical beings in and around 
her hermitage became free from animosity due to her 
power. 

68. Lions and cows prone to the passions of love, 
hatred etc. ceased to harass one another, thanks to her 
greatness. 

69. O excellent sage, creatures like cats, mice etc. 
who are born enemies to one another did not exhibit any 
bad characteristics there. 

70. O excellent sage, trees bore fruits, grasses grew 
in plenty and flowers of variegated nature and colour 
blossomed there. 

71. The entire forest became comparable to Kailasa as 
it were the achievement of her penance. 



560 


fxiapurdrui 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 

( Attempt of Himavat to dissuade Parvatf ; gods go to 
meet Siva) 


Brahma said : — 

1. O excellent sage, while Parvatl was engaged in 
penance thus for attaining Siva, a long time elapsed but Siva 
did not appear. 

2. Then Himavat came there along with his wife, 
sons and ministers and spoke to Parvatl, who had resolved to 
continue her penance. 

Himavat said : — 

3- O Parvatl, O fortunate one, do not torture your- 
self by this penance. Dear girl, Siva is not to be seen. 
Certainly he is detached 

4. You are a young woman of tender limbs. You 
will be overpowered and exhausted by this penance. There 
is no doubt about it. I am speaking the truth. 

5. Hence, O comely lady, get up. Gome back to our 
house. Of what avail is Siva by whom Kama has been re- 
duced to ashes ? 

6. O goddess, hence not being emotional, Siva will not 
come to claim you as the excellent lady. Why do you yearn 
for him ? 

7. Just as the moon in the sky cannot be caught, O 
sinless girl, so also Siva is inaccessible. Know this. 

Brahmd said : — 

8-9. The same thing was said by Mena, Sahya 28 moun- 
tain, Meru, 29 Mandara 30 , Mainaka 01 and Krauftca 32 and 

28. It is one of the seven piincipal mountain ranges in India, a 
part of the Western Ghats at some distance fi om the sea. For details 
see P. 164. 

29 It is a fabulous mountain, variously identified, supposed to be 
situated in the centre of the earth 

30. It is a great mountain which the Gods used for churning the 
ocean. It is supposed to be the mountain so named in Bh&galpur. For 
details see P. 48. 

31. See Note No. 12. P. 494 

32. It is a mountain in the Himalaya* stretching from Kailisa to 
the south. It is personified here. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


561 


others, The unafflicted Parvati was thus sought to be dissuad- 
ed by various arguments. 

10. When she was thus addressed by all of them, she 
with a broad smile, spoke to Himavat. 

Parvati said : — 

11. O father, O mother, O kinsmen, have all of you 
forgotten what I had said formerly. Even now listen to my vow. 

12. This great God by whom Kama has been burnt in 
fury is detached (you say). I shall propitiate him, by means 
of penance. He is favourably disposed to His devotees. 

1 3. All of you please go to your respective abodes with 
delight. He will certainly be pleased. You need not be 
anxious over this. 

14. With my penance alone here itself, I shall bring 
Him who burnt Kama and the mountainous forest. 

15. Sada^iva can be easily served through penance. 
Ye fortunate Sirs, please know this truth. I am telling you 
the truth. 

16. After addressing thus, her father Himalaya, her 
mother Menaka, her brothers Mainaka and Mandara, the 
eloquent Parvati. the daughter of the king of mountains, kept 
quiet. 

17. Thus addressed by Parvati, the lord of mountains 
and the other mountains went back the way they came, sur- 
prised within and praising her. 

18. After all of them had departed, she with firm re- 
solve in the great Truth, accompanied by her maids per- 
formed a severe penance. 

19. O excellent sage, by that great penance the three 
worlds including the gods, Asuras and men, nay all the mo- 
bile and immobile beings, became heated. 

20-21. The Prajapatis, the Guhyakas and others experi- 
enced great distress but could not understand the reason 
thereof. The gods, Asuras, Yak§as, Kinnaras, Caranas, Siddhas, 
Sadhyas, the sages, the serpents and the Vidyadharas too had 
the same experience 33 . 

33. Siddhas, Sadhyas, Yak?as, Kinnaras, Vidy&dharas, Nagas and 
Guhyakas are a class of semi-divine beings, thousands in num her, of 
great purity and holiness, who reside in the Himalayas attending on Siva. 



22. All of them, Indra and others, who were extremely 
agitated, took leave of their preceptor and sought refuge in 
me on the mountain Sumeru. All their limbs had been 
scorched. 

23. Devoid of splendour, and agitated excessively they 
bowed to and eulogised me. They spoke simultaneously 
thus. 

The gods said : — 

24. “O lord, the whole of this universe consisting of 
the mobile and immobile has been created by you. Why is 
it scorched so much ? We do not understand. 

25. O Brahma, please tell us the reason. O lord, you 
shall protect us, the gods whose bodies have been scorched. 
There is none else to protect us”. 

Brahma said : — 

26-27. On hearing their words I remembered Siva and 
pondered over everything. I realised that the universe was 
scorched as a result of Parvatfs penance. Accompanied by 
them I hastened respectfully to the milk ocean to inform 
Vi?nu about it. 

28. Reaching that place along with the gods, I saw 
Vi?nu shining lustrously on a splendid seat. Bowing to and 
eulogising him with palms joined in reverence I spoke. 

29. “Save, save, O Visnu, save us who have sought 
refuge in you, being scorched by the great and severe pen- 
ance of Parvatl. 

30. On hearing these words of mine on behalf of the 
heaven-dwellers, lord Visnu seated on the Seipent couch 34 
spoke to us : — 

Vifnu said : — 

31. The entire reason has been known to me. It is 


Praj&patis arc the 'ten lords of created beings first created by 
Brahma. 

34‘ Vispu is represented in human form slumbering on the serpent 
Sefa and floating on the waters of the ocean. 



RudresaMnUt 


563 


caused by ParvatTs penance. I shall now go to lord Siva 
accompanied by all of you. 

32. O gods, we shall request lord Siva to approach 
Parvati and marry her for the welfare of all the worlds. 

33. We shall do everything necessary to make the 
Pinaka-bearing lord of the gods go there to grant the boon 
to Siva. 

34. Therefore now we shall go to the place where 
the great lord Siva of severe penance, the conferrer of all 
auspicious things, stays. 

Brahma said : — 

35. On hearing those words of Visnu, the gods and the 
rest became excessively afraid of Siva, the furious, the annihila- 
tor and the one desirous of burning everything. 

The gods said : — 

36. We dare not go near the great lord Siva who is 
very terrifying, furious and who has the burning brilliance 
of the deadly fire of dissolution. 

37. Undoubtedly he will burn us all in His anger 
as Kama, the indefatigable god, has been burnt by him. 

Brahma said : — 

38. O sage, on hearing the words of Indra and others, 
Visnu, the lord of Laksmi spoke these words, consoling all 
the gods. 

Visnu said : — 

39. O gods, listen with pleasure and attention to my 
words. The lord, the destroyer of the fear of gods, will not 
consume you in fire. 

40. Considering Siva to be benevolent you shall 
shrewdly seek refuge in Him, 

41. We shall all seek refuge in Siva, the ancient 
Purusa, the lord, of excellent features, . greater than the 
greatest, the supreme self, the great one resorting to 
penance. 



Sivapur&na 


564 

BrahmS said : — 

42. Thus urged by the great lord Vi§nu they set out 
desirous of seeing the Pinaka-bearing lord Siva. 

43. At first Visnu and others who were anxious to see 
the penance of Parvatl went to her hermitage which was on 
the way. 

44. On seeing the excellent penance of Parvatl and 
being enveloped by her refulgence they bowed to her who 
was engaged in penance and who had brilliant features. 

45. After praising the penance of Parvatl whose body 
was achievement personified, the gods went to the place 
where the bull-bannered lord was present. 

46. After reaching there the gods sent you in, O sage, 
and stood at a distance from Siva who had reduced Kama 
to ashes. They were watching. 

47. O Narada, you the fearless devotee of Siva 
approached Siva and saw the lord extremely pleased. 

48. O sage, you came back again and beckoning to 
the gods, with effort you took them, Vi$nu and others, to 
Him. 

49. Then Visnu and other gods went there and saw 
lord Siva, favourably disposed to His devotees, delighted and 
comfortably seated. 

50-51. Then Visnu, the gods, the Siddhas, the sages 
and I bowed to and eulogised Siva seated in the Yogic 
posture, surrounded by the Ganas. He was seated in the 
form of penance. We eulogised Him with hymns from the 
Vedas and Upanisads. 


CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR 

(Siva consents to marry Parvatl) 

The gods said : — 

1. Obeisance to lord Siva, obeisance to the destroyer 
of Kama; obeisance, obeisance to one worthy of eulogy; 
to one of profuse splendour, to the three-eyed lord. 

2. Obeisance to Siva clad in skin; obeisance to the 



Rudrasarhhitd 


565 


terrible, to the terrible-eyed, to great lord and to the lord of 
the three worlds. 

3. You are the lord of worlds; you are the father, 
the mother and the lord; you are Siva the benefactor. You 
are particularly compassionate. 

4. You are the creator of all the worlds; O lord, you 
shall save us. O great God, except you who else is compe- 
tent to destroy misery ? 

Brahmd said : — 

5. On hearing these words of the gods, Nandikesvara 
who was endowed with great sympathy began to inform 
Siva. 

4 

Nandikesvara said : — 

6. O foremost among the gods, Visnu, other gods, the 
sages and Siddhas eulogise you in order to see you. They 
are being threatened by Asuras. Hence they seek some 
remedy and resort to thy feet, the seat of great fearlessness. 

7. Hence, O lord of all, the sages and the gods shall 
be protected by you. You have been particularly mentioned 
as the kinsman of the distressed and favourably disposed 
towards your devotees. 

Brahma said : — 

8. Siva, who was thus informed by Nandin and who 
was extremely sympathetic, slowly reverted from His medi- 
tation and opened His eyes. 

9. Then lord Siva, the highly efficient great Atman, 
reverted from His trance and spoke to the gods. 

Siva said . — 

10. “ O great gods, Visnu, Brahma and others, why 
have you come near me ? Mention the reason for the 
same. 

Brahmd said : — 

1 1 . On hearing these words of Siva, all the gods rejoic- 
ed, They looked at Vi?nu as if to induce him to speak. 

12. Then Vi§nu, the great devotee and benefactor of 



566 


the gods mentioned the matter of great importance of the 
gods as mentioned by me (before). 

Vifnu said : — 

13. “O Siva, all the gods have come here to submit to 
you their misery perpetrated mysteriously by Taraka. 

14-15. O Siva, the demon Taraka will be killed only by 
your self-begotten son and not otherwise. Ponder over whit 
I have said and take pity on me. Obeisance, O great lord, 
to you. O lord, redeem the gods from the misery brought 
about by Taraka. 

16. Hence, O lord Siva, Parvatl shall be accepted by you 
and grasped with your right hand. Accept her hand as offered 
in marriage by the lord of mountains. She is full of noble 
attributes. 

17. On hearing those words of Vi?nu, Siva was pleased 
and said indicating to them the goal of the good, eager in 
Yogic feats as He was. 

Siva said : — 

18-19. “If goddess Parvatl, the most beautiful lady were 
to be accepted by me, she will be able to resuscitate Kama 
on account of the marriage. Then all the gods, sages and 
ascetics will become lusty and incompetent in the great 
path of Yoga. 

20. Kama was burnt by me for the achievement of 
universal goal. It was at the suggestion of Brahma, O Visnu. 
No anxiety need be felt in this connection. 

21. O lord of gods, O intelligent one, it is your duty 
not to be obdurate after considering the situation of what 
shall be done and what not. 

22. O Vi?nu, a great favour to the gods has been 
done by me when Kama was burnt. May ye all stay free 
from lust certainly along with me. 

23. Just as I, so also you, O gods, can without effort 
perform difficult tasks being endowed with the energy of great 
penance. 

24. Kama not being with you, you can be endowed 
with the supreme bliss and be free from aberrations by means 
of spiritual contemplation, O Gods. 



Rudrasathhitd 


567 


25. O Brahma, O Vi?nu, O Indra, O sages and O 
gods, what had been done by Kama formerly and forgotten 
by you may be recollected and pondered over. 

26. O gods, meditation of everyone had been spoiled 
by the stubborn Kama, the great archer formerly. 

27. Kama leads to hell; lust to anger, anger to delusion 
and delusion destroys penance. 

28. Anger and lust shall be eschewed by you, the best 
of gods. My words shall be heeded by you all and not 
otherwise. 

Brahma said : — 

29. After saying thus, the bull-bannered lord Siva expres- 
sed the wish that Brahma, Vi?nu, the gods and the sages, 
should speak. 

30. Siva became quiet after resorting to meditation 
again. Siva, as before, was surrounded by His Ganas. 

31-33. Siva thought within Himself His own Soul, the 
form that is unsullied, free from distortions, aberrations and 
ailments, the form which is greater than the greatest, eternal, 
free from sense of possession, free from obsessions, beyond the 
ken of sounds and words, devoid of attributes and knowable 
through perfect wisdom. Thinking upon His own features 
thus in His meditation, the lord, the cause of great enjoy- 
ment and protection became engrossed in supreme bliss. 

34. On seeing Siva again engaged in meditation all 
the dwellers of heaven, Visnu, Indra and others, humbly told 
Nandin. 

The gods said : — 

35. What shall we do now ? Siva has become deta- 
ched and has gone on meditation. You are a comp- 
anion of Siva and pure assistant. You are omniscient. 

36. O chief of the Ganas, we seek refuge' in you. 
Please guide us. What is the remedy by which Siva can be 
propitiated ? 

BrahmS said : — 

37. O sage, thus urged by the gods, Vi$nu and others, 
Nandin, the favourite Gana of Siva replied to the gods. 



568 


Shapurtya 


NandUvara said : — 

38. O Visnu, O Brahma, O Indra, O gods and O 
sages, pay heed to my words gratifying to Siva. 

39. If you persist still in your wish that Siva shall 
marry, you shall eulogise with respect and piteous request. 

40. O gods, great lord cannot be made subservient by 
ordinary devotion. The supreme lord does even what shall 
not be done when moved by extraordinary devotion. 

41. O Brahma, Visnu and other gods, then act accor- 
dingly, otherwise go the way you have come. Tarry not. 

Brahma said : — 

42. O sage, on hearing his words, Visnu and other 
gods, considering that it must be so, eulogised Siva with 
pleasure. 

43. O great lord, lord of the gods, O ocean of mercy, 
lift us up from the great distress. Save us who have sought 
refuge in you. 

Brahma said : — 

44. Thus the gods eulogised Siva with many piteous 
entreaties. They cried loudly being agitated by their 
devotion. 

45. Visnu accompanied by me spoke out many piteous 
words, remembering Siva with great devotion. 

46. Siva was thus eulogised by the gods, Visnu and me. 
He, the great lord, ceased His meditation due to His attach- 
ment for His devotees. 

47. The delighted Siva said heightening the pleasure 
of Visnu and other gods, after glancing at them with merci- 
ful looks. Siva is favourably disposed to His devotees. 

Siva said : — 

48. O, Visnu, O Brahma, O Indra and other gods, why 
have you all collectively come here in my presence ? Tell 
me the truth. 

Visnu said : — 

49. O great lord, you are omniscient. You are the 



Rudrasarhkitd 569 

immanent being and the lord of all. Don’t you know what 
is in our mind ? Still I speak at you bidding. 

50. O Siva, many kinds of miseries have befallen us 
due to the demon Taraka. It is for that that you have 
been propitiated by the gods. 

51. For attaining you Siva is born of mountain 
Himacala. The demon’s death can be at the hands of your 
son alone begotten of her. 

52. This is the boon granted to him by Brahma. 
Incapable of being killed by others, the demon harasses the 
entire universe. 

53. At the instance of Narada, she is performing a 
great penance. All *he three worlds consisting of the mobile 
and immobile beings have been enveloped by her refulgence. 

54. O lord Siva, please go and grant Siva the boon. 
O lord, destroy our misery and bestow happiness on us. 

55. O Siva, there is a great enthusiasm in my heart as 
well as in those of the gods to witness your marriage. Please 
get it performed in a fitting manner. 

56. The opportune moment for the fulfilment of the 
boon granted by you to Rati has arrived. Make your promise 
fruitful. 

Brahma said : — 

57. After saying this and bowing to and eulogising Him 
with different hymns, Visnu, the gods and the sages, all of us 
waited in front of Him. 

58. On hearing the words of the gods Siva, subservient 
to His devotees, laughed and replied. Siva is a strict pres- 
erver of Vedic conventions. 

Siva said : — 

59. O Visnu, O Brahma, O gods, ail of you please hear 
with attention. I am going to say a specific thing" in a suit- 
able manner. 

60. Marrying is not a proper thing for men. Marri- 
age is a great fetter that binds firmly. 

61. There are many base bondages in the world. 
Association with women is the toughest of all. One can 
free oneself from all bondages except that of women. 



62. Anyone bound with nooses of iron and timber can 
secure release but one bound with nooses of women never 
frees oneself. 

63. Worldly enjoyment tightens the bondage. Salva- 
tion is inaccessible to a man drawn to worldly enjoyment 
even in his dream. 

64. If he wishes for happiness, an intelligent man shall 
duly forsake all worldly pleasures. Worldly enjoyment that 
dooms persons is on a par with poison. 

65. O Indra, a man attains downfall even by conver- 
sing with a sensuous person. Great preceptors say that 
worldly enjoyment is a bitter beer mixed with sugar. 

66. Although I know and realise all these, although I 
have specific wisdom yet I shall accede to your request and 
make it fruitful. 

67. I am definitely subservient to my devotees. Hence 
I may do everything. I am known all over the three worlds 
as one who performs ill fitting things. 

68. The vow of the king of Assam (Kamarupa) 85 was 
made fruitful. I saved king Sudak§ina who had become a 
hireling and a prisoner. 

69. I am the three- eyed God who bestows happiness 
but brought about the misery of Gautama. I especially curse 
those wicked persons who harass my devotees. 

70. I have the feelings of endearment towards devotees. 

I drank up poison for the welfare of the gods. O gods, the 
miseries of the gods have always been removed by me. 

71 For my devotees, I experienced many sufferings. I 
removed the misery of the sage ViSvanara by becoming a 
householder. 

72. What is the use of talking much ? O Visnu, O 
Brahma, I speak the truth. All of you know truly that I 
have vowed as follows. 

73. Whenever any devotee of mine is involved in any 
adversity I remove it instantaneously and completely. 

74. I know the sufferings you undergo from .the demon 
T&raka. I shall remove them. Truth, I tell you the truth. 

35* K&marupa was alao known as Pr£gjyoti$a. The designation 
applies to the country now called Assam. In ancient days it comprised 
the north-eastern part of Bengal and the western portion of Assam. 



Rudrasartihitd 


571 

75. Although I am not interested at all in dalliance I 
shall marry Parvati for begetting a son. 

76. O gods, all of you go back to your respective 
abodes fearlessly. I shall achieve your task. In this respect 
you need not be anxious at all. 

Brahma said : — 

77. O sage, after saying this, Siva became silent and 
entered into spiritual contemplation. Vi$iiu and other gods 
went back to their respective abodes. 

CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE 

( The seven celestial sages test Parvati) 

Ndrada said : — 

1. When Brahma, Visnu and other gods had gone along 
with the sages what happened thereafter ? 

2. O dear one, what did Siva do? Within what time 
did He go to grant the boon ? How ? Please tell roe for 
my pleasure. 

Brahma said : — 

3. When Brahma and other gods had gone back to 
their respective abodes, Siva entered into spiritual contempla- 
tion in order to test her penance. 

4. He meditated upon His own soul within Himself, 
the Atman that is greater than the greatest, free from illusion 
and obsessions and stationed within itself. 

5. The bull-bannered lord Siva, the object of the ex- 
pression That, * whose movements are unknown, is the cause 
of enjoyment and protection. Siva is the lord Supreme. 

Brahmd said : — 

6. O dear then, Parvati was engaged in great penance. 
Even Siva wondered at that. 

7. He became distracted from spiritual contemplation. 
A deity subservient to His devotees cannot be otherwise. Siva, 

* It refers to the formula “that are you”, identifying the soul 
with the supreme soul. 



572 


l ha 


the cause of great enjoyment and protection remembered the 
seven celestial sages, Vasistha and others. 

8. Immediately on being remembered, the seven sages 86 
came there with faces beaming with delight and praising 
their good fate. 

9. Bowing to Him with folded arms and bent 
shoulders they eulogised lord Siva with extreme pleasure by 
means of words choked with devotional feelings. 

The seven sages said : — 

10. “O great God, lord of gods, O lord, O ocean of 
mercy, we have become very well blessed since we have been 
remembered by you now. 

1 1 . Why have we been remembered ? We may 
kindly be commanded. O lord, have pity on us as on your 
own slaves. Obeisance be to you. 


BrahmS sa*d : — 

12. On hearing the words of the sages, lord Siva, 
the storehouse of sympathy spoke lovingly and laughingly with 
eyes beaming like full-blown lotus. 

Lord Siva said : — 

13. O dear seven celestial sages, listen to my words. 
You are all my benefactors. You are clever and perfectly 
wise. 

14. The great Goddess Parvati, the daughter of the 
mountain is performing a penance now in the mountain 
called Gaurisikhara, with a steady mind. 

15. O brahmins, she is desirous of attaining me as 
her husband. She is being served by her maids. She 
has discarded all other desires. She is determined in her 
resolve. 

16. O excellent sages, you go there at my bidding. 
With love in mind, conduct the test of her resolve. 

17. O virtuous ones of good rites, at my bidding, 


ir 36> . §C r Cn Bages viz * Maric »> Atri Angiras, Pulastya Pulaha 
Major. * nC * Va8l? ‘^ a arC re P rC8emcd b V a G^oup of seven stars called Ursa 



Rudrasarhhiid 573 

you need not hesitate to employ even deceitful and critical 
remarks. 

Brahma said : — 

18. Thus commanded, those sages quickly went there 
where the mother of universe, the brilliant daughter of the 
mountain, shone with refulgence. 

19. There she was seen as the personified achieve- 
ment of penance itself. She was shining brilliantly with great 
splendour. 

20. Mentally bowing to her, the seven sages, of good 
rites, humbly spoke to her after being warmly welcomed and 
worshipped by her. 

The sages said : — 

21. O daughter of the mountain, listen. Why do you 
perform this penance ? Which god do you wish to 
propitiate ? For what purpose ? Please tell us now. 

Brahma said : — 

22. Thus addressed by the brahmins, the goddess 
Siva, daughter of the lord of mountains, replied truly before 
them though it was a great secret. 

Parvati said : — 

23. O great sages, listen to my words with hearty 
affection. I am saying only what I thought in my own 
way. 

24. On hearing my words you will laugh at me consi- 
dering my proposal impossible. O brahmins, I hesitate in 
revealing it but what can I do ? 

25. This mind of mine is resolute helplessly attempt- 
ing at a great task. Verily it is trying to erect a high wall 
on the surface of water. 

26. At the bidding of the celestial sage I am per- 
forming this steady penance with the desire that Rudra be 
my husband. 

27. The unfledged birdling of my mind flies up 
tenaciously. May lord Siva, the storehouse of mercy fulfil 
its desire. 



Sivapur&na 


574 

Brahmd said : — 

28. On hearing her words, the sages honoured Parvati 
mentally with pleasure but spoke these deceptive false words 
laughingly. 

The sages said : — 

29. O daughter of the mountain, although you are 
wise and intelligent, you are not able to see through the 
conduct of that celestial sage who professes to be a great 
scholar but who is cruel-minded. 

30. Narada is a quibbler. He misleads others. If his 
words are paid heed to, you stand to lose in every 
respect. 

31. Now listen to a true anecdote that sheds light 
thereon, with keen intellect. We are enlightening you out 
of love and affection, take it to heart. 

32. Daksa, the son of Brahma, at the bidding of his 
father, begot ten thousand sons of his wife. He dearly loved 
them and employed them in performing a great penance. 

33. The sons went to the holy lake Narayanasaras 37 
in the western zone for performing penance. Nosing it out, 
Narada too Went there. 

34. Sage Narada misled them with his deceptive 
instructions. At his instance, they never went back home to 
their father. 

35. On hearing this, Daksa was infuriated but his 
father consoled him. Thereafter he begot a thousand other 
sons and engaged them in penance. 

36. The sons too went to the same place for penance 
at the bidding of their father. Narada too went there, a 
self-appointed instructor for them. 

37. He gave them the same instruction and they went 
the way of their brothers. They never returned to the 
parental abode. They were engrossed in the avocation of 
mendicants. 

38. O daughter of mountain, the good conduct of 
Narada is thus well-known. Now hear about another activity 
of his in making men detached. 

37* The Narayaga lake has not been identified. Probably it is a 
lake of the Nar&yapa hill, near Badrinath in GaihwaJ 



Rudtasarhhitd 


575 


39. There was a Vidyadhara named Citraketu. The 
sage instructed him and made him detached from his 
house. 

40. He bestowed his instructions on Prahlada and 
made him suffer much at the hands of Hiranyaka£ipu. He 
is definitely a person who splits others* intellect. 

41. Whomsoever this sage advocates his philosophy, 
very pleasing to the ears, generally the same person discards 
his hearth and home and begins to beg for alms. 

42. Narada has a dirty soul though he is endowed 
with a white brilliant complexion for ever. We know him 
particularly because we are his associates. 

43. People from a distance may describe a stork as a 
gentle bird that does not prey on fish. But in fact an 
associate knows the conduct of his associates. 

44. You too who are honoured by the wise have 
followed his advice and thus become a fool. That is why 
you are performing this severe penance. 

45. O young lady. He, for whose sake you are per- 
forming this elaborate penance is a perpetually indifferent 
person of no emotional disturbance. Undoubtedly He is an 
enemy of Kama. 

46. The trident-bearing Siva has an inauspicious 
body, is free from shame and has no home or pedigree. He 
is naked and ill-featured. He associates with ghosts and 
goblins and the like. 

47. That rogue of a sage has destroyed your discretion 
with his deception. He has deluded you with apparently good 
arguments and made you perform this penance. 

48. O great Goddess, daughter of the mountain, you 
alone think within yourself how much pleasure could be 
derived by getting such a bridegroom. 

49. At first he married Sati, the chaste daughter of 
Dak$a, eagerly but the fool that he was he could not maintain 
the household even for a few days. 

50. He accused her and forsook her Himself. The lord 
went on meditating on His own form, free from stains and 
sorrows and sported happily. 

51. He is single withqut a second and without attach- 



ment. He is after salvation, O gentle lady, how can a woman 
put up with him. 

52. O blessed one, even now, at our bidding, return to 
your house. Cast off this foolish intention. You will benefit 
thereby. 

53. A befitting bridegroom for you is lord Vi?nu end- 
owed with all good qualities. He is a resident of Vaikugtha,** 
lord of wealth and is skilled in sports. 

54. O Parvatl, with him we shall fix your marriage 
that will confer all happiness on you. Leave off this obduracy. 
Be happy. 

Brahma said : — 

55. On hearing these words, Parvatl, the mother of the 
universe, laughed and spoke to the wise sages. 

Parvati said : — 

56. O excellent sages, what you have said may be 
true according to your light and wisdom; but O brahmins, 
my tenacity cannot be affected. 

57. Being born of a mountain, toughness is congenital 
to my body. Pondering over this with a short intellect you 
will plea?>e desist from preventing me. 

58. I shall never discard the wholesome advice of the 
celestial sage. Vedic scholars know and affirm that the 
advice of a preceptor is wholesome. 

59. Those who firmly believe that the advice of the 
preceptor is true will experience great happiness here and 
hereafter. They will have no unhappiness anywhere. 

60. Those who distrust the maxim in their heart of 
hearts that the advice of preceptors is true will experience 
nothing but misery here and hereafter, no happiness anywhere. 

61. O brahmins, the advice of the preceptors is not to 
be eschewed at all. Whether it leads to the attachment of 
a household or otherwise, my tenacity will remain pleasing to 
me for ever. 

62. O excellent sages, what you have just spoken shall 

38. Vaikuniha, aho called Vaibhra, it the abode of Visru variously 
described at situated on the eastern peak mf Mount Mcru or in the 
Northern ocean. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


577 


be interpreted in another way. I shall explain it in brief. 

63. When you glorify Vis$u as the abode of noble 
qualities or as a sportive deity T do not contradict. As to 
your statement that Sadasiva is devoid of attributes I shall 
tell you the reason. 

64. Siva is Brahman, unchanging and without aberra- 
tion. He assumes shapes and forms for the welfare of his 
devotees. He does not make a show of worldly lordship. 

65. Therefore he assumes the attitude and behaviour 
of great Yogins. Siva is a supreme bliss personified and an 
Avadhuta in form. 

66. Interest in embellishment and ornaments shall be 
found in those who are deluded by illusion and who are not 
in unison with the Brahman. The lord is devoid of attributes, 
unborn, free from illusion, of invisible movement and a 
cosmic Being. 

67. O brahmins, Siva does not shower His blessings 
on the ground of faith, caste etc. I know Siva truly only 
through the blessings of the preceptor. 

68. O brahmins, if Siva does not marry me I shall 
remain for ever a virgin. Truth, I tell you the truth. 

69. Even if the sun were to rise in the west, even if 
the mountain Meru were to move ; even if the fire were to be 
cool and even if the lotus were to bloom on a rock at the 
top of a mountain, my stubbornness cannot be nullified. 
I am telling you the truth. 

Brahma, said : — 

70. After saying thus and bowing to those sages, the 
daughter of the mountain stopped and remembered Siva with 
an unruffled mind. 

71. On realising the resoluteness of Parvati, the sages 
hailed her and bestowed excellent blessings upon her. ' 

72. O sage, after bowing to the goddess, the sages 
who wanted to test her. were delighted. They immediately 
returned to Siva’s abode. 

73. Having reached the place they informed Siva of 
all the details. Taking leave of Him with respect, they went 
to the heaven. 



CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 


(Parvati-Jafila dialogue) 


Brahmd said : — 

1. When those sages returned to their abodes, lord 
Siva, the cause of great enjoyment and protection wanted to 
test the penance of the goddess. 

2. Under the pretext of testing, Siva wanted to see her. 
With a delighted mind He assumed the form of a Japla (an 
ascetic with matted hair) and went to the forest of penance 
of Parvati. 

3. He took the form of a very old man with the body 
of a brahmin. His brilliance shone. He was delighted in 
mind. He had an umbrella and a staff ( to support Him) . 

4. There He saw the goddess surrounded by her maids 
on the platform, as pure as the digit of the moon. 

5. Siva, who is favourably disposed towards His devo- 
tees, approached her with pleasure in the guise of a celibate. 

6. On seeing that brahmin of wonderful refulgence 
come, goddess Parvati worshipped Him with all the articles 
of worship. 

7. She worshipped him with great joy by means of 
well prepared and arranged articles of worship. Thereafter 
Parvati enquired after the health of the brahmin with respect. 

Parvati said : — 

8. Who are you and whence have you come in the 
guise of a Brahmacarin ? You are making this forest reful- 
gent by your splendour. Please speak, O foremost among 
Vedic scholars. 

The brahmin said : — 

9. I am an aged brahmin roaming about as I please. 

I am an intelligent ascetic bestowing happiness and helping 
others. 

10. Who are you ? What is your parentage ? Why 
do you perform penance in this isolated forest ? Your penance 
cannot be surpassed even by the sages of eminent status. 

11. You are neither a small girl nor an old woman. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


579 


You appear to be an auspicious young woman. How is it 
that you are performing this penance even when you are un- 
married. 

12. O gentle lady, are you the wife of an ascetic who 
does not provide you with food and shelter and so leaving 
you has gone to another place ? 

13. Tell me, in which family are you bom? Who is 
your father ? What are your undertakings ? You are very 
fortunate. Futile is your interest in penance. 

14. Are you the mother of the Vedas? Are you Lak- 
smi or Sarasvati ? I dare not guess who you arc ? 

Parvati said : — 

15. O brahmin, I am not the mother of the Vedas, 
nor LaksmI nor Sarasvati. I am the daughter of Himacala 
and my name is Parvati. 

16. Previously I had been born as Sati, the daughter of 
Daksa. By Yogic means I cast off my body since my hus- 
band was insulted by my father. 

17. Even in this life, Siva came to me but due to ill 
luck, He reduced Kama to ashes, left me and went away. 

18. O brahmin, when Siva went away, I came out 
of my father’s house, being greatly dejected, to perform 
this steady penance on the banks of the celestial river. 39 

19. Even after performing this severe penance for a 
long time, I could not attain Him. I was just to consign 
myself to fire but on seeing you, I have stopped for a while. 

20. Now you can go. I shall enter fire since I have 
not been accepted by Siva. Wherever I take birth I shall 
woo only Siva. 

Brahmd said : — 

21. After saying so, Parvati jumped into the fire in the 
presence of the brahmin although she was forbidden by Him 
again and again. 

39. The celestial Gariga is said to flow from the toe of Vi^QU and to 
have been brought down from heaven, by the prayers of Bhaglratha to 
purify the ashes of the sixty thousand sons of king Sagara who had been 
burnt by the angry glance of the saga Kapila. 



580 Sivapurina 

22. Even as she jumped into the fire, it became as 
cool assandal paste due to her ascetic power. 

23. The brahmin stopped her standing on her way as 
she was trying to go away and asked her laughingly. 

The Brahmin said : — 

24. O gentle lady, 1 cannot understand anything. 
Your penance is wonderful. Your body is not charred by 
the fire. Still your desire remains unsatiated so far. 

25. O gentle lady, let me know about your desire; I 
am a brahmin who can bestow pleasure upon everyone. 

26. Please tell me everything truly and methodically. 
Since we have become friends nothing should be kept a secret 
from me. 

27. I wish to ask you now. O gentle lady, whom do 
you wish to have as your husband ? It is in you that the 
fruit of penance is seen. 

28. If your penance is for others or for the supreme 
object, wherefore should you perform it at all ? You had 
a jewel in your hand, you cast it off and have taken up a base 
metal instead. 

29. Why have you rendered your beauty in vain by 
taking recourse to this penance that eschewing different sorts 
of fine clothes hide is worn by you. 

30. Hence tell me the reason, truthfully, for this 
penance. Let me, a great brahmin, be pleased on hearing 
the same. 

Brahma said : — 

31. Thus asked by him, Parvati urged her maid. She 
of good rites made everything narrated to him through her 
maid. 

32. Induced by Parvati, her bosom friend Vijaya who 
knew all about her good rites spoke to the ascetic. 

The maid said : — 

33. O saintly sir, listen. I shall recount the story of 
Parvati as well as tfie reason for penance, if you wish to 
hear. 

34. This my friend is the daughter of Himacala, lord 



RudratatfihUa 581 

of mountains. She is the daughter of Menaka named Kali 
but famous as Parvati. 

35. She is not married to anyone nor does she desire 
any other than Siva for her husband. She has performed this 
penance for three thousand years. 

36. It was for that purpose that my friend started 
penance like this. I shall tell you the reason. Listen, O 
excellent brahmin, O saintly one. 

37. Leaving off Indra and other gods, Visnu and 
Brahma, Parvati wishes to attain the Pinaka-bearing Siva as 
her husband. 

38. She my friend planted many trees before. O 
brahmin, all of them have put forth flowers and fruits. 

39-40. My friend has been performing severe penance 
at the bidding of Narada to make her beauty fruitful, to 
embellish her father’s race and to bless Kama. She has 
directed this penance to lord Siva. O holy ascetic, how is it 
that her desire is not fulfilled. 

41. O excellent brahmin, you enquired of her desire. 
I have just told you out of my love for her. What else do 
you wish to hear. 

Brahma said : — 

42. On hearing these truthful words of Vijaya, O sage, 
Siva who came disguised as an ascetic said laughingly. 

The ascetic said : — 

43. The maid has said something, but I deduce only 
a huge joke therefrom. If it be true, let the gentle lady 
herself speak out. 

Brahma said 

44. When these words were uttered by that brahmin 
ascetic, goddess Parvati spoke to the brahmin thus. - 



CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 


(Description of the fraudulent words of the 
Brahmacdrin) 


Parvati said : — 

1. O great brahmin, listen to my story entirely. What 
my friend has said just now is the whole truth, not other- 
wise. 

2. I am telling you the truth and not a lie. Siva 
has been wooed by me, by mind, speech and action as well 
as by means of ascetic feelings. 

3. I know that it is an inaccessible object. How can 
I attain it ? Still out of my eagerness I am performing this 
penance. 

Brahma said : — 

4. After saying these words to him, the daughter of 
the mountain kept quiet. On hearing the words of Parvati 
the brahmin said. 

The brahmin said : — 

5. So long I had been desirous of knowing what 
our gentle lady craves for that she performs this great 
penance. 

6. O dear lady, I have now known it through your 
own words. I am now going away from this place. You 
can do as you please. 

7. What should be done by you is not mentioned 
by me. To me your further friendship is useless. But this 
should be mentioned that your future should be happy. 

Brahmd said : — 

8. After saying these words to her when he proposed 
to go, goddess Parvati bowed to and spoke to the 
brahmin. 

Pdrvatt said : — 

9. “O excellent brahmin, why do you go? Stay 



Rudrasarhhitd 583 

and tender me wholesome advice”. When she said thus, 
the staff-bearing brahmin stopped and spoke. 

The brahmin said : — 

10. If you are stopping me with devotion, truly 
desirous of hearing then I shall explain everything whereby 
you may gain some wisdom. 

11. I know Siva through and through with all His 
weighty attributes. I shall tell you the truth. Listen with 
attention. 

12. The great lord is bull-bannered. His body is 
smeared with ashes. His hair is matted. He is clad in the 
hide of a tiger. He has covered His body with the hide of 
an elephant. 

13. He holds the skull. Serpents twine round His 
limbs. Poison has left a mark on his neck. He eats even 
forbidden stuffs. He has odd eyes and is definitely 
awful. 

14. His birth and pedigree cannot be traced. He is 
devoid of the enjoyment of a householder. He has ten 
arms. He is mostly naked and is ever accompanied by ghosts 
and goblins. 

15. What is the reason whereby you wish Him to be 
your husband ? O gentle lady, where has your wisdom 
gone ? Think well and tell me. 

16. A previous terrible activity of His has been heard 
by me. If you are interested in hearing I shall tell you. 

17. Daksa’s daughter, the chaste lady Sati wooed 
Vf§abhavahana (Siva) as her husband. Fortunately their 
union was well known. 

18. Sati was discarded by Dak§a because she was the 
wife of the skull-bearing Siva. Siva too was eschewed in the 
allocation of shares in the sacrifice. 

19. On account of the insult Sati was infuriated and 
she discarded her dear life. Siva too was abandoned by 
her. 

20. You are a jewel among women. Your father is 
the king of all mountains. Why do you crave for a hus- 
band like this and that too by means of a severe penance ? 

21 . Handing over a gold coin you wish to buy a piece 



of glass. Setting aside the pure sandal paste you wish to 
smear mud over your body. 

22. Unmindful of the sunlight you wish to have the 
light of the glow worm. Throwing away the fine China 50 
silk you wish to wear the hide. 

23. Discarding the life at home you yearn for a life in 
the forest, O madam, throwing away excellent treasure you 
wish a piece of iron in return. 

24. Leaving off the guardians of the quarters you run 
after Siva. This is not well said It is against the conven- 
tions of the world. 

25. Where you with eyes like the petals of a lotus ? 
Where this three-eyed creature — Siva ? You are moon-faced 
while Siva is ft ve- faced. * 

26. On your head the divine plaited hair shines with 
glossy splendour like a serpent. But Siva has only the 
matted hair to boast of. 

27. Sandal paste is applied on your body, while the 
ashes of the funeral pyre on that of Siva. Where your silken 
garment and where the elephant-hide of Siva. 

28. Where the divine ornaments and where the serpents 
of Siva ? Where the deities that move about and where 
Siva, fond of goblins and their oblations ? 

2^. Where the pleasing sound of his tabor ? Where 
His peculiar drum called Damaru ? Where the set of fine 
drums and the inauspicious sound of his horn ? 

30. Where the inauspicious sound of double- drum and 
where the sound of his throat ? There is no matching 
beauty between you both. 

31. If He had money to spare how could He have 
been a naked being ? His vehicle is a bull. He ha$ no other 
appendages. 

32. There is not even a single quality in the odd-eyed 
Siva out of the innumberable qualities pleasing to women 
and expected in bride-grooms. 

33. Your friend Kama was burnt by Siva. He insulted 
you also by leaving you off and going elsewhere. 

r>o. The Chinese silken cloth is mentioned also by Kalidasa in the 
Sakuntala I. 34. 

•On the five-faced feature of Siva see Note 25 P. 46 



RudrasathhiUL 


585 


34. His caste is not recognised. He has no learning 
or wisdom. His assistants are the ghosts. Poison is seen even 
in His throat. 

35. He also moves about in isolation. He is detached 
from everything particularly. Hence you cannot fix your mind 
in Him. 

36. Where your necklace and where the garland of 
skulls that he wears ? Where your rich divine unguent and 
where the ash from the funeral pyre that He has on His 
body ? 

37. O divine lady, everything concerning you and 
Siva, such as form, features etc. is mutually discordant. I do 
not like your resolution. You can do whatever you please. 

38. You yourself have evolved taste for all bad ob- 
jects. Turn your mind from Him. If not, do whatever you 
please. 

Brahma said : — 

39. On hearing these words of that brahmin, Parvati 
said angrily to the brahmin who discredited Siva. 


CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT 

( Parvati sees Siva's real form) 


Parvati said : — 

1. So long I have been thinking that some one else 
has come. Now everything has become clear. You are a 
person who cannot be killed. 

2. O lord, what has been said by you is known. It is 
not otherwise. If what has been said by you is real, 'it can- 
not be called unreal. 

3. Sometimes lord Siva is seen in that guise. But He is 
the supreme Brahman who, out of his own accord, takes up 
bodies in his own sports. 

4. You have now come in the form of a student ascetic 
for the sake of deceiving me. Using false arguments, you have 
spoken fraudulent words. 



5. I know the real form of Siva very particularly. I shall 
therefore explain Siva’s reality in the proper perspective after 
careful consideration. 

6. He is in fact devoid of attributes* But for some re- 
sons He takes up attributes. How can He have a birth, he 
who is really attributeless but takes up attributes ? 

7. SadaSiva is the support and receptacle of all lores. Of 
what avail is learning to Him who is perfect and the supreme 
soul ? 

8. At the beginning of the Kalpa, all the Vedas were 
given by Siva to Visnu in the form of breath. Who can be 
a good lord equal to Him ? 

9. How can He be measured in age, He who is pri- 
mordial to everything and everyone. Even primordial nature 
(Prakfti) is born of Him. Of what avail is then Energy to 
Him ? 

10. With the threefold Energies, 41 Siva blesses those who 
worship Him always as the lord of Energies. 

11. Every individual soul becomes fearless and conquers 
death by worshipping Him. Hence His designation ‘the con- 
queror of death* is famous in all the three worlds. 

12. Visnu attains and retains his Visnuhood by His 
favour. Similarly Brahma his Brahmahood and the gods 
their godhood. 

13-14 Whenever the lord of the gods wants to see Siva 
he has to propitiate His gate-keepers, the ghosts etc., otherwise 
his crown becomes shattered by batons. Really Siva is a great 
lord. He has no need for many attendants. 

15. What is it that cannot befall one who serves 
the auspicious -featured Siva. What is deficient in that lord ? 
Does Sadasiva like me ? 

16. Even if a person is perpetually poor for seven lives, 
after serving Siva, his prosperity becomes unhampered. 

17. How can he find benefit inaccessible-he in whose 
presence the eight Siddhis 4 * (achievements) dance always for 
the sake of propitiation with speechless mouths or with lowered 
faces. 


41. The three elements of Energy consist of(i ) pre-eminent position, 
(9) good counsel and (3) adventurous undertaking. 

42 ■ On the eightfold superhuman faculties, see Note 203. P. 935. 



Rudrasarhhitd 587 

18. Although Siva resorts to inauspicious things yet by 
thinking on Him everything becomes auspicious. 

19. His worship fulfils all desires. How can there be 
aberration in Him who always remains in an unmodified state. 

20. People are sanctified by merely seeing the person in 
whose mouth the auspicious name “Siva” is ever present. 

21 . If, as you say, the ash from the funeral pyre is unholy, 
how is it that the same transferred to Siva’s body is taken 
thence and worn on the head by the gods ? 

22. How can He be easily realised, He who is the deity 
that creates, sustains and annihilates the worlds, all the 
same who is devoid of attributes and is termed Siva ? 

23. The form of Siva, the supreme soul, is that of 
Brahman, devoid of attributes. How can people like you 
know it, people with extrovert faces ? 

24. Persons of evil conduct, sinners and those who 
have gone astray from the path of the gods do not at all know 
the reality of Siva of attributeless form. 

25. If, out of ignorance of His reality, any one were to 
discredit Siva, his merit hoarded ever since birth becomes 
reduced to ashes. 

26. You have censured Siva of immeasurable splendour 
and I have worshiped you, hence I have become sinful. 

27. On seeing a person who hates Siva one should take 
bath along with one ’s clothes. On seeing a person who hates 
Siva one should perform expiatory rites. 

28. O wicked one, you profess knowledge of Siva. But 
you should know that the eternal Siva is not known at all. 

29. Whatever may be the form or feature of Siva, He is 
multiformed. Still He is my favourite. He is without aberration 
and beloved of the good. 

30. Neither Visnu nor Brahma can equal that noble 
soul. How can then the gods and others be ? They are al- 
ways dependent on Time and are not eternal. 

31. After realising this with my sharp intellect factually, 
I have come to this forest and am performing the elaborate 
penance for attaining Siva. 

32. My ambition is to attain the supreme lord who 
is favourably disposed to His devotees and who blesses the 
distressed. 



588 


Sivapurd^a 


Brahmd said : — 

33. After saying this, O sage, Parvati, the daughter of 
the mountain, stopped and meditated on Siva with unaffected 
mind. 

34-35. On hearing the words of the goddess when the 
brahmin ascetic began to say something, Parvatl whose mind 
was fixed on Siva and who was averse to hear any dis- 
paraging remarks about Siva spoke immediately to Vijaya, 
her maid. 

Parvati said : — 

36. This base brahmin must be prevented strenuously. 
He is inclined to say something again. He will surely 
censure Siva. 

37. Not only does he who disparages Siva incur sin 
but also he who hears the same . 43 

38. A person who disparages Siva is definitely worthy 
of being killed by Siva’s attendants. If it is a brahmin he 
must be dismissed or the hearer shall go away from that 
place immediately. 

39. This wicked man will again disparage Siva. 
Since he is a brahmin, he is not to be killed. He shall be 
abandoned. He shall not be seen at all. 

40. Let us leave this place at once and go elsewhere. 
Do not tarry. Let there be no more talk with this ignorant 
man. 

Brahmd said : — 

41. Saying this, O sage, even as Parvati was about 
to step ahead, the brahmin manifesting as Siva clasped his 
beloved. 

42. After assuming the handsome form in the manner 
Parvati had meditated upon and manifesting it to Parvati, 
Siva addressed her while she stood with her lowered 
head. 


43. For the similarity of ideas and verbal expression, compare 
K&lid&sa's Kumara V. 83 . 



kudrasarhhitd 589 . 

Siva said : — 

43. “Where will you go, leaving me ? You are not to 
be discarded again by me. I am delighted. Tell me what 
boon shall I grant you. There is nothing that cannot be 
given to you. 

41. From today I am your slave bought by you by 
performing penance. 44 I have been bought by your beauty. 
Even a moment appears like a Yuga. 

45. O Parvatl, O great Goddess, you are my eternal 
wife. Let this shyness be eschewed. You please ponder 
with your keen intellect. 

46. O steady- minded one, you have been tested b> 
me in various ways. Let my guilt be excused in following 
this worldly game. 

47. Even in the three worlds I do not see a beloved 
like you. O Parvatl, in every respect I am subservient to 
you. You can fulfil all your desires. 

48. O beloved, come on near me. You are my wife. 
I am your bridegroom. I shall immediately go to my 
abode — the excellent mountain, along with you. 

Brahma said : — 

49. When the lord of the gods spoke in this way, 
Parvati rejoiced. Whatever distress she had felt during 
penance she cast off as something old. 

50. O excellent sage, her weariness subsided. In fact, 
when the fruit is realised, the exertion felt during the 
process of undertaking perishes. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 

(Sivd-Sioa dialogue) 


Narada said : — 

1. O Brahma, O fortunate one, what happened there- 
after ? I wish to hear everything. Please narrate the glory 
of Parvatl to me. 


44. For the similarity of idea* and verbal expression, cp. Ibid V. 86. 



590 


Brahmd said : — 

2. O celestial sage, let this be listened to. I shall 
resume the story joyfully, the story that quells all sins and 
increases devotion to Siva. 

3. O brahmin, on hearing the words of Siva, the 
great Soul and on seeing His pleasant form and features 
Parvati was delighted much. 

4. The highly chaste lady, goddess Parvati replied to 
the lord standing near with great pleasure and face beaming 
with love. 

Parvati said : — 

5. O lord, O lord of gods, you are my husband 
Has it been forgotten by you why you destroyed the sacri- 
fice of Daksa formerly with great tenacity ? 

6. Listen, O lord of gods, I am born of Mena for 
the achievement of the task of the gods terrified to the quick 
by Taraka. 

7. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, if you arc 
sympathetic O lord, become my husband. O lord do as 
I say. 

8. With your permission I am going to my father’s 
abode. Let your pure great glory be made well known. 

9. O lord, you will please go to Himavat. Clever in 
divine sports, be the mendicant and beg of him, me as your 
alms. 

10. Spreading your glory in the worlds you shall make 
everything about my father fiuitful. Thus you start your 
householder’s life. 

11. There is no doubt that my father with his kinsmen 
will accede to your request as he has already been urged by 
the sages lovingly. 

12. Formerly as Daksa’s daughter I was offered to you 
by my father. But the marriage rites were not duly perfor- 
med then. 

13. The planets were not worshipped by my father. 
Therefore a great defect occurred in our marriage in regard 
to the planets. 

14. Hence, O lord, you will celebrate marriage in 



Rudrasamhita 5$1 

accordance with the rules for the fulfilment of the task of the 
gods. 

15. The customary procedures of the marriage shall 
certainly be followed. Let Himavat know that an auspicious 
penance has been performed well by his daughter. 

Brahma said : — 

16. On hearing these words, Sada€iva was highly deli- 
ghted. Laughingly and lovingly He spoke to Parvati. 

Siva said — 

17. O great Goddess, listen to my important statement. 
See that our marriage rites are performed in the proper 
manner without deficiency. 

18. O sweet-faced one, all the living beings Brahma 
and others are non-eternal. O beautiful lady, know all these 
visible things to be perishable. 

19. Know that the single beings assumed manifold 
forms. The attributeless took over the attributes. That 
which is self-luminous had other lights imposed on it. 

20. O gentle lady, I, the independent, have been 
made subservient by you. You alone are the great illusory 
power, the Primordial nature that creates. 

21. This entire universe has been made of illusion; 
it is held by the supreme soul with His great intellect. It is 
united and enveloped by the Ganas of the nature of per- 
vading souls of meritorious deeds, akin to the nature of supreme 
soul. 

22. What are these planets ? What are these sets of 
seasons ? What are those other planets ? q gentle lady, 
what is said by you, O fair-complexioned one. 

23. We two have created the universe different in 
attributes and actions for the sake of the devotees and with 
a disposition favourable to them. 

24. You are indeed the subtle primordial nature 
consisting of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas. You are capable of 
perpetual activity. You are both possessed and devoid of attri- 
butes. 

25. O slendcr-waisted lady, of all living beings I am 



the soul without abberation without yearnings. I take up 
bodies at the requests and wishes of my devotees. 

26. O daughter of the mountain I will not go up to 
Himavat your father. I will not become a mendicant and 
beg of him for you. 

27. O daughter of the lord of mountains, even a 
weighty person endowed with great qualities, even a noble 
soul, is considered base immediately after uttering the words — 
“Please give me”. 

28. O benevolent lady, after knowing this what is it 
that you say is our duty ? Gentle lady, do as you wish. 

Brahma said : — 

29. Thus addressed, the great goddess, the chaste lady 
of lotus-like eyes told Siva with devotion after bowing to 
Him again and again. 

Parvati said : — 

30. “You are the cosmic soul and I am the cosmic 
nature. There is nothing to deliberate on this. We two are 
independent and subservient to the devotees. We two are 
both possessed and devoid of attributes. 

31. O lord Siva, with effort, you will please do accord- 
ing to my request. O Siva, beg of Himavat for me, You 
will bestow a fortune on him. 

32. O great lord, be sympathetic. I am your devotee 
for ever. I am your wife for ever in ever birth. 

33. You are Brahman, the great soul, devoid of attri- 
butes greater than primordial nature, without abberration, free 
from yearnings, independent, great lord. 

34. Still you are possessed of attributes too and enth- 
usiastic in the uplift of the devotees. You sport about in 
your own soul engrossed in it and you are clever in your 
different sports. 

35. O great lord, I know you in every respect. O 
omniscient, of what avail is a detailed talk. Take pity on 
me. 

36. Spread your glory in the world indulging in your 
wonderful divine sports. Singing them, O lord, people can 
cross the ocean of worldly existence. 



kudrasarhhitd 593 

Brahma, said : — 

37. After saying these words to the great lord, Parvati 
stopped and bowed to Him frequently with shoulders stobp- 
ing and palms joined in reverence. 

38. Thus addressed by her, Siva of the noble soul, 
just to follow and imitate the worldly conventions thought that 
it should be so. Being desirous of doing so he rejoiced. 

39. Then Siva vanished. With a great delight He 
went to Kailasa but at His separation from Parvati his 
mind was distressed. 

40. After reaching there He mentioned the news to 
Nandin and others. He was very much delighted. 

41 . Those Ganas, Bhairava and others were greatly 
pleased. They celebrated the occasion with great festivities. 

42. O Narada, all went on auspiciously. All misery 
was at an end. Siva too was in a pleasant mood. 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

( The Celebration of ParvatV s Return) 

Narada said : — 

1. O Brahma, O dear, of great fortune, you have the 
real vision and are blessed. This wonderful story was heard 
by me, thanks to your blessings. 

2. When Siva returned to His mountain, O intelligent 
one, what did Parvati all auspicious do and where did she go ? 
Please tell me. 

Brahma said : — 

3. O dear, listen with pleasure to what happened there- 
after when Siva returned to His place. I shall mention it, 
remembering Siva, 

4. Accompanied by her maids and assuming meaning- 
ful dress and features she returned to her father’s house repea- 
ting the name of lord Siva. 

5. On hearing that Parvati was returning, Mena and 



Hiraavat excessively delighted went ahead seated in a divine 
vehicle. 

6-7 The chief priest, the citizens, the maids, the kins- 
men and also others accompanied them. All the brothers 
with Mainaka, the eldest, accompanied them highly delighted 
and crying shouts of victory. 

8-12. The auspicious waterpot was placed in the main 
highway decorated with sandal paste, aguru, musk and 
branches of trees with fruits. The priests, brahmins and sages 
reciting the Vedas, dancing girls, all went ahead seated on lofty 
elephants to receive her. All round stumps of plantain trees 
were fixed. Women along with their sons and husbands held 
lamps in their hands. Brahmins were shouting mantras etc. 
in an auspicious voice. Various instruments were played. 
Conch shells were sounded. In the meantime Parvati reached 
the outskirts of the city. Entering the city she saw her parents 
again. 

13. On seeing the parents rushing at her in their great 
delight, she gladly bowed to them along with her maids. 

14. They gave her their blessings and embraced her. 
Saying “O darling,” they shed tears in their excitement of 
love. 

15. Women near and dear as also the wives of her 
brothers embraced her closely with great pleasure. 

16. “A great task has been well accomplished by you. 
It has saved the whole family. All of us are sanctified by 
your noble conduct”. 

17. Praising her with these and similar words they 
bowed to her with great delight. They worshipped her with 
sandal paste and sweet scented flowers in great joy. 

18. At that time the gods, seated in their aerial chariots 
in the sky, showered auspicious flowers, bowed to and eulog- 
ised her with hymns. 

19. Then the Brahmins and others joyfully took you 
within the city in a resplendent chariot. 

20. Then the brahmins, the maids and other women 
took her within the house with due honour. 

21. O great sage, ladies performed her ceremonial 
ablution; the brahmins offered benedictions. Himvat and 
Menaka rejoiced much. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


595 


22. Himavat considered his household life fruitful. A 
daughter is far better than an ignoble son. He praised you 
too, Narada, saying “Well done, Well done”. 

23. The lord of the mountains gave monetary gifts to 
brahmins and lords. He made the brahmins recite auspicious 
hymns, as part of the festivities. 

24. The parents delighted with their daughter; the 
brothers and the sisters gathered joyfully in the courtyard, O 
sage. 

25. The happy and delighted Himavat, honoured every- 
one. Then he went to the Gahga for his bath. 

26. In the meantime, Siva, favourably disposed to His 
disciples and prone to divine sports, assumed the guise of a 
dancer and approached Menaka. 

27-28. He held the blowing horn in his left and the 
drum in his right hand. He wore a red cloth and had the 
wallet suspended behind his back. In the guise of a dancer 
with the skill of dancing and singing, he danced well and 
sang many songs in sweet voice. 

29. He blew the horn and played on the drum in 
very sweet tunes. Everything was very pleasant. 

30 All the citizens men, women, children and old 
folks assembled there to witness the performance. 

31. O sage, on hearing the sweet songs, and seeing 
the delightful dance, the people entered into raptures of 
ecstacy. 

32-35 Parvati became unconscious. She saw Siva’s 
handsome form, bearing trident and other symbols before her 
vision. He had smeared the ashes all over His body. He 
was wearing a garland of bones. His face was beaming with 
his shining three eyes. He had the sacred thread of a serpent. 
Exquisitely white in complexion, the handsome lord Siva, the 
friend of the distressed, the ocean of mercy was repeating the 
words “Choose the boon (or the bridegroom).” On seeing 
Him thus in her mind she bowed to Him. Mentally she had 
chosen the boon when she had said, “Be my husband”. 

36. And He had granted her the auspicious t boon with 
pleasure and vanished. The mendicant now continued the 
dance. 



37. Mena who was greatly delighted took gems and 
jewels in gold vessels in order to give them to Him. 

38. But the dancer did not accept the gifts. He re- 
quested for the hand of Parvati and began to dance and sing 
again. 

39. Mena was surprised on hearing his words and she 
was furious. She rebuked the mendicant and wished to 
drive him out. 

40. In the meantime the lord of mountains returned 
from the Ganga. He saw the mendicant in the human form 
in his court-yard. 

41. On hearing the details from Mena he became very 
angry. He ordered his attendants to drive out the dancer. 

42. But O excellent sage, none of them could push 
him out as he was hot to the touch like a blazing fire and 
very brilliant. 

43. O dear, then the mendicant who was clever at 
diverse sports showed his endless great power to the mountain. 

44. The mountain saw him immediately transmuted in 
to the form of Visnu the four-armed, with crown earrings 
and yellow garment. 

45. Flowers etc. which had been offered to the mace- 
bearing lord, Visnu, at the time of worship, he saw on the 
body and over the head of the mendicant. 

46. Then the lord of mountains saw the four-faced 
deity, the creator of worlds, red in colour and reciting the 
Vedic hymns. 

47. Then the lord of mountains saw the form of the 
sun, the eye of the universe, much to his enthusiastic amaze- 
ment. 

48. Then, O dear one, he saw him in the wonderful 
form of Siva accompanied by Parvati. He was smiling and 
shining beautifully. 

49. Then he saw him in the form of a mass of splen- 
dour of no specific shape. It was unsullied, free from pecu- 
liar attributes and desires. It was wonderfully formless. 

50. Thus he saw many forms and features there. He 
was surprised and delighted much. 

51. Then the chief of mendicants begged of Himavat 



Rudrasarhhitd 597 

and Mena the hand of Parvafi as alms. He, the source of 
great enjoyment did not accept, anything else. 

52-54. The lord of mountains deluded by Siva’s; magic 
did not accede to this request. The mendicant too did not 
take anything. He vanished from the scene. Then Himavat 
and Mena realised that Siva had deceived them and gone to 
His abode. After some pondering, they developed a feeling 
of devotion to Siva who is the cause of salvation, the 
bestower of divine bliss. 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 

f Description af Siva’s magic ) 


Brahma said : — 

1. On knowing their undistracted great devotion to 
Siva, O Narada, Indra and other gods, thought like this. 

The gods said : — 

2. If the mountain were to give his daughter to Siva 
with singleminded devotion he will attain salvation immedia- 
tely and will disappear from Bharata . 45 

3. The mountain is the storehouse of endless gems. If 
he were to leave off the Earth and gi, the name of the 
Earth — Ratnagarbha (having gems in the womb) — shall be a 
misnomer. 

4. He will cast off his immobile aspect and assume a 
divine form. He will give his daughter to the Trident bear- 
ing deity and will go to Siva’s region. 

5. He will undoubtedly attain mergence into lord Siva, 
having enjoyed pleasures there, he will attain salvation. 

Brahma said : — 

6 . Thinking like this and consulting one another they, 
in their bewilderment, decided to send god Bfhaspati there. 

45. Bharata, the land of Bharatas, derives its name from the Bharatas, 
an ancient powerful Aryan tribe mentioned in the Rgveda. 



598 


7. O Narada, then Indra and other gods, went to Bfhas- 
pati’s abode lovingly with humility, in their eagerness to 
achieve their self-interest. 

o. Reaching there, all the gods including Indra bowed 
to Brhaspati and submitted every detail to him. 

The gods said : — 

9. O revered preceptor, please go to the abode of 
Himavat for the fulfilment of our task. After going there, you 
shall make disparaging remarks about the trident-bearing 
deity. 

10-11. Parvatl will not marry any other person except 
Siva. The mountain will derive the benefit only after some- 
time if he gives the daughter in marriage without his full 
concurrence. Let the mountain stay on earth for the present. 
O preceptor, you shall make him stay on the earth as he is 
the support of many gems. 

Brahma said : — 

12. On hearing these words of the gods, the preceptor 
of the gods, plugged his ears with his hands. He did not 
accept the proposal of the gods. He remembered the name 
“Siva”,. 

13. Then remembering lord Siva, Bfhaspati 46 of liberal 
mind rebuked the gods again and again and said. 

Brhaspati said : — 

14. All of you gods seem to be selfish in nature. 
You want to destroy other’s interests. Indeed I will go to 
hell by disparaging Siva. 

15. O gods, one of you shall go to the mountain. 
Let him urge the lord of the mountains and achieve the 
desired object. 

16. Let him stay in Bharata after giving his daughter 
without willingness. It is certain he will attain salvation if 
he gives his daughter with devotion. 

17. Afterwards the seven celestial sages will properly 

46. Brhaspati is designated as the family priest of divine community. 
He is the preceptor of the gods and intercedes on their behalf with the 
triad— Brahm&, Vi$QU and Siva, seeking their support. 



Rudrasarhfntd 


599 

persuade the mquntain. Except Pinaka- bearing deity , Parvati 
will not marry any other person. 

18. Or, O gods, all of you go to Brahma’s region 

taking Indra with you. Tell Brahma all your details. Ho 
will get your work done immediately. * 

f 4. 

Brahmd said : — 

19. On hearing it and consulting among themselves 
the gods came to my Assembly. After duly bowing, to me 
they informed me about the details. 

20. On hearing the words of the gods about censuring 
Siva, O sage, I the reciter of the Vedas spoke to them in an 
aggrieved tone. 

21. “Dear children, I am incompetent to decry Siva. 
It is unbearable. It destroys all riches. It is the seed of 
all adversities. 

22. O gods, all of you go to Kailasa and propitiate 
Siva. Make Him go to Himavat’s abode quickly. 

23. Let him approach the lord of mountains and make 
disparaging remarks about Himself. Rebuking others is 
conducive to destruction. Rebuking oneself is conducive to 
fame**. 

24. On hearing my words, all the gods, joyously 
bowed to me and went to Kailasa, the chief of mountains. 

25. Going there and seeing Siva they bowed to Him 
with bent heads and palms joined in reverence. The gods 
eulogised Siva. 

The gods said : — 

26. O great lord, lord of gods, O Siva, the merciful, 
we seek refuge in you. Be sympathetic. Obeisance be to 
you. 

27. O lord, you are favourably disposed to your 
devotees, always carrying out their tasks. You are the 
uplifter of the distressed, and an ocean of mercy. You save 
us from all our miseiies and distresses. 

Brahmd said : — 

28. Eulogising lord Siva thus, Indra and other gods 
respectfully submitted all the details. 



29. On hearing the words of the gods, lord Siva 
agreed to the proposal. He made the gods return after 
assuring* them smilingly. 

30. Hastening to their abodes, the gods rejoiced much 
considering their work fully fulfilled and praising Sadasiva. 

31. Then the lord Siva who is favourably disposed 
to his devotees, the lord of magic and free from aberrations 
went to the lord of mountains. 

32-33. When the lord of the mountains was seated in 
his royal assembly along with Parvati and kinsmen, Sadasiva 
came there, in the meantime bearing a staff and an umbre- 
lla. He was dressed in divine clothes and had a shining mark 
on the forehead. 

34. He was in the guise of a saintly brahmin. He 
was repeating the name of Visnu with devotion. He had the 
garland of crystal beads in his hand and the Salagrama stone 
round his neck. 

35. On seeing that extraordinary guest, Himavat with 
his attendants stood up in reverence and prostrated before him 
with devotion. 

36. Parvati bowed with devotion to her dear lover in 
the guise of a brahmin. On realising him mentally the godd- 
ess eulogised him with great joy. 

37. With great pleasure Siva bestowed his blessings on 
all. O dear. He bestowed on Parvati her cherished desire in 
addition. 

38. The brahmin received with pleasure the articles of 
homage 47 etc. offered by Himavat, the lord of mountains. 

39. O sage, after duly worshipping the excellent bra- 
hmin with pleasure, the mountain Himavat enquired of his 
welfare. 

40. Again, the lord of mountains asked him “Who are 
you, please ?” Immediately the chief of brahmins, spoke to 
the lord of mountains thus. 

The chief of brahmins said : — 

41* O foremost among mountains, I am a brahmin 

47. Madhuparka is a mixture of honey, butter, sugar, curd and 
water offered to a guest when he first comes to the house. 



Rudrasarhhiid 60 1 

devotee of Viflju, and a great scholar. My occupation is that 
v.. a match-maker. I roam about on the earth. 

42. I go where I wish. I go everywhere^ By the 
power of my preceptor I am omniscient. I am simple-minded 
and by nature I help others and I am sympathetic and quell 
aberrations. 

43. I have come to know that you desire to give your 
daughter to Siva, this daughter so tender like a lotus flower, 
of divinely excellent form and endowed with al| accomplish- 
ments. 

44-47. To Siva — who has no support, who is devoid 
of associations, who is deformed, who is without attributes, 
who resides in the cremation-ground, who has the 
form of a snake-catcher, who is a Yogin, who is naked, who 
has deficient limbs, who wears snakes as his ornaments, whose 
name and pedigree are unknown, whose conduct is bad, who 
has no sport, whose body is smeared with ashes, who is furi- 
ous, who lacks in discrimination, whose age is not known, 
whose matted hair is ill worn, who supports all who roam 
about, who has garland of snakes who is a mendicant, 
who is engaged in following wrong-paths and who tenaciously 
discards the Vedic path. 

48. O mountain, this inclination of yours is not at all 
conducive to auspiciousness. O foremost among the wise, bora 
of Narayana’s family, learn sense. 

49. For the marriage of Parvatl, He is not at all a des- 
erving person. On hearing of this, the general public will 
smile in derision. 

50. O lord of mountains, see for yourself. He has 
not a single kinsman. You are the storehouse of great gems 
and jewels. He has no assets at all. 

51. O lord of mountains, you shall consult your kins- 
men, sons, wife and wise counsellors, except Parvati. 

52. O lord of mountains, the medicine does ndt appeal 
at all to the patient. Wrong diet that brings about great 
defects always appeals to him. 

Brahmd said : — 

53. Saying this, the brahmin stopped. Ife took food and 
left the place with pleasure for his abode. Siva is one who 
quietly indulges in His divine sports. 



602 


chapter thirtytwo 

(The seven celestial sages arrive) 


Brahmd said : — 

1. On hearing the words of the brahmin, Mena spoke 
to Himavat with tears welling up in her eyes, due to grief and 
with the heart extremely dejected. 

Mend said : — 

2. O lord of mountains, please listen to my words con- 
ducive to happiness. Please consult important devotees of 
Siva regarding what has been mentioned by the brahmin. 

3. Many disparaging remarks about Siva have been 
made by this brahminical devotee of Visnu. O lord of mou- 
ntains, on hearing these words, my mind is very much dejected. 

4. O lord of mountains, I shall not give my daughter 
endowed with all good accomplishments to Siva with ugly 
features, ignoble conduct and defiled name. 

5. If ypu do not accede to my request, I shall undou- 
btedly die. I will immediately leave this house or swallow 
poison. 

6. With a rope I shall tie Parvati round my neck and 
go to a thick forest. I would rather drown myself in the 
great ocean. I shall never give my daughter to him. 

7. Saying thus with great grief, Mena entered the 
chamber of anger. Casting off her necklaces she lay down 
on the ground sighing and sobbing. 

8. O dear, in the meantime all those seven celestial 
sages were remembered by Siva whose mind was agitated by 
the pangs of separation from Parvati. 

9. All those seven sages, 48 as soon as they were remem- 
bered by Siva, came there in person as though they were an- 
other set of wish-yielding Kalpa trees. 

10. Arundhatl too came there as though she was an 
achievement personified. On seeing them resplendent like the 
sun, Siva stopped his recitation of mantras. 

11. O sage, standing in front of Siva and bowing to 

48. On the seven sages, see Note 164 P. 163. 



Rudrasarhkitd 603 

and eulogising Him, the seven sages of great austerity consi- 
dered themselves blessed. 

12. Then, as they were struck with surprise, they join- 
ed their palms in reverence, bowed to and addressed Siva 
adored by all the worlds: — 

13. The sages said: — “O most excellent of all, O great 
ruler, O Emperor of the heaven-dwellers, how can our fort- 
une which is very excellent be described by us ? 

14-15. Formerly we had performed three kinds of pen- 
ance; we had studied the excellent Vedas ; we had made 
offerings in the fire, we had visited many holy centres; thus 
whatever merit we have acquired verbally, mentally and 
physically that entire merit has now accrued to us by your 
blessing in remembering us. 

16. A man who worships you always shall be blessed. 
How can that merit be properly described, the merit of those 
whom you yourself remember ? 

17. O Sadasiva, we have become the most excellent 
of all people by your remembering us. Usually you never 
even come across the path of ambitions and aspirations of 
ordinary people. 

18-19. O lord, your vision, very difficult to be acquired, 
is like the fruit stooping down within the reach of the dwarf, 
like sight to a man born blind, like eloquency acquired by 
a dumb man, like the indigent meeting with a treasure- 
trove, like the lame man reaching the top of a high mountain 
and like the barren woman bearing a child. 

20. By seeing you today we have become the most 
respectable sages worthy of the worship of all the worlds. We 
have reached the highest position. 

21. O lord of gods, by seeing you who are the lord of 
all gods we have become worthy of great respect. There is 
no necessity of talking more. 

22. If any duty is assigned to us it will be a favour 
to us. An auspicious task befitting us, your utter slaves, 
shall be given to us. 

Brahmd said : — 

23. On hearing their words, Siva the great lord, in 
conformity with the conventions of the worid, spoke these 



604 


Swapw&qa 


pleasant words: — 

Siva said : — 

24. Sages are always to be adored and particularly you 
all. O brahmins, it was for a specific reason that you have 
been summoned here. 

25. My attitude of being helpful is known to you. 
That must be achieved, especially in the interest of the fulfil- 
ment of the desires of the world. 

26. Cause for great misery has arisen for the gods at 
the hands of Taraka the wicked. Boon has already been 
granted. He is invincible. What shall I do ? 

27. O great sages, all the eight cosmic bodies 4 * that I 
possess are not for furthering my self-interest, they are for 
helping the wide world. 

28-29. A great penance has been performed by Parvatl. 
That cannot be performed even by great sages. I have to 
give her the great fruit thereof. Indeed my vow is to render 
delight to my devotees. The fruit I bestow on her shall be 
conducive to her welfare. Hence I wish to marry her. 

30. At the request of Parvatl I went to the abode of 
the mountain in the guise of a mendicant. Clever in divine 
sports I thereby sanctified her. 

31. On hearing to know that I am the supreme 
Brahman, the couple were desirous of giving me their 
daughter with great devotion in accordance with the Vedic 
manner. 

32. On the inducement of the gods, in order to reduce 
the quality of devotion (of Himavat and Mena) I took the 
guise of a devotee of Visnu and rebuked myself. 

33. O sages, on hearing it they were dejected and 
have now lost interest in me and do not wish to give their 
daughter to me. 

34. Hence you all go to the abode of Himavat and 
urge the excellent mountain and his wife. 

35. Speak out the words as venerable as the Vedas. 
Do everything necessary to get the matter straightened out 
and settled. 

36. O excellent ones, I wish to marry their daughter. 

49- On the eightfold image of Siva, see Note 89 P. 13a. 



Rudrasarhhitd 605 

I have agreed to marry her and h^ve already granted her 
that boon. 

37. What is the use of talking too much ? Himavat 
must be convinced. Mena too must be convinced similarly, so 
that the purpose of the gods shall be served well. 

38. Whatever mode is selected by you shall be more 
than necessary. The task is yours. You alone are the sharers of 
the credit. 

Brahma said : — 

39. On hearing these words, the seven sages of pure 
mind became delighted and thought themselves blessed by 
the lord. 

40. <: We have become blessed and contented in every 
respect. We have become venerable to every one, especially 
adorable. 

41. He who is worthy of being respected by Brahma 
and Visnu, he who secures everything accomplished is sending 
us, his emissaries on an errand that is conducive to the 
happiness of all the worlds. 

42. He is the master of the worlds and their father. 
She is considered the mother. Let this proper alliance 
increase for ever like the moon”. 

43. Saying thus the celestial sages bowed to Siva 
and went by aerial path in the direction of the city of 
Himavat. 

44. On seeing that city of heavenly splendour, the 
sages were surprised. Expatiating on their good fortune they 
spoke to one another. 

The sages said : — 

45. We are really blessed and meritorious in being 
able to see this city 50 because we have been engajged in a 
task like this. 

46. This city seems to be better than Alaka, 51 heaven, 61 

50. Himavatpura is probably identical with Ausadhiprastha, the 
capital of Himavat. See Note 10. P. 490. 

51. See Note 2aG P. 265. 

5a. It signifies the heaven of Indra which is supposed to be situated 
on Mount Meru. 



SwapurSna 


606 

Bhogavati 63 and even Amaravatl 64 . 

47. The houses are beautiful and well-built. The 
courtyards are well laid out and paved with different kinds 
of crystals and jewels of variegated colours. 

48. Slabs of solar and lunar stones are found in every 

house. Different kinds of celestial trees are also growing 

here. 

49. The splendour of festoons is also seen in every 
house. They are of different colours and sorts with shapes 
of parrots and swans carved on the walls of the palaces. 

50. The canopies with hanging festoons are of diverse 
character. There are many lakes and ponds. 

51. The gardens and parks are of various kinds 

frequented by delighted people. Here men are like gods 
and the women are like the celestial damsels. 

52. In the land of activities (i.e. Bharata), the sacri- 
ficial priests and the followers of Puranas perform holy rites 
with a desire to attain heaven. That is in vain because they 
have left off the city of Himavat. 

53. Men are eager to go to heaven only as long as 

this city is not seen. O brahmins, when this city is seen 

what is the use of heaven ? 

Brahma said : — 

54. Describing the city thus all those excellent sages 
went to the rich and well-furnished abode of Himavat. 

55. On seeing those seven sages, resplendent like the 
sun, coming along the aerial path from a distance, Himavat 
was surprised and said : — 

Himavat said : — 

56. The seven venerable persons, resplendant like the 
sun, are approaching me. These sages shall be worshipped 
by me now. 

57. We householders are really blessed, to whom great 
men like these, bestowing happiness on all, pay their visit. 

53. It is the subterranean capital of the Nagas in the Nagaloka 
portion of Patala. 

54 . It refers to the famous city of Indra, supposed to be situated on 
Mount Meru. 



Rudrasathhitd 607 

Brahma said : — 

58. In the meantime they descended on the ground 
from the sky. On seeing them Himavat advanced to 
welcome them. 

59. With palms joined in reverence he bowed to them 
with stooping shoulders and worshipped them with due 
respect and honour. 

60. Desiring welfare of others, the seven sages embra- 
ced Himavat, the lord of mountains and spoke words of 
auspicious blessings with pleasant faces. 

61. Keeping them ahead he said — “My household 
life is blessed”. With great devotion he got and offered 
them seats. 

62. When they were duly seated, he too sat with 
their permission. Then Himavat spoke to the refulgent 
sages : — 

Himavat said : — 

63-64. I am blessed. I am contented. My life is 
fruitful. I am the best person worthy of being seen in the 
three worlds. I am as pure as any of the holy centres. 
All this is because you, verily in lord Visnu’s forms, have 
come to my abode. Perfect ones such as you, what special 
purpose can there be in visiting poor persons like me ? 

65. Still I am your servant. Some task there may be 
to be entrusted to me. Mercifully may it be spoken out. 
May my life be fruitful. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

( The appeasement of Himavat) 

The sages said : — 

1. Siva is the father of the universe. Parvati is the 
mother of the universe. Hence your daughter shall be given 
to Siva, the supreme soul. 

2. O Himalaya, by this activity your life will be 



608 & mpurdna 

fruitful. You will become the venerable person of the most 
venerable in the universe. There is no doubt about it. 

Brahm& said : — 

3. O great sage, on hearing these words of the seven 
sages, the lord of the mountains bowed to them with joined 
palms and spoke thus. 

Himavat said : — 

4. O ye seven sages of great enlightenment, what 
you have just now said has been already cherished by me by 
the will of Siva. 

5. Now, a certain brahmin professing Vaisnava cult 
came here and spoke very critically about Siva. 

6. Ever since, the mother Parvati has gone out of sense. 
Hences she does not wish her daughter’s marriage with Siva. 

7. She has entered the chamber of anger. She is 
aggrieved and her clothes have become dirty. O brahmins, 
her obduracy is so great that she does not pay heed to 
any advice. 

8. I too am, you can say, out of sense. I am telling you 
the truth. I do not wish to give my daughter to Siva who 
is apparently a mendicant. 

Brahma said : — 

9. O sage, after saying these words, the king of moun- 
tains deluded by Siva’s magic became silent and sat amidst 
the sages. 

10. The seven celestial sages praised the magic of Siva 
and sent Arundhati 56 to Menaka. 

11. Then at the bidding of her husband Arundhati, 
the bestower of knowledge, went quickly to the place where 
Mena and Parvati were sitting. 

12. After going in she saw Mena lying in her grief. 
The chaste lady spoke to her these carefully selected sweet 
and wholesome words : — 


55- She is the wife of Vasi$tha, one of the seven sages. In Hindu 
Mythology she is regarded as the highest pattern of conjugal excellence 
and wifely devotion. 



Rudrasashhitd 609 

Arundhati said : — 

13. O Menaka, get up. O chaste lady, I, Arundhati, 
have come to your house. The seven sages of sympathetic 
nature have also come. 

Brahma said : — 

14. On hearing Arundhati’s voice, Mena got up quick- 
ly and bowed to her who was on a par with Lak$mi in her 
brilliance. 

Mend said : — 

15. Ha, what a meritorious thing is this ! We are 
blessed. Arundhati, the daughter-in-law of the Creator of the 
universe, the wife of Vasistha, has come here. 

1G. O gentle lady, what for is your visit now ? Please 
tell me specifically. My daughter and I are your slaves. 
Be merciful to us. 

Brahma said : — 

17. Arundhati, the chaste lady thus addressed, advised 
her in various ways and returned to the place where the 
sages were seated. 

18. Then they began to advise the lord of the moun- 
tains, after thinking on the feet of Siva. They were clever in 
speech and they spoke respectfully. 

The sages said : — 

19. O lord of the mountains, may our words, the cause 
of everything auspicious, be heard. Give Parvatl to Siva. 
Become the father-in-law of the world-destroyer. 

20. For the destruction of Taraka, formerly Brahma 
requested Siva who is the lord of all and who does not beg 
of any one, to strive for this alliance. 

21. Siva, the foremost of Yogins was not eager to 
marry. But since requested by Brahma, the lord agreed to 
take your daughter. 

22. Parvati performed a penance and the lord pro- 
mised her. Thus for these two reasons the lord of Yogins 
wishes to marry her. 



610 


Brahmd said : — 

23. On hearing the words of the sages, Himavat laug- 
hed but he was a little frightened. He spoke with humility. 

Himavat said : — 

24. I do not see any royal paraphernalia with Siva, 
He has none to support him. He has no assets. He has no 
kinsman. 

25. I do not wish to give my daughter to a Yogin who 
is extremely detached. O ye sons of the Creator of the Vedas 
tell me decisively. 

26. If a father were to give his daughter in marriage 
to an unsuitable person, out of love, delusion, fear or covet- 
ousness, he is doomed. He will go to hell. 

27. Out of my own free will, I will not give her to the 
trident-bearing Siva. O sages, whatever arrangement is 
befitting here, may kindly be carried out. 

Brahmd said : — 

28. O excellent sages, on hearing these words of the 
mountain Himavat, Vasistha 66 , the most eloquent among 
them replied: — 

Wasiffha said : — 

29. O lord of mountains, listen to my words in every 
respect conducive to your welfare; they are not against virtue. 
They are true and shall bring about your joy here and here- 
after. 

30. Statements, in ordinary language and in the Vedas, 
are of three forms. A scholar knowing all lores understands 
them by means of his pure vision of knowledge. 

31. It is only an enemy, though keen in intellect, who 
says what is pleasing to the ears now but what transpires to be 
untrue and unwholesome afterwards. He never speaks whole- 
some things. 

56. Vasistha was one of the seven great sages and one of the ten 
Praj&patis. There are several accounts about his origin. He is declared to 
have been either a mind-born son of Brahm& or the son of Mitra and 
Varupa from Urvasi. 



Rudrasamhitd • 


611 


32. Only a virtuous and sympathetic friend will speak 
such words as are unpleasant in the beginning but conducive 
to happiness in the end. 

33. But the third variety of behaviour nectarlike to the 
ears, conducive to happiness on all occasions, essential and 
truthful is considered to be the most excellent. 

34. O mountain, these are the three types of behaviour 
as mentioned in the treatises on polity. Tell me which type 
of behaviour shall I adopt to please you. 

35. Siva, the lord of gods, is devoid of riches created by 
Brahma. But His mind is engrossed in the ocean of true 
knowledge. 

36. How can lord Siva who is knowIedge-Bliss Him- 
self have any desire for articles created by Brahma ? An 
ordinary householder gives his daughter to one who has a 
kingdom and riches in his possession ? 

37. By offering his daughter to a miserable person, a 
father may be guilty of slaughtering his daughter. Who can 
think Siva miserable whose servant is Kubera ? 

38. He is attributeless, supreme soul, great lord and 
greater than Prakrti. He can create and annihilate things by 
a mere sportive touch of His eyebrows. 

39. His manifestations are threefold, He is the cause of 
creation sustenance and annihilation in the names of Brahma 
Visnu and Siva. 

40. Brahma stays in Brahmaloka, Visnu in the milk 
ocean, Siva in Kailasa, all these are the attributes of Siva. 

41. The primordial nature, born of Siva, maintains three- 
fold forms in the creative activity, partially out of sport with 
diverse digits. 

42 Vanl, the deity presiding over the activity of speech, 
is born of his mouth ; Laksmi, in the form of riches, is born 
out of his chest. 

43. Parvatl manifested herself in the splendours of the 
gods. After killing all the demons she granted riches and 
glory to the gods. 

44. In another Kalpa she was born of the womb of 
Daksa’s wife. Her name was Sati. She attained Siva. Daksa 
gave her to Him. 

45. By her Yogic power she cast off her body on hearing 



612 


about the insult to her husband. She is now born of you in 
the womb of Mena. 

46. This Parvati is the wife of Siva in every birth. In 
every Kalpa she is the great cosmic intellect, mother of wise 
men. 

47. She is victorious always in the form of Siddha, the 
bestower of Siddhi (achievement) and is Siddhi personified. 
Siva carefully preserves the bones and ashes from the fun- 
eral pyre of Sati. 

48. Hence, you give your daughter, this gentle lady to 
Siva out of your own free will. Otherwise she will herself 
go and sui render herself as his beloved wife. 

49. Taking the firm decision on seeing her innumer- 
able sufferings He came to the place of your daughter’s 
penance in the guise of a brahmin. 

50. After consoling her and granting her the boon He 
returned to His abode. It was for complying with her re- 
quest that Siva requested you for the hand of Siva, O 
mountain. 

51. Both of you had accepted the proposal as you were 
drawn by devotion to Siva. O lord of mountains, how is it 
that your mind has taken a somersault now ? Please tell me. 

52. On being requested by the gods, the lord has sent 
us, the sages and Arundhati to you. 

53. O mountain, we instruct you plainly. By giving 
Parvati to Siva you will meet with great bliss. 

54. O lord of mountains, even if you do not give 
Parvati to Siva out of your own free will, their marriage 
will take place as a result of the inexorable workings of 
fate. 

55. O dear one, Siva has already granted Parvati the 
boon at the time of her penance. A promise of Siva cannot 
be turned topsyturvy. 

56. Oh ! even the promise of ordinary good men act- 
ing under the guidance of Siva cannot be transgressed in all 
the worlds. O mountain, what then about that of Siva 
Himself. 

57. Working singlehanded, Lord Indra chopped off the 
wings of mountains as though at play. Parvati too sportively 
broke the peak of Meru. 



Rudrasarfihitd 


613 


58. All riches can be sacrificed, O lord of mountains, 
for the sake of a single entity, but the eternal Sruti has it 
that one should forsake a single entity for the sake of a 
unit. 

59. When danger was imminent at the hands of a 
brahmin, the chief of kings, Anaranya 67 , saved his entire asset 
by giving his daughter to him. 

60. When he was threatented by the curse of brahmin 
his preceptors, wise kinsmen and people well-versed in the 
science of polity advised him hastily. 

61. O king of mountains, you too save your kinsmen 
by giving your daughter to Siva. You can claim thus the 
gods too to your side. 

Brahmd said : — 

62. On hearing the words of Vasistha, Himavat, with 
a dejected heart but laughing outwardly asked him about the 
details of the story of the king. 

Himavat said — 

63. O brahmin, what is the race to which the king 
Anaranya belonged ? How did he save his assets by giving 
his daughter ? 

Brahma said : — 

64. On hearing these words of the mountain, Vasi$tha 
became glad and told him the details of the interesting story 
of the king. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

(The Story of Anaranya ) 


Vasiffha said : — 

1. The king Anaranya hailed from the race of the 
fourteenth Manu Indrasavarni. 

57- According to SP. RS. Section III ch. 34, the King Anaramra 
belonged to the lineage of the fourteenth Manu called Indra-Savarpi. He 
is said to have performed a hundred horse -sacrifices with Bhrgu as his offi- 
ciating priest but did not accept Indra-hood. 



2. The great king Anaranya, bom of Mangalaranya* 
was very strong. He was a special devotee of Siva and 
ruled over the seven continents 68 . 

3. Having Bhrgu as his priest he performed a hundred 
sacrifices. He did not accept the position of Indra even 
when offered by the gods. 

4. O Himavat, hundred sons were born to him and 
a beautiful daughter Padma who was equal to Laksmi. 

5. O excellent mountain, he was more fond of his 
daughter than of his hundred sons. 

6. He had five queens who were endowed with great 
qualities and fortunes and were loved by him over and 
above his life. 

7. The girl entered the prime of her youth in her 
father’s palace. The king issued letters of invitation for the 
requisition of good bridegrooms. 

8. In ' the meantime the sage Pippalada eagerly 
hastening back to his hermitage saw a certain Gandharva in 
an isolated place in the penance-grove. 

9. The Gandharva was an expert in the science of 
erotics. He was in the company of a woman. He was 
therefore completely submerged in the ocean of pleasure, 
sexual dalliance and was lusty. 

10. On seeing him the great sage became very lustful. 
He lost interest in penance and began to think of acquiring 
a wife. 

11. Thus the good sage spent a long time with his 
mind utterly agitated by pangs of love. 

12. Once while the good sage was on his way to the 
river Puspabhadra* * for taking his bath he happened to seethe 
young maiden Padma who was as charming as goddess Laksmi. 

13. The sage asked the persons standing by — “Who 
is this girl ?” The people, afraid of the curse bowed to the 
sage and replied. 

•Contrast Pargiter AIHS PP. 14-, , 246. Anaranya was born of Sam- 
bhuta. 

** It has not been possible to identify this river. 

58. It is a division of the terrestrial world The number of these 
divisions varies according to different authorities. It is usually seven. These 
are situated round the mountain Meru like the petals of a lotus flower 
and each being separated from the other by a distinct ocean. The central 
one is Jambudvipa in which is included Bharata Khap^la (India) . 



Rudrasarhhitd 


615 


The people said : — 

14. This excellent lady, the repository of all good 
qualities, is the daughter of Anaranya and is called Padmi. 
She is another LaksmI (goddess of fortune). She is being 
wooed by great kings. 

Brahmd said : — 

15. On hearing the words of the people who spoke 
the truth, the sage became much agitated in the mind and 
was eager to possess her. 

16. O mountain, the sage took bath and worshipped 
his favourite deity Siva duly. The lustful sage went to the 
council-chamber of Anaranya for the sake of alms. 

17. Immediately after seeing the sage, the king was 
struck with awe and bowed to him. He offered him homage 
( Madhuparka) * and devoutly worshipped him. 

18. Out of love, the sage accepted everything and 
ultimately requested for the hand of his daughter. The 
king kept quiet, being unable to give any decisive reply. 

19. The sage repeated his request saying — “O great 
king, give me your daughter. Otherwise in a trice I will 
reduce everything to ashes’*. 

20. The king and his attendants were overwhelmed 
by the splendour of the sage. Staring at the old emaciated 
brahmin, they began to cry. 

21. The queens, knowing not what shall be done, 
lamented. The chief queen, the mother of the girl, fell 
unconscious in the excess of her grief. 

22. The brothers of the girl were agitated with sorrow. 
O lord of mountains, everything and every one connected 
with the king was overwhelmed with grief. 

23. In the meantime the wise brahmin, the excellent 
preceptor of the king, as well as his intelligent priest came 
there. 

24. The king bowed to them and paid homage. He 
cried before them. He explained to them everything and 
asked them what was the proper step to be taken 
immediately. 

•See Note 47 P. 6oo 



25-26. The brahmin, the preceptor of the king and the 
scholarly priest were experts in sacred lore and polity. 
They advised the king in that matter. 

The preceptor and the priest said : — 

27. O wise king, listen to our beneficial words. Do 
not be anxious. In the company of your kinsmen turn your 
good attention to the sacred texts. 

28. O king, whether today or after a year, the 
princess is to be given to a deserving person, a brahmin or 
anyone else. 

29. In the three worlds we do not see more deserving 
person than this brahmin. Give your daughter to this sage 
and save your riches. 

30. O king, if all riches face the danger of destruction 
due to one object or person, the wise man saves everything 
by abandoning that object or person unless it be that who has 
sought refuge. 

Vasiffha said : — 

31. On hearing the words of the wise, the king lament- 
ed again and again but ultimately offered his daughter fully 
bedecked in ornaments to the excellent sage. 

32. O mountain, accepting and marrying the beautiful 
maiden Padma, on a par with goddess LaksmI, in accordance 
with holy laws, the delighted sage returned to his abode. 

33. After giving his daughter to an old man, the king 
was much dejected in mind. Abandoning everything he went 
to the forest for performing penance. 

34. O mountain, when the king went to the forest, the 
queen, passed away, due to the pangs of separation from her 
husband and daughter. 

35. Without the king, the respectable sons and officers 
of the king became unconscious. The other people thinking 
that the king was dead lamented much. 

36. Anaranya went to the forest, performed great 
penance, and worshipped Siva with devotion. In the end, he 
attained Sivaloka free from all ailments. 

37. The eldest son of the king, Kirtiman, virtuously 
ruled over the kingdom and tended the subjects like his own 
children. 



Rudrasamhita 


617 


38. Thus, O mountain, I have narrated to you the 
auspicious story of Anaranya, how he saved his race and his 
wealth by offering his daughter to the sage. 

39. O king of mountains, you too, give your daughter 
to Siva, save the entire family and keep even the gods under 
your control. 


CHAPTER THIRTYF1VE 

(The story of Padma and Pippalada) 

Ndrada said : — 

1 . O dear, what did the excellent mountain do after 
hearing the anecdote of Anaranya and the marriage of his 
daughter ? Please tell me. 

Brahma said : — 

2. After hearing the story of Anaranya including the 
anecdote of the offer of his daughter, the lord of mountains 
again asked Vasis{ha with palms joined in reverence. 

The lord of mountains said : — 

3. O leading sage Vasistha, O son of Brahma, O merci- 
ful one, you have narrated the wonderful story of Anaranya. 

4. What did Padma, the daughter of Anaranya, do after 
marrying sage Pippalada. Please mention her story fully. 

Vasiflha said : — 

5-6 The very old and venerable sage Pippalada returned 
to his hermitage along with his wife Padma and passed time 
in pleasure. He was not too much sensuous. He continued to 
perform his penance and holy rites in the forest and on the 
mountain. 

7. The daughter of Anaranya served the sage devoutly 
physically, mentally and verbally like Laksmi serving Vi§nu. 

8. Once Dharma (Virtue) assumed the guise of a king 
by his magical power and happened to see on the way that lady 
of gentle smiles going to the celestial river for her holy dip. M 


59. Cf. Note 39 P. 579. 



618 Stvapurdna 

9-10. The lord Dharma was seated in a beautiful 
chariot studded with gems. He was bedecked in many kinds 
of ornaments. He was in the prime of fresh youth, glorious 
and lustrous like the cupid. On seeing Padma he spoke thus, 
in order to know the innermost feelings of the sage’s wife. 

Dharma said : — 

11. O beautiful woman, you are Laksmi herself; you 
are charming, you are worthy of a king; you are in the very 
prime of youth; you will be ever young; you are a lovely 
sweet lady. 

12. I am telling you the truth, O slender-limbed lady. 
You lack lustre and colour in the presence of the sage Pippa- 
lada who is old and weak. 

13. Cast off that ruthless old brahmin always engaged 
in penances. Look up to me a great king, heroic in sexual 
dalliance and agitated by Kama. 

14. A beautiful woman acquires beauty as a result of 
the merit of a previous birth. The beauty becomes completely 
fruitful only after embracing a man of aesthetic taste. 

15. I am the lover of a thousand beautiful women. I 
am an expert in the erotic science and literature. Abandon 
that husband and make me your slave. 

16. You can indulge in sexual dalliance in the beauti- 
ful secluded forests, mountains and banks of rivers in my 
company. Make your life fruitful. 

Vasiffha said : — 

17. Saying this, he got down and was eager to catch 
her hands. The chaste lady then addressed him thus. 

Padmd said: — 

18. Away, away, go away you sinful king. If you 
cast your lustful ogles at me you will be doomed in a trice. 

19. How can I resort to you, lecherous and mad after 
women, after forsaking the excellent sage Pippalada whose 
body is sanctified by austerities ? 

20. By the very touch of a person under the influence 
of women all merits are destroyed. He is a great sinner. 
His very sight promotes sins. 



Rudrasarftkitd 


619 


21. Even if he performs holy rites, a person succumb- 
ing to the viles of women is always impure. The manes, the 
gods and all men despise him. 

22. Of what avail is knowledge, penance, repetition 
of sacred mantras, sacrifice, adoration, learning and charitable 
gift to him who is henpecked ? 

» 23. Since you spoke to me viewing me with the feelings 
that I am your wife although I ought to have been viewed 
* as your mother, you will have a gradual decline as a result 
of my curse. 

Vasiffha Said : — 

24. On hearing the curse of the chaste woman, O lord 
of mountains, Dharma cast off the guise of a king and 
assumed his real form. Tremblingly he spoke thus — 

Dharma said : — 

25. O mother, know me as Dharma elderly and vener- 
able to men of wisdom and preceptors. O chaste lady, I 
always consider other’s wives as mothers. 

26. It was to know your innermost feelings that I 
approached you. I knew your mind, still I was urged by 
fate. 

27. Only proper suppression, not the contrary, is 
carried out by you. Chastisement of those who go astray from 
the right path is carried out by Siva Himself. 

28. Obeisance to Siva who distributes happiness, 
misery, boons, prosperity or adversity on all. 

29. Obeisance to Siva who can make people enemies 
or friends, create affection or quarrel, to generate or destroy 
things. 

30. Obeisance to Siva who has made milk white, who 
has bestowed chillness on water and heat on fire. , 

31. Obeisance to Siva, by whom the primordial nature, 
the principles Mahat etc, Brahma, Vi§nu, Siva and others 
are created. 

Brahmd said : — 

32. After saying thus Dharma, the most venerable god 



in the universe stood in front of her, stunned but delighted 
at her chastity. But he did not say anything. 

33. Princess Padma, the chaste beloved of Pippalada, 
O mountain, was surprised on realising that it was Dharma 
and said. 

Padma said : — 

34. O Dharma, you are the ever present witness of all 
activities. O lord, why did you deign to deceive me to 
know my mind ? 

35. O Dharma, what has been done already does not 
amount to any guilt on my part. You have been cursed in 
vain by me but it was due to my ignorance and innate 
nature of woman. 

36. I am now thinking as to what shall be done about 
it. May that idea strike me whereby I may get peace. 

37. This sky, these quarters and the winds may get 
destroyed but the curse of a chaste lady will never be 
destroyed. 

38. In the Satyayuga you shine with all the legs, O 
king of gods, on all occasions, day or night, like the moon on 
a full moon night. 

39. If you are destroyed, the annihilation of all crea- 
tions will occur. But a sense of helpless despair is unnecessary. 
So I shall explain. 

40. In the Tretayuga, one leg shall be defunct, O 
excellent god. Another leg too shall be defunct in Dvapara 
and the third one in the Kali age, O lord. 

41. In the latter half of Kali, all the legs will be 
chopped off. Again in the Satyayuga you will attain per- 
fection. 

42. In the Satyayuga you will be all-pervasive and in 
the other Yugas partially so. Thus in accordance with the 
Yugas, you will be maintaining your position. 

^•3. Let these words of mine be true and pleasing to 
you, I am now going to serve my husband. O lord, you 
return to your abode. 


6o. On the historical time as divided into four ages, called Yugas, 
sec Note 32 P. 43. 



Rudrasarhhitd 621 

Brahma said : — 

44. On hearing her words Dharma became delighted. 
Then Dharma, the son of Brahma, spoke to the chaste lady 
who had been speaking to him. 

Dhanpa said : — 

* 45-46. O chaste lady, you are blessed, you are devo- 
tedly attached to your husband. Hail to you. Take this 
boon. Your husband is the cause of your great protection. 
Let him be a young man with sexual vigour and righteous- 
ness. He shall be comely in appearance, good in conduct, 
eloquent in speech and perpetually stable in youth. 

47. Let him enjoy more longevity than Markandeya. 61 
Let him be richer than Kubera. Let him enjoy more pro- 
sperity and power than Indra. 

48. Let him be a devotee of Siva on a par with Visnu. 
Let him be a greater Siddha than Kapila 62 . Let him vie with 
Brhaspati in intelligence and with Brahma in equanimity. 

49. You will be blessed with all the fortunes of your 
master as long as you live. Also you will be perpetually 
young. 

50. Undoubtedly you will become the mother of ten 
sons who will be greater than your husband, they will have 
all good qualities and live long. 

51. O chaste lady, let your abode be endowed with ail 
riches, brightly illuminated always and superior to even the 
abode of Kubera. 

Vcsiftha said : — 

52. O excellent mountain, after saying thus, Dharma 
stood quiet there. She circumambulated him, bowed to him 
and returned to her house. 

53. Bestowing blessings upon her, Dharma returned to 

6i. He was the son of Mi kanda, remarkable for his austerities and 
great age He is represented as one of the seven persons who are considered 
to be ‘deathless’. Cf. 

arerernrr gfonrfat i 

frq: T^T*T^T II 

6a. He is represented as a celebrated sage and a founder of the 
Sankhya philosophy. He is said to have destroyed the hundred thousand 
sons of King Sagara with a glance. 



622 &ivapurS$a 

his abode. He praised Padma lovingly in every assembly he 
visited. 

54. She sported about in secret with her husband who 
became a young man. She gave birth to sons who surpassed 
her husband in their good qualities. 

55. All kinds of riches were granted to the couple 
increasing their happiness. They were conducive to the pros- 
perity here and hereafter. 

56. O lord of mountains, this ancient story of the 
couple has been narrated to you. You have heard the story 
with pleasure and respect. 

57. Knowing the real situation give your daughter 
Parvatl to Siva. Cast off sins, O lord of mountains, in the 
company of your wife Mena. 

58-61. After a week there is a very auspicious hour 
very rare to meet with. The presiding planet of the lagna is in 
the lagna. The moon is in conjunction with his son, Mercury 
as well as the constellation RohinI 63 . The moon and the 
stars occupy pure positions. The month is Marga^irsa and 
the day is Monday free from all defects. All the planets are 
in auspicious conjunction. They are not aspected by the evil 
planets. The Jupiter is in a position that is conducive to the 
birth of a good child and all good fortune to the bridegroom. 
O lord of mountains, give your daughter Parvatl, the mother 
of the universe, the primordial Being to Siva, the father of 
the universe. You will then get quiet and contentment. 

Brahma said : — 

62. After saying this, the excellent sage Vasisfha, most 
excellent of wisemen, stopped after remembering lord Siva, 
the creator of divine sports of diverse varieties. 


63. Rohifli : the fourth of the lunar asterisms, the daughter of Daksa 
and the wife of the moon. 



RudrasarkhitS 


623 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 

(The statements of the seven sages) 

Brahma said : — 

1. On hearing the words of the seven sages, Himacala, 
his wife and attendants were very much surprised. The lord 
of the mountains spoke to the other mountains. 

Himacala said : — 

2. O lord of mountains — Meru, 61 O Sahya 65 O Gandha- 
madana, 66 O Mandara, 67 O Mainaka, 88 O Vindhya, 69 all of 
you listen to my words. 

3. Vasisfha says like this. It is to be considered what 
I shall do now. You consider well, decide and let me know. 

Brahma said:— 

4. On hearing his words, Sumeru and other mountains 
decided carefully and spoke to Himalaya lovingly. 

The mountains said : — 

5. Of what avail is a long discussion and deliberation 
now ? What should be done is only that. She is born only 
for the purpose of the gods. 

6. Incarnating for the sake of Siva, she shall be given 
to Siva. Siva has been propitiated by her and Siva has also 
spoken to her. 


64. The mountain stands in the centre of the earth and is described 
as the paricarp of the earth-lotus with great islands or continents forming 
its petals For details, see Note 24 7 P. ;io. 

65. Sahya is the name applied to that part of the Western Ghats 
which lies to the north of the Travancore lulls. 

66. Gandhamadana is that part of the Himalayas on which the 
Badarikasrama is situated. See Note 309 P.40V 

67. See Note 30 P. 56 >. For details see Note 36 P. 48. 

68. Mainaka: See Note 12 P. 491.. 

69. The name Vindhva is applied to the whole chain of hills 
running from Gujrat to the Gaya region and lying on both sides of the 
Narmada river. 



SivapurSna 


624 

Brahma said : — 

7. On hearing the words of Meru and others, Himacala 
was greatly pleased and Parvati laughed within herself. 

8. Arundhati too convinced Mena wilh reasoned state- 
ments and examples from various mythological legends, 

9. Then the wife of the mountain too was delightedly 
convinced. She entertained Arundhati, the sages and the 
mountain with a grand feast and then took food herself. 

10. Then the chief of mountains, freed from wrong 
notions and grown wise, spoke with palms joined in reverence 
and mind extremely delighted. 

Himacala said : — 

11. O fortunate sages, please listen to my words. All 
my bewilderment has vanished since I have heard the story of 
Siva and Siva. 

12. Everything that I possess, my body, wife, Mena, 
sons, daughter, assets and achievements and other things 
belong to Siva and not otherwise. 

Brahma, said:-~ 

13-14. After saying so, he bedecked his daughter with 
various ornaments. Then he took them all and placed them 
on the lap of the sage saying “These are the presents I have 
to give her.” 

The sages said : — 

15. O mountain, you are the donor, Siva is the men- 
dicant, and the alms goddess Parvati. What else can be 
better than this ? 

16. Since the course of your summits is befitting, you 
are blessed, you are the chief of all mountains, you are great 
in every respect. 

Brahmd said : — 

17. After saying thus, the sages of pure mind offered 
their blessings to the girl— “Be pleasing to Siva.” 

18. They touched her with their hands and continued — 
“Everything will be well with you. As the moon in the 
bright half of the month, may your qualities increase.” 



Rudrasarhkiti 


625 


19. After saying thus and offering fruits and flowers to 
the lord of mountains, the sages made him believe that the 
alliance was a settled fact. 

20. The great chaste lady Arundhati tempted Mena 
further with Siva’s good qualities. 

21. According to the worldly convention they smeared 
the moustache of the mountain with powdered turmeric and 
saffron as an auspicious custom. 

22. After fixing the auspicious Lagna for the marriage 
and congratulating and complimenting one another the sages 
came to Siva’s abode on the fourth day. 

23. After reaching the place, Vasistha and other sages 
bowed to Siva and eulogised Him with different hymns. They 
then spoke to lord Siva. 

The sages said : — 

24. O lord Siva, lord of the gods, O great lord Siva, 
please listen lovingly to the narration of what we, your 
attendants, have done. 

25. O great lord, the lord of mountains and Mena have 
been urged with different kinds of statements and examples 
from mythological legends. Undoubtedly he is enlightened. 

26. Parvati has been betrothed to you by the lord of 
mountains. It is not otherwise. Now please start for the 
marriage with your attendants and the gods. 

27. O great god, O lord, go to the abode of Himacala 
and marry Parvati in accordance with the customs for the 
sake of a son. 

Brahma said : — 

28. On hearing their words, lord Siva who was deli- 
ghted and who loved to follow worldly conventions' laughed 
and said: — 

Lord Siva said : — 

29. O fortunate one, a marriage ceremony has never 
been witnessed nor even heard of by me before. The details 
of the same shall be mentioned by you all, specifically. 



Brahmd said : — 

30. On hearing these words in a worldly vein uttered 
by Siva, they laughingly replied to Sadasiva, lord of the 
gods. 

The sages said : — 

31-33. Please invite and summon Visnu with his re- 
tinue, Brahma with his sons, lord Indra, 70 all the sages, 
Yaksas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Siddhas, Vidyadharas, heavenly 
nymphs and others. All of them will jointly accomplish 
everything for you. There is no doubt about it. 

Brahmd said : — 

34. Saying this and taking His permission the seven 
sages joyfully returned to their abodes praising the way of 
Siva. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 

( The letter of betrothal is despatched , the requisites for the celebra- 
tion are gathered and the mountain-irwitees arrive) 

Ndrada said : — 

1. Dear wise father, when the seven sages returned 
what did Himacala do ? Please tell me, O lord. 

Brahmd said : — 

2. O great sage, I shall tell you what Himacala did, 
when the seven sages and Arundhati left. 

3. Bidding farewell to his brothers, Meru and others 
Himacala, the lord of mountains, rejoiced in the company of 
his sons, daughter and wife. 

4. Urged by them lovingly, Himacala caused the 
letter of betrothal to be written by Garga, his priest. 


70. Indra is called Satakratu — ‘a God of hundred rites*, for he 
achieves Indrahood— lordship of the gods — by performing one hundred 
horse-sacrilices. 



RUdrasarhhitd 627 

5. He despatched the letter of betrothal to Siva along 
with articles of homage through his kinsmen. 

6. Those people arrived at Kailasa and handed over 
the letter to Siva after applying the holy mark on his 
forehead. 

7. After being duly honoured by the lord, they returned 
highly delighted to the penance of the mountain. 

8. On seeing those people who had been highly 
honoured by lord Siva and who had returned excessively 
delighted, the mountain rejoiced much. 

9. Then he extended his invitation highly pleasing to 
his kinsmen stationed in different places with great delight. 

10. Then he began collecting foodstuffs and other 
requisite articles intended for the performance of the 
marriage. 

11. Mountainous masses of rice, beaten rice, jaggery, 
sugar candies and salt were heaped up. 

12. He caused huge tanks and receptacles built for 
milk, ghee and curds as well as for fried flour cakes of 
barley and other grains and ball-like sweets. 

13. Big tanks and receptacles were made for the 
nectar, sugarcane juice, baked cakes, and the sugar candies. 

14. Tanks were built for butter, spirituous beverages, 
sweet juices of various kinds and rice preparations of various 
sorts. 

15. Different kinds of pickles and side dishes were 

prepared that might appeal to Siva’s Ganas and the gods. 

Different kinds of valuable garments purified in fire were 

kept ready. 

16. Gems and jewels of different kinds, gold, silver and 
other articles were gathered duly. 

17. Auspicious rites were started by the mountain on 
an auspicious day. The womenfolk of the mountain per- 
formed the purificatory ceremony for Parvatl. 

18. Women bedecked in ornaments performed 

auspicious rites. The delighted brahmin women of the 
city did everything in accordance with the tradition and 
custom. 



628 Sioapurfya 

19. Great festivities and holy auspicious rites were 
performed by the delighted Himavat too. 

20-21. Delighted in every respect and eagerly awaiting 
the arrival of his kinsmen he was excited with various 
emotions. The invitees came there along with their wives, 
children and attendants. O celestial sage, listen to a detailed 
narration of the arrival of those mountains. 

22-24. In order to increase the devotion to Siva I 
shall explain in brief. Mandara, the chief mountain in 
heaven came to Himavat in a divine form. He was highly 
refulgent. He was accompanied by his wife and children. 
His company shone brilliantly. He had brought with him 
many gems and jewels. 

25. Bringing with him many articles of presentation, 
the liberal Western mountain 71 reached there in a divine 
form. 

26. The Eastern mountain came there with brilliant 
gems and jewels. He looked delighted and extremely 
brilliant, 

27. The highly venerable lord of hiountains, Malaya, 72 
came there with his followers. He was happy with his 
excellent followers. 

28. The mountain Dardura 73 came along with his wife. 
He was exquisitely dressed. He was delighted 74 . He had many 
attendants with him. 

29* O dear, the delighted mountain Nisadha came 
along with his attendants. He was very brilliant. 

30. The fortunate mountain Gandhamadana came with 
great pleasure along with his children and womenfolk. 

31. Mountains Karavlra 75 and Mahendra 76 of great 
wealth and prosperity also came there. 

71. ‘Asta’ is a mythical sunset mountain in the West while *udaya* 
is a mythical sunrise mountain in the East. 

72. Malaya (derived from the Dravidian word malai meaning * 1 . ill* 
was the name applied to the Travancore hills and the southernmost part 
of the Western ghats. 

73. Dardura, variously spelt as Darddara or Darddura is identified 
with the Deogarh peak in the eastern part of the Vindhyas. G. E. Part I 
P. 104. 

74. A mythic range \>f mountains lying south of Meru, but some- 
times described as on the east H. M P 24. 

75. It has not been possible to identify this mountain. 

76. Mahendra, the same as Mahendragiri, was the name applied to 
the Eastern Ghats. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


629 


32. Pariyatra 77 came with attendants, children and 
womenfolk. He was brilliant and delighted. He had 
brought many gems and jewels with him. 

33. Krauftca 78 the chief of mountains, came with a 
large army of attendants. He had articles of presentation 
with him. He was accompanied by his kinsmen and relatives. 

34. Purusottama 79 mountain came with many presenta- 
tion articles. He was highly honoured along with his 
followers. 

35. The mountain Nila 80 with plenty of wealth came 
along with his sons and womenfolk. 

36. The mountains Trikuta, 81 Citrakuta, 82 Venkata, 8 * 
Srigiri, 84 Gokamukha 83 and Narada 8 * 5 came also. 

37. The excellent mountain Vindhya 87 possessing many 
riches, came there delightedly along with his wife and 
sons. 

38. The mountain Kalanjara, 88 highly resplendent and 
extremely delighted came along with his attendants. 

39. The mountain Kailasa favouring every one 
because of brilliant lord Siva came there delighted. 

40. All other mountains from several continents, O 
brahmin, assembled together in the abode of Himavat. 

77. Pariyatra or Paripatra was the name applied to the Western 
Vindhyas together with tl.cAravelly range. 

78. Krauiich is the name of a mythical mountain said to be the 
grandson of Himalaya who was pierced by Karlikeya and Parasurama. 

79. It is a sacred hill of Orissa associated with lord Visnu styled as 
Purusottama. 

80. Nilapiri, ‘‘the Blue Mountain” seems to be the Niladri or 
Nilakuta, the name of the “Kamakhya hill ’ according to the Kahkapur&na 
79. 74. Cf Saktisangama tantra III. 7. 10. 

81. A mountain in Ceylon on the top of which was situated LaftkS, 
the capital of Ravana. 

82. Chitrakuta is a mountain near PraySga. 

83. V<rikata- a famous hill in the south, which is the seat of Vi$nu. 

84. Shrigiri or Siisaila is situated in Telangana. Cf. &akti^angania- 
tantra III. 7.14. 

8">. Ookamukha is probably the same as Kokamukha. It is a range 
of the Himalayas located in Nepal. Cf Var&hapurSpa 140; GAMI 
Ch. XVII. 

86. Coming in the list of mountains it signifies a mountain which 
has not been identified so far. 

87. See Note 69. P. 623. 

88. It is a sacred hill in Banda District in U.P. 



630 Sivapurdna 

41. O sage, all these mountains, invited by Himavat 
came there to attend the marriage of Siva and Siva. 

42. The brilliant rivers, Sonabljadra 89 and others came 
delightfully to be present at the marriage of Siva and 
Siva. 

43. All the rivers bedecked in ornaments came 
lovingly in divine forms at the marriage of Siva and 
Siva. 

44. The rivers Godavari, 90 Yamuna, 91 Brahmastri 92 and 
Venika 93 came to attend the marriage of Siva and Siva. 

45. With great pleasure Ganga too, assuming a divine 
form and fully bedecked in ornaments came to attend the 
marriage of Siva and Siva. 

46. The best of rivers Narmada, 94 daughter of Rudra, 
came joyfully and quickly to attend the marriage of Siva 
and Siva. 

47. The entire city of Himavat was full of excitement 
and ardent fervour when the invitees gathered there 
together. 

48. Great festivities went on in the city. Banners, 
flags and festoons shone everywhere. The canopies hid the 
sunlight. 

49. Himavat welcomed them with great delight and 
reverence. The mountains and the rivers, the gents and the 
ladies were duly received. 

50. He housed them suitably in separate places. They 
were gratified with the amenities provided by Himavat. 


89. Soriabhadra most probably is the same as AruQ&cala in the South 
Arcot District. See Avasthi: Studies in Sk. P. P. 142. 

90. Godavari. See Note 56 P. 75. 

91 . Yamuna. See Note 67 P. 76. 

*92. The river Brahmastrl can be identified with the river Saraivati 
See Note 35 P. 47. 

93. See Note 57 P. 75, 

94. See Note 55 P. 75. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


631 


CHAPTER THIRTYE1GHT 

(Description of the dais) 

Brahma said : — 

1. Then the lord of mountains, O excellent sage, 
attended to the decoration of the entire city befitting the 
great festivities ahead. 

2. The roads were watered and swept clean. At 
every door, stumps of plantain trees and other auspicious 
symbols were fixed. 

3. The courtyard was embellished with plantain trees 
tied with silken cords- There were festoons of mango 
leaves. 

4. Festoons with garlands of jasmine flowers shone, 
everywhere. Other articles of auspicious portent were fixed 
in every quarter. 

5. These and other things were carried out by 
Himavat for the sake of his daughter. Every activity was 
supervised by Garga of great ability. Everything auspicious 
worth mentioning found a place there. 

6. He called Visvakarman 05 and requested him to erect 
a large and spacious dais beautiful with side rostrums, 
altars etc. 

7. The dais, O celestial sage, was ten thousand 
Yojanas wide. It was wonderfully constructed and had all 
the characteristic features. 

8. All the mobile and immobile objects of the world 
were represented there with realistic appearance. Everything 
was wonderfully portrayed. 

9. The mobile objects presented there surpassed the 
immobile ones and the immobile ones surpassed the mobile 
onts in excellence. 

10. The watery places presented there excelled the 
solid grounds. Even experts could not distinguish what was 
water and what was solid ground. 

11. There were artificial lions. There were rows of 

9> Sec Note 301 P. 401; Note 295 P. 389. 



632 


storks. There were artificial peacocks, but very beautiful in 
appearance. 

12. Artificial women were represented as dancing with 
artificial men casting wistful glances at them and enchanting 
them. 

13. Beautiful representations of gatekeepers with up- 
lifted bows in their hands appeared like real originals. 

14. The statue of MahalaksmI at the main entrance 
appeared like the goddess just emerged from the milk- 
ocean. It was because all the characteristics were 
complete. 

15. Elephants with their mahouts and horses with 
their riders were so natural that none would say that they 
were artificial. 

16. Chariots were driven by charioteers, other vehicles 
by other drivers. There were fool-sol idiers too. All of them 
were artificial. 

17. O sage, Visvakarman was so delighted that he 
made all these things to fascinate the visiting dignitaries, 
the gods and the sages. 

18. O sage, the statue of Nandin, at the portals, of 
crystalline purity and brilliance, was a prototype of the real 
Nandin. 

19. Above that there was the celestial chariot Puspaka 
decorated with sprouts. It shone with gods represented 
therein. 

20. On the left side there were two huge saffron 
coloured elephants with four tusks and appearing to be of 
sixty years in age. They shone lustrously. 

21. There were two horses too, brilliant like the 
sun. They were bedecked in divine ornaments and other 
necessary embellishments. 

22- The guardians of the quarters were shown as 
adorned with great gems. All the gods were portrayed by 
Visvakarman realistically. 

23. Bhrgu 06 and other sages, secondary gods, Siddhas 
and others were represented by Visvakarman. 

24. A wonderful image of Visnu with his attendants 


96. Sec Note 299 P* 397* 



Rudrasarfihitd 


633 


Garuc}a and others was created by him with wonderful 
features. 

25. 1 top was portrayed as surrounded by my sons, 
Vedas and Siddhas. O Narada, I was represented as 
reciting the hymns. 

26. An artificial image of Indra seated on Airavata 
and accompanied by his attendants was made by him 
looking as beautiful as the full moon. 

27. O celestial sage, of what avail is a long-drawn 
description ? The gods were drawn by Visvakarman as 
desired by Himavat. 

28. The Altar was erected by him with wonderful 
features, fascinating the gods and exquisite in form. 

29. On being commanded by the lord of mountains, 
the intelligent Visvakarman created different abodes for the 
residence of the gods and others. 

30. Great couches of wonderful brilliance very cosy 
and exquisite were made by Visvakarman for their sake. 

31. For the residence of Brahma, seven wonderful 
abodes were created in a trice. They had great brilliance. 

32. A brilliant abode of Visnu called Vaikunfcha, with 
wonderful features, was created in a trice. 

33. Visvakarman created a wonderfully divine palace 
for the lord of gods endowed with all riches. 

34. Wonderful mansions for the guardians of the 
quarters were erected by Visvakarman. They were beautiful 
and large. 

35. Mansions of various kinds were built by him for 
other gods too. 

36. The highly intelligent Visvakarman built every- 

thing very quickly for the propitiation of Siva from whom 
he had secured great favours. » 

37. Similarly he erected Siva’s mansion of various 
shapes and of great brilliance. Having the symbol of Siva 
it was designated as Sivaloka. It was admired by all the 
gods. 

38. Thus for propitiating Siva, wonderful and very 
brilliant structures were erected by Visvakarman. 

39. Making all arrangements in accordance with 



worldly conventions, Himavat awaited eagerly for the 
arrival of Siva. 

40. Thus, O divine sage, I have narrated the pleasing 
story of Himavat entirely. What else do you wish to 
hear ? 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 

(The gods arrive at Kailasa on invitation and 
Siva prepares to start) 

Ndrada said : — 

1. O dear father Brahma, O intelligent disciple of 
Visnu, obeisance be to you. O merciful one, this wonderful 
story has been heard by us from you. 

2. Now I wish to hear the story of the auspicious 

marriage of the moon-crested lord that dispels all sins. 

3. What did lord Siva do on receiving the auspicious 
letter of betrothal. Please narrate that story of Siva, the 
supreme soul. 

Brahmd said : — 

4. Dear child of great intellect, listen to the glory of 
Siva, what lord Siva did on receiving the auspicious 
letter. 

5. On reading the auspicious letter with joy, Siva 

laughed in delight. The lord honoured them duly. 

6. Causing the letter to be read aloud, He duly 

accepted the proposal. Honouring the messengers He 
informed them. 

7. He told the sages — “Every thing is auspicious and 
well done. All of you shall grace the celebration of my 
marriage. The marriage proposal has been accepted by me”. 

8. On hearing these words of Siva, they were 

delighted. After bowing to and circumambulating Him they 
returned joyful of their great luck and grace. 

9. Then Siva, the lord of the gods, the lord indulging 



Rudrasarhhitd 635 

in divine sports, remembered you, O sage, in accordance 
with worldly conventions. 

10-11. You came there praising your good luck. 
Bowing to Him humbly with palms joined in reference and 
with stooping shoulders you eulogised Him with the utterances 
of words “hail to Thee*’. O sage, you requested Him for 
his behest. 

12. Then the delighted Siva, heightening your pleasure 
with sweet speech and evincing interest in worldly conventions 
told you thus, O excellent sage. 

Siva said : — 

13. O excellent sage, listen to us lovingly. I ,am 
speaking to you because you are the crest-jewel of my 
devotees. 

14. At your bidding a great penance has been per- 
formed by Parvatl. Propitiated by her I have granted her 
the boon of my being her husband. 

15. Being subservient to her by her devotion I ^hall 
marry her. The auspicious hour free of defects has been fixfed 
by the seven sages. 

16. O Narada, the marriage will take place after 
seven days from today. Following the worldly conventions J 
shall make a grand festival of the same. 

Brahma said : — 

17. O dear one, on hearing these words of Siva, the 
supreme soul, you were delighted and you spoke after 
bowing to the lord. 

Narada said : — 

18. This is your sacred rite. You have been consi- 
dered subservient to your devotees. You have carried out 
the desire of Parvatl. 

19. O lord, a task befitting my capacity must be 
mentioned by you. Considering me your own servant please 
be kind to me. Obeisance to you. 

BrahmS said : — 

20. O great sage, Siva, favourably disposed to His 



636 Stvapurdna 

devotees, on being thus requested by you replied very 
delightedly to you. 

Siva said : — 

21. O sage, on my behalf, invite all the gods 
beginning with Visnu, and sages, Siddhas and others. 

22. Giving due weightage to my bidding, may all 
of them come here enthusiastically, in all their splendour 
along with their women and children. 

23. O sage, those who do not take part in the 
celebration of my marriage, are not my people, even if they 
are the gods. 

Brahma said : — 

24. Paying heed to this behest of Siva, O sage, you, 
a great favourite of Siva, invited all of them approaching 
everyone severally. 

25. O Narada, after carrying out your duties as his 
emissary you, the great sage, returned to Siva and remained 
there with His permission. 

26. Siva too waited there eagerly expecting their 
arrival while his attendants were celebrating great festivities 
by dance and songs. 

27. At the same time, Visnu, along with his retinue, 
came there suitably dressed. 

28. Accompanied by his wife and followers he bowed 
to Siva with great devotion and joy, and with his permission 
stayed there in a good abode. 

29. I too accompanied by my attendants went to 
Kailasa. After bowing to the lord, I too waited there with 
pleasure along with my followers. 

30. Indra and other guardians of the quarters came 
there with their retinue and womenfolk richly decorated and 
in festive mood. 

31. Similarly the sages, the Nagas, the Siddhas, the 
secondary gods and others who had been duly* invited came 
there in jovial mood. 

32. Lord Siva duly received and welcomed all those 
gods and others severally. 

33. Then a great festival was celebrated at Kailasa,, 



Jtudrasarhhitd 


637 

It was very wonderful. The celestial damsels danced in a 
befitting manner. 

34. O sage, in the meantime Visnu and other gods 
who had arrived there desired to make Siva’s procession to 
start. 

35. At the bidding of Siva, all of them performed 
service to Siva considering His work as their own. 

36 . The seven Mothers performed the rites of 
bedecking Siva in a fitting manner very joyously. 

37. Even the very natural dress and features of Siva 
assumed the work of ornamentation, O excellent sage, at the 
will of lord Siva. 

38. The moon took the place of the crown. The 

third eye became the beautiful ornament on the forehead. 

39. O sage, the serpents that had been embellishing 
His ears before became the ear-rings studded with various 
gems. 

40. The serpents in the other parts became the 

befitting ornaments of those parts, very beautiful and 

studded with gems. 

41. The ashes became the sweet unguent smeared over 
his body. The elephant hide etc. became the beautiful 
silken cloth. 

42. The form assumed a beauty beyond description. 
Lord Siva seemed to have acquired from Himself all the 
riches. 

43. Then all the gods, demons, Nagas, Patangas, 

Apsarasas, sages and others approached Siva and proclaimed 
jovially. 

All of them said : — 

44. O lord, start on journey for wedding the great 
goddess, the daughter of the mountain, accompanied by us. 
Be merciful. 

45. Then the omniscient Visnu of joyful mind spoke 
befitting the occasion after bowing to Siva with devotion. 

Vtfnu said : — 

46. O lord of the gods, favourite of those who seek 



638 Sivapur&qa 

refuge in you, please carry out the task of your devotees, 
O lord, please listen to my submission. 

47. O Siva, let the rites of your marriage with the 
daughter of the lord of mountains be performed according 
to the laws laid down in the Grhya Sutras. 

48. The rites followed in your marriage, O Siva, will 
become famous and be followed in the world. 

49. Please cause the construction of the altar and the 
Nandimukha 97 according to family tradition. Thus you 
will be spreading your glory in the world, O lord. 

Brahma said : — 

50. Lord Siva thus requested by Visnu, and being 
himself eager to follow worldly conventions performed the 
same duly. 

51. Authorised by Him, I performed all the rites 
conducive to prosperity, assisted by the sages. 

52-55. The sages Kasyapa, Atri, Vasisjha, Gautama, 
Bhaguri, Brhaspati, Kanva, Sakti, 98 Jamadagni, Parasara, 
Markandeya, Silapaka, Arunapala, Akrtasrama, Agastya, 
Gyavana, Gaxga, Silada, Dadhlci, Upamanyu, Bharadvaja, 
Akrtavrana, Pippalada, Kusika, Kautsa, Vyasa, with his 
disciples, and other sages came to Siva. Urged by me they 
performed the sacred rites duly. 

56- All of them who had mastered the Vedas and 
Vedangas performed the safety rites for Siva and tied the 
auspicious thread round his wrist. 

57. By reciting hymns from Rk, Yajus, and Saman 
they performed the holy rites. All the sages were greatly 
pleased. 

58. In order to ward oil obstacles they performed 
the adoration of the planets under my instruction. They 
worshipped the gods stationed in the altar. 

59. After performing the social and Vedic rites in a 
fitting manner Siva became pleased and bowed to the 
brahmins joyously. 

60. Then the lord of all started from the excellent 

97. Nandimukha is a Siuridha ceremony performed in memory of 
the Manes, preliminary to any festive orcasion such as marriage. 

98. Sakii was the eldest son of Vasi^ha. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


639 


mountain Kailasa keeping the brahmins and the gods 
ahead. 

61. Outside the mountain Kailasa, Siva stopped for 
a while along with the gods and brahmins receiving different 
ovations. 

62. Then a great jovial festival was celebrated by the 
gods and others in order to propitiate Siva. Songs were sung. 
Instruments were played. Dances were held. 


CHAPTER FORTY 

(The Marriage Procession of Siva) 

Brahma, said : — 

1. Then Siva called Nandin and other Ganas and 
ordered them to accompany Him. 

Siva said : — 

2. Station a few Ganas here and the rest of you accom- 
pany me to the city of the mountain in a jovial mood. 

Brahma said : — 

3. Then the lords of Ganas thus ordered took their 
armies and started joyously. I shall explain it in general 
terms. 

4. The lord of Ganas, Saiikhakarna started with a 
crore of Ganas to the city of Himavat along with Siva. 

5. Kckaraksa took ten crores of Ganas with gaiety. 
Vikrla, the leader of Ganas, took eight crores of Ganas. 

6. ViSakha took four crores and Parijata took nine 
crores of Ganas. 

7. The glorious Sarvantaka and Vikrtanana took 
sixty crores. Dundubha took eight crores. 

8. O sage, Kapala took five crores and the heroic 
Sandaraka took six crores of Ganas. 

9. Kanduka and Kundaka took a crore of the Ganas. 
Vistambha took eight crores. 

10. The leader Pippala joyously went with a thousand 



640 SivapurSna 

crores. O excellent sage, Sanadaka the hero also took so 
many. 

11. Aves'ana went with eight crores. Mahake£a took 
a thousand crores. 

12. O sage, Kunda and Parvataka each took twelve 
crores of Ganas with him. The heroic Candratapana went 
with eight crores. 

13. Kala, Kalaka and Mahakala each went with hun- 
dred crores of Ganas. The leader of Ganas named Agnika 
went with a crore. 

14. Agnimukha, the leader of Ganas, went with a crore. 
Adityamurdha and Ghanavaha each went with a crore of 
Ganas. 

15. Sannaha and Kumuda went with hundred crores. 
So also Amogha and Kokila each went with hundred crores. 

16. Sumantra, the leader of Ganas, went with a crore of 
Ganas. Kakapadodara and Santanaka went each with six 
crores of Ganas. 

17. Mahabala, Madhupiriga and Kokila each went 
with nine crores. Nila and Purnabhadra each went with 
ninety crores of Ganas. 

18. Caturvaktra with seven crores, Karana with twenty 
crores and the leader of Ganas Ahiromaka went with ninety 
crores. 

19. O Narada, Yajvaksa, Satamanyu and Meghamanyu 
each of these leaders too went with so many crores. 

20. Kasjhagudha, the leader of Ganas, went with 
sixtyfour crores. So too yirupaksa, Sukcsa, Vrsabha and 
Sanatana. 

21. Similarly Talakctu, Sadasya, the eternal Cancvasya 
Samvartaka, Caitra and the lord Lakulisa himself. 

22-23. The brilliant Lokantaka, Daityantaka, lord 
Bhrngiriti, the glorious Dcvapriya, Asani and Bhanuka went 
with sixtyfour crores. Others in jovial mood went in thous- 
ands with Siva to attend his marriage, O sage. 

24. A thousand crores of Bliutas aud three crores of 
Pramathas went. Virabhadra went with sixtyfour crores of 
Ganas and three crores of Romajas. 

25. In the marriage procession of Siva, Nandin and 



Rudrasarhhitd 641 

other leaders of Ganas went surrounded by hundreds and 
twenties of crores of Ganas. 

26. Knowing delightedly that it was Siva’s marriage, 
Bhairava the Ksetrapala went jovially with crores and crores 
of Ganas. 

27. These and other leaders of Ganas of great strength 
and multitudinous in number joined the procession with 
joy and enthusiasm. 

28. They had a thousand hands. They wore matted hair 
and crowns. They were bedecked with streaks of the moon. 
They had three eyes and blue necks ( like lord Siva ). 

29. All of them wore garlands of Rudraksa beads. 
They had the holy ashes smeared over the body. They had 
the ornaments of necklaces, earrings, bracelets, crowns etc. 

30. The leaders were as refulgent as Brahma, Visnu 
and Indra, Anima and other Energies.* They were as 
brilliant and lustrous as crores of suns. 

31. O sage, some of them belonged to this terrestrial 
world, some came through nether worlds, some came through 
the sky and some came through seven heavens. 

32. Of what avail is this talk ? O celestial sage, 
Siva’s own Ganas living in all the worlds came and joined 
the procession of Siva, with pleasure. 

33. Thus, lord Siva, accompanied by his Ganas, gods 
and others, went to the city of Himagiri for the celebration of 
His marriage. 

34. O great sage, listen to another incident that hap- 
pened when Siva, the lord of all, went for his marriage along 
with the gods and others. 

35. Rudra’s sister Candi assuming a great festive mood 
came there with great pleasure but inspiring terror in others. 

36. She was riding on a ghost. She was bedecked in 
the ornaments of serpents. A gold pot filled (with water) 
shone over her head. 

37. She was accompanied by her attendants. Her face 
was beaming. Her eyes dazzled. She was enthusiastic and glad. 
She was strong. 

38. The divine Bhuta attendants were crores and crores 
in number. They shone in diverse forms. 

* See Note 303 P. 235. 



39. Accompanied by them Candi of deformed face 
went ahead gladly and enthusiastically. She was equally 
competent to please and to harass. 

40. All the Ganas of Siva numbering to eleven crores, 
terrible but favourites of Siva were kept by her far behind. 

41. The loud sounds of Damarus, the Jhankara sound 
of the Bherls and the sound of the conches pervaded all the 
three worlds. 

42. The tumultuous sound of the Dundubhis rose up 
in the air blessing the universe auspiciously and destroying 
everything other than auspicious. 

43. O sage, behind the Ganas, the enthusiastic gods, 
theSiddhas, the guardians of the quarters and others followed. 

44. O sage, Visnu, seated on Garuda and going in 
the middle of the group shone with the great umbrella held 
aloft. 

45. He was surrounded by his attendants who fanned 
him with Camaras. His Parsadas too shone well. He was be- 
decked in all his ornaments. 

46-47. I too shone well on the way with the Vedas, 
Sastras, Puranas and Agamas personified and along with 
my sons, Prajapatis, Sanaka and other Siddhas. I was eager 
in rendering service to Siva. 

48. Going along, seated on the elephant Airavata in 
the midst of his armies, Indra, the lord of god, shone well 
fully decorated in various ways. 

49. Many other sages enthusiastic about the marriage 
of Siva shone well on their way. 

50-51. Sakinis, Yatudhanas Vetalas, Brahmaraksasas, 
Bhutas, Pretas and Pramathas, Tumburu, Narada, Haha, 
Huhu," Gandharvas and Kinnaras went ahead playing on 
their musical instruments with great delight. 

52-53. The Mothers of the universe, the celestial -virgins, 
Gayatrl, Savitri, LaksmI, the celestial maidens, the wives of 
the gods, the mothers of the worlds went ahead with great 
joy, only because it was the marriage of Siva. 

54-55. Lord Siva, favourably disposed to virtue, was 


99. Tumbani, IIulu'i and Huhu were the Gandhatvas, attending on 
Kubera They *rrc «xpm musicians who played on Vina and other 
musical insliuimitts andwcie generally invited at icstivims 



Rudrasa$hfdtd 


643 


seated on his bull of crystal purity and beauty — the bull who 
is called Dharma by the Vedas, Sastras, Siddhas and sages. 
Sfya was being served by the gods and sages on his way. 
He shone well. 

56. Accompanied by all these sages and decorated in 
various ways* lord Siva was going to the abode of the moun- 
tain Himalaya for the marriage with Parvati. He shone well. 

57. Thus the story of Siva’s grand procession has been 
narrated to you. O Narada, listen to the incidents of good 
portent that happened in the city of Himavat. 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

( Description of the Altar- Structure) 


Brahma, said : — 

1. Then after mutual consultation and getting Siva’s 
permission, O sage, Visnu sent you ahead to the abode of 
the mountain. 

2. Urged by Visnu, O Narada, you bowed to lord 
Siva and went ahead of all to the abode of Himavat. 

3. O sage, after going there, you saw your own image 
made by Visvakarman and were surprised. You were a 
bit ashamed too. 

4. O great sage, tired of seeing the portrayal of your- 
self, you became engaged in seeing the other builds of 
Visvakarman. 

5. You entered the great altar of Himavat, studded 
with various gems and decorated with gold pots and stumps 
of plantain trees. 

6. It had a thousand columns. It was wohderful. 
O sage, you were struck with surprise on seeing the altars. 

7. Then you were a bit confused and greatly 
bewildered. You spoke to the lord of mountains thus. 

8-9. O lord of mountains, tell me the truth. Has 
lord Siva seated on his bull and surrounded by his Ganas 
come already for the marriage ? Have the gods with Vi$nu 



644 


and others at their head, the sages, the Siddhas and the 
secondary gods come already ?” 

Brahma said : — 

10. On hearing your words full of surprise, O sage, 
the mountain Himavat told you the truth. 

Himavat said : — 

11. O Narada^ O highly intelligent one, Siva with 
the marriage party has not come till now for the purpose 
of marrying Parvatl. 

12. O Narada, know that all these things have been 
portrayed by Visvakarman. O celestial sage, shake ofT your 
bewilderment. Be calm. Remember Siva. 

13. Showing kindness to me you take your food and 
rest for a while. Then gladly accompany Mainaka and 
others to Siva’s presence. 

14. Accompanied by these mountains you request Siva 
along with the gods, and the great sages, Siva whose sprout- 
like feet are worshipped by gods and demons. Bring them 
here. 

Brahma said : — 

15. You accepted the suggestion noble-hearted ly and 
performed the duties there. Then accompanied by the sons 
of the mountain and others you went to Siva’s presence. 

16. There the brilliant god Siva surrounded by the 
gods and others was seen and bowed to by you and the 
mountains with devotion. 

17. Then all the gods including Indra, Visnu and 
me and Siva’s attendants asked you, O sage. 

18. They had been struck with surprise and suspicion 
on seeing the mountains Mainaka, Sahya, Meru and others 
bedecked in all kinds of ornaments. 

The gods said : — 

19. O Narada, intelligent one, you appear to be 
bewildered. Have you' been duly honoured by Himavat or 
not ? Tell us in detail. 

20. Why have these excellent mountains Mainaka, 



Rudrasarfihitd 645 

Sahya, Meru and others highly bedecked and of great valour, 
come here ? 

21. O Narada, does the mountain really intend to 
give his daugther to Siva or not ? What is it that is 
taking place in the abode of Himavat now ? Please 
tell us. 

22. We are having doubts in our minds. Hence we, 
the heaven-dwellers, ask you. Please say everything, O 
righteous one, and dispel our suspicions. 

Brahma said : — 

23. On hearing these words of Visnu and other 
heaven-dwellers, O sage, you who had been fascinated by 
the magic of Tvasft* (Visvakarman) spoke to them. 

24. Going to an isolated place, O sage, you spoke 
these words to me, to Visnu and also to Indra who is the 
lord of gods and a former enemy of the mountains, having 
cut off their wings. 100 

Ndrada said : — 

25. The distorted portayal of heaven-dwellers is 
something enchanting. He desires to delude the gods in a 
loving but cunning manner. 

26. O lord of SacI, have you forgotten everything ? 
Formerly you had deluded him. Hence he wishes to sur- 
pass you here in the abode of the mountain of noble heart. 

27. I have been fascinated by my shining portrait. 
Vi?nu, Brahma and Indra have been realistically portrayed 
by him. 

28. O lord of gods, why should I talk too much ? 
He has made artificial prototypes of all the gods. No one, 
not a single detail, has been left out. 

29. It is for the purpose of particularly enchanting the 
gods that this spell has been employed by him through this 
caricature. 

Brahma said : — 

30. On hearing your words lord Indra who was frigh- 

ioo. Indra is said to have clipped the wings of the mountains when 
they grew troublesome. 



tened from head to foot, immediately spoke to Visnu. 

Lord Indra said : — 

31. O lord of LaksmI, O lord of gods, Tva$tr who is 
agitated due to the grief over his son will surely kill me 
under this pretext and not otherwise. 

Brahmd said : — 

32. On hearing his words Vi$nu, the lord of gods 
laughingly consoled Indra by speaking thus. 

Visnu said : — 

33. O lord of Sacf, formerly you had been enchanted 
by the demons Niva taka vacas, your previous enemies, by the 
power of their great spell. 

34. O Indra, at my instance, this mountain Himavat 
and others too were rendered wingless. 

35. Let the mountains now create magic on remem- 
bering that and wish to surpass us foolishly. We are not to 
be afraid of our enemies. 

36. O Indra, Siva favourably disposed to His devotees, 
will undoubtedly look to our welfare. 

37. While he was speaking this to Indra of agitated 
mind, Siva spoke to Visnu following the worldly custom. 

Siva said : — 

38. “O Visnu, O lord of gods, what are you speaking 
to each other ?” O sage, after speaking thus to them Siva 
addressed you. 

39. “O Narada, what does the great mountain say ? 
Tell me the truth with details. You must not keep any 
secret. 

40. Does the mountain want to give the daughter or 
not ? Tell me that quickly. O dear one, on going there, 
what did you see ? What did you do ? Tell me that 
quickly. 

Brahmd said : — 

41. Addressed thus by Siva, O sage, you endowed 
with divine vision told him secretly what you saw in the altar. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


647 


Ndrada said : — * 

42. O great lord, lord of gods, listen to my auspicious 
words. O lord, there is no fear of any hindrance in the 
celebration of marriage. 

43. The lord of mountains will surely give his 
daughter to you. It is certainly to take you there that these 
mountains have come here. 

44. But to delude the gods a wonderful spell has been 
created. O omniscient, it is only to inspire curiosity. There 
is no possibility of any obstacle. 

45. O lord, ViSvakarman, a great expert in creating 
illusion has constructed a peculiar altar in his house at his 
instance. It is full of surprising things. 

46. A fascinating assembly of gods has been built 
there. On seeing it I was deluded by his skill and was 
struck with surprise. 

Brahmd said : — 

47. O dear, on hearing your words, the lord Siva 
following the worldly convention, laughingly spoke to Visnu 
and other gods. 

Siva said : — 

48. O Visnu, if the mountain Himavat gives his 
daughter to me, what have I to do with this spell? Speak 
to me what is true. 

49. O Brahma, O Indra, O sages, O gods, speak truly. 
What have I to do with the spell if the mountain gives 
his daughter ? 

50. It is held by scholars, knowing cogent reasons, 
that somehow or other the fruit should be achieved. Hence 
you, with Vi$nu at the head, will hasten seeking only the 
task on hand. 

Brahmd said : — 

51. Discussing thus with gods, Siva appeared to be 
completely overpowered by Kama like an ordinary man. 

52-54. At the bidding of Siva, Visnu and other gods, 
the noble sages and others, O sage, kept you and mountains 
at the head and started for the abode of Himavat. They 



648 


were surprised to see the wonderful abode. The delighted 
Siva reached the outskirts of the city accompanied by Vi$nu 
and others as well as his delighted Ganas. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

{Description of the meeting of the lord and the 
mountain) 

Brahmd said : — 

1. On hearing that the all-pervading Siva had come 
very near his city, the lord of mountains Himavat rejoiced 
much. 

2. Then, gathering all the requisite things he sent 
mountains and the brahmins to welcome Siva. 

3. With his mind melting with devotion and joyously 
praising his luck, the mountain personally went to see Siva 
as dear as the very vital air. 

4. On seeing the army of the gods Himavat was 
struck with wonder. Considering himself blessed he appeared 
in front of them. 

5. The gods too were struck with wonder on seeing 
his army. The gods and the mountains became delighted. 

6. The vast army of the mountains and the gods, O 
sage, on coming together shone like the eastern and western 
oceans in juxtaposition. 

7. Meeting each other, the gods and the mountains 
considered themselves blessed. They were greatly delighted. 

8. Seeing Siva in front, Himavat bowed to Him. 
The mountains and the brahmins bowed to Sadariva. 

m K " n r,l11tr hiriiifcij 

ornaments and beaming in the face. The beauty of his 
divine person illuminated the quarters. His body shone in 
the delicate silken garments. His crown was lustrous with 
the gems set in it. He was smiling shedding pure brilliance 
everywhere. Serpents had transformed themselves into 
ornaments on his body. He had a wonderful lustre and a 
divine refulgence. Gods served him with chowries in their 


Rudrasarhhiid 


649 


hands. Visnu was standing to the left, Brahma to the right, 
Indra at his back. Behind on either side, the gods were 
standing. He was being eulogised by the gods and others. 
He looked benevolent to the people. Being one He had 
assumed different physical bodies for his own reasons. He 
was Brahman itself, the lord of all and the bestower of boons. 
He was both with or without attributes, subservient to the 
devotees, merciful, greater than primordial Being and pri- 
mordial nature, Existence, Knowledge and Bliss itself. 

15. The mountain saw Visnu, bedecked in ornaments 
and seated on Garuda to the right of lord Siva. 

16. O sage, to the left of the lord stood I, the four- 
faced deity, shining brilliantly and accompanied by my 
attendants. 

17. On seeing us both, great favourites of Siva for 
ever, the lord of mountains with all his retinue respectfully 
bowed to us. 

18. Similarly, on seeing the gods and others brilliantly 
shining behind lord Siva and at his sides, the lord of moun- 
tains bowed to them. 

19. At the bidding of Siva the mountain went ahead 
to his city. Behind him went Visnu, Brahma, the sages and 
the gods. 

20. O Narada, the sages, the gods and others 
accompanying the lord, praised the city of Himavat with 
great delight. 

21. Stationing the gods and others on his beautiful 
summit specially arranged for them, Himavat went to the 
place where the altar for the rites had been erected. 

22. After causing squares and quadrangles to be made 
with festoons, he performed the ceremonial ablutions, gave 
charitable gifts and supervised everything. 

23. Then he sent his sons to Siva accompanied by 
all his attendants and followers, Visnu and others. 

24. The extremely delighted lord of mountains in the 
company of his kinsmen desired to perform the reception to 
the bridegroom with great pomp and ceremony. 

25. The sons of the mountain accompanied by their 
relatives went to Siva and acquainted him with the request 
of the mountain. 



650 Sivapurdpa 

26. The sons of the mountain came back to their 
abode with his permission and informed the king of 
mountains gladly that the bridegroom and the party were on 
their way there. 

27. O sage, on hearing the request thus made, Vi?nu 
and other gods with the lord rejoiced much. 

28. Dressed richly and exquisitely the gods, the ganas, 
the sages and others started towards the abode of lord 
Himavat. 

29. In the meantime, Mena desired to see Siva. O 
sage, through her lord, you, the excellent sage, were requisi- 
tioned there. 

30. O sage, urged by the lord who desired to fulfil 
the task of Siva you went there. 

31. O sage, after bowing to you, Mena with her 
heart full of surprise told you that she wanted to see the 
real form of lord Siva that dispels haughtiness. 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

( Description of Siva's wonderful sport) 

Mend said : — 

1. O sage, I shall first see the bridegroom of Parvatl. 
Let me have an idea of the form and features of Siva for 
which she performed the great penance. 

Brahma said : — 

2. Thus, urged by ignorance, O sage, she went to the 
terrace along with you to see Siva. 

3. Then Siva, realising her false pride in herself, 
spoke to Vi$nu and me as a part of His wonderful sport. 

Siva said : — 

4. “At my bidding, O dear ones, both of you go one 
by one accompanied by the gods to the threshold of the 
mountain. I shall follow afterwards.” 



651 


Hudrasarhkiid 

Brakmd said : — 

5. On hearing it Vi?nu called all and told them of 
his suggestion. The gods then walked in accordance with 
that suggestion enthusiastically. 

6. O sage* the lord of the universe, let Mena stand 
on the terrace and see the procession along with you in 
order to make her mind confused. 

7. In the meantime, seeing the splendid vast army, 
O sage, Mena became delighted as usual. 

8. At the head of procession came the beautiful 
fastidious Gandharvas, dressed in rich clothes and bedecked 
in fine ornaments. 

9. They rode on different vehicles. They played * on 
musical instruments. Flags and banners of various colours and 
sizes fluttered on their chariots. The heavenly nymphs 
accompanied them. 

10. On seeing Vasu, 101 the lord of Vasus, along with 
Vasus, Mena became delighted and exclaimed — “O this is 
Siva”. 

11. O excellent sage, you told her “These are only 
the attendants of Siva. This is not Siva, the bridegroom.” 

12. On hearing this, Mena fell athinking “A person 
greater than this ! Ha, how will he be !” 

13. In the meantime she saw Manigriva, 102 the other 
Yak?as and their vast army with twice the splendour of 
Vasus. 

14. On seeing the lustrous Manigriva the lord of 
Yakgas, Mena was delighted and said — “This is Siva, the 
bridegroom of Parvati.” 

15. “This is not Siva, the bridegroom of Parvati. He 
is only an attendant of Siva” said you to Mena, the wife 
of the mountain. By that time the god of fire passed by. 

16. On seeing his splendour twice that of Yak$as, she 

101. Vasu is the chief of the eight Vasus who in fact are personi- 
fications of natural phenomena, viz. water, pole-star, moon, earth, wind, 
fire, dawn and light. Gf. Note 163, P. 10*. 

102. Manigriva is one of the sons of Kubera, distinct from Ma^i- 
bhadra who is also a Yak fa. 



said “This is Siva, the bridegroom of Parvati” but you 
said “No”. 

17. By that time Yama passed by with twice the 
splendour of the previous one. On seeing him delighted 
Mena exclaimed “This is Siva”. 

18. “No” said you. By that time Nirrti, the lord of 
Punyajanas, passed by having twice the splendour of Yama. 

19. On seeing him the delighted Mena said “This 
is Siva”. “No” said you to her. By that time Varuna 
passed that way. 

20. On seeing his splendour twice that of Nirrti, she 
said “This is Siva, the bridegroom of Parvati”. But you 
said “No”. 

21. By that time Vayu passed by with twice the 
splendour of Varuna. On seeing him the delighted Mena 
said “This is Siva”. 

22. “No” said you. By that time Kubera, the lord 
of Guhyakas, passed by with twice the splendour of 
Vayu. 

23. On seeing him the delighted Mena said “This is 
Siva”. “No”, said you to her. By that time l£ana 
passed by. 

24. On seeing his splendour twice that of Kubera, 
she said “This is Rudra, the bridegroom of Parvati”. But 
you said “No”. 

25. Then came Indra, the most important of all the 
gods, the lord of the three worlds, endowed with divine 
refulgence and who had twice the splendour of ISana. 

26. On seeing him Menaka said — “This is Siva”. 
“Not he”, said you then “This is Indra, the lord of gods”. 

27. By that time the moon passed by with twice the 
splendour of Indra. On seeing him she said “This is Siva” 
and you denied it. 

28. By that time the Sun passed by with twice the 
splendour of the moon. On seeing him she said “It is he”. 
You said to her “No”. 

29. By that time Bhrgu and other sages, all highly 
lustrous and accompanied by their disciples, passed by. 

30. On seeing Brhaspati in their midst Menaka 



said : — “This is Siva the master of Parvati”. Then you 
said “No”. 

31. By that time Brahma passed by. He was in an 
excellent from of lustre, praised by excellent sages and looking 
like an embodied Dharma itself. 

32. O sage, seeing me the highly delighted Mena 
said — “This is Parvati’s husband”. You said to her “No”. 

33-35. In the meantime lord Visnu came that way. 
He looked glorious and splendid, dark- blue like the fresh 
cloud and having four arms. He had the handsome features 
of numberless cupids. He wore yellow garments. He was 
the king of heaven with eyes resembling the petals of a lotus, 
and looked very calm. He had Garuda as his vehicle. He 
possessed all the characteristic signs conch etc. He was be- 
decked in crown and other ornaments. He wore Srivatsa 
on his chest. He had an uncommon splendour that was in- 
comprehensible 

36. On seeing him Mena’s eyes became dazed. With 
great delight she said — “This is Siva himself the bride- 
groom of Parvati. There is no doubt about it”. 

37-39. On hearing Menaka’s words you said — “ No, 
this is not the lord, the cause of protection and enjoyment. 
This is not the bridegroom of Parvati. This is Visnu, the 
officer-in-charge of the marriage-party of Siva and a great 
favourite of Siva. The bridegroom Siva is better than him. 
O Mena, it is impossible for me to describe his beauty. He 
is the lord of the entire universe, the lord of all, the Self- 
Emperor”. 

Brahma said : — 

40. On hearing your words, Mena thought her 
daughter auspicious, rich, fortunate and harbinger of happiness 
for the three families. 

41. Her face was beaming with pleasure and her heart 
was delighted. Frequently congratulating herself on her 
good luck she said : — 

Mend said : — 

42. By the birth of Parvati, I have become blessed in 



every respect. The lord of mountains too is blessed. Every 
thing connected with me is blessed. 

43. Her would-be-husband is the lord of these leaders 
of great lustre whom I have seen now. 

44. How can I describe her good luck even in 
hundred years ? It is impossible to describe it when I see 
the lustre of these leaders. 

Brahma said : — 

45. Thus spoke Mena with her mind full of love and 
hope. By that time Siva, the wonderful source of enjoy- 
ment and protection, came that way. 

46. He showed himself in his real form free from 
change of illusion. O dear, the Ganas of wonderful forms 
proved to be the dispeller of Mena’s pride. 

47. O sage Narada, on seeing Him come, you lovingly 
pointed him out to her as the bridegroom of Siva and spoke 
to her. 

Narada said : — 

48. This is Siva Himself, O comely maiden, see. It 
was for him that Parvati performed a great penance in the 
forest* 

Brahma said : — 

49. Thus addressed by you the delighted Mena stared 
at the lord with joy; the lord Isana of wonderful features 
and of wonderful attendants. 

50. Immediately the army of Siva came there 
consisting of wonderful arrays of Bhutas, Pretas and 
Ganas. 

51. Some were in the form of violent gusts of wind, 
producing hissing sounds with waving flags. Some had 
crooked faces. Others were deformed. 

52. Some were awful with overgrown moustaches and 
beards. Some were lame. Some were blind. Some held 
staffs and nooses and some great iron clubs in their 
hands. 

53. Some rode on peculiar vehicles. Some played on 



Rudrasarhhitd 


655 


horns. Some played on Damarus. Some played on Gomukhas. 

54. Some had no faces. Some had distorted and 
deformed faces. Some had many faces. Some had no hands. 
Others had deformed hands. Some of them had many hands. 

55. Some had no eyes. Some had many eyes. Some 
had no head. Some had deformed heads. Some had no 
ears. Some had many ears. The Ganas had all types of 
dresses and features. 

56. Such and other innumerable deformed Ganas, 
heroic and terrible, strong and strenuous passed by, O dear. 

57. 0 sage, you pointed out the Ganas of Siva to her 
with your finger and said— “O lovely lady, see the attendants 
of Siva and Siva Himself.” 

58. O sage, on seeing the innumerable Ganas, Bhutas 
and Pretas, Menaka was terribly frightened instantaneously. 

59-61. On seeing Siva in their midst, the mother of 
Parvatl trembled. She saw Siva who though devoid of attri- 
butes was better than those who had all the attributes, He was 
seated on the Bull. He had five faces 103 and three eyes. He 
had ashes smeared over the body. He had matted hair with 
the crescent moon on His head. He had ten hands with the 
skull in one of them. His upper cloth was tiger’s hide. He 
held the bow Pinaka in one of his hands and the Trident in 
another. He had odd eyes, ugly features utterly dishevelled 
and untidy. He wore the hide of an elephant. 

62. She was stunned, tremulous agitated and confused. 
You said to her “This is Siva” and pointed Him out to her. 

63. On hearing your words she fell on the ground 
like a tender creeper blown by the wind. Mena the chaste 
lady was grief-stricken. 

64. “What is this ? I have been deceived for being 
too ambitious. Of what use is it to see this deformity ?” 
Saying this, Menaka fell unconscious there in a trice. 

65. Her maids exerted themselves in various ways and 
attended on her. Then gradually she, the beloved of the 
lord of mountains, regained consciousness. 


103. On the five-faced form of lord Siva see Note 25 P. 34. 



CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 

( Mend regains consciousness) 


Brahma said : — 

1-2. On regaining consciousness, the chaste beloved of 
the mountain lamented with great agitation and began to 
rebuke everyone. In faltering words she frequently censured 
her sons at first and then scolded her daughter. 

Mena said : — 

3. O sage, formerly it was mentioned be you that 
Parvati would marry Siva. Afterwards you assigned some 
activity of worship to Himavat. 

4. Its fruit is visible now, to be sure. But it is 
adverse and meaningless. O sage, O wicked minded one, I 
the innocent woman have been cheated by you by all means. 

5- The fruit of penance which she performed and 
which is very difficult even for the sages to perform, has been 
this, painful to every onlooker. 

6. What shall I do ? Where shall I go ? Who will 
dispel my sorrow ? My family is wrecked. My life is 
doomed. 

7. Where are those so called celestial sages ? I shall pluck 
out their beards. Where i* that mischievous woman who 
came here by herself in the guise of the wife of one of them ? 

8. By whose guilt have I been ruined now ?” Saying 
this she turned to her daughter and began to say harsh 
words. 

9. O wretched daughter, what is it that you have 
done ? This is extremely painful to me. You have given 
gold and brought a glass piece, O wicked girl. 

10. You have cast away sandal paste and smeared 
yourself with mud. You have driven away the swan and 
have held a crow in your hands. 

11. Setting aside the sacred river water you have 
drunk the well-water. Losing the sun you have clung to the 
glowworm in all earnestness. 

12. Throwing away cooked rice you have eaten the 



Rudrasarhhitd 


657 


husk. Spilling away the clarified butter you have eagerly 
swallowed castor oil. 

13. Setting the lion aside a jackal has been served by 
you. Without listening to the lore of Supreme Brahman 104 
you have heard base ballads. 

14. O daughter, casting off the holy sacrificial ashes 
at home you have taken the inauspicious ashes from the 
funeral pyre. 

15. Abandoning the great lords, Visnu and others 
you have performed penance for Siva. Your intellect has 
really gone astray. 

16. Fie on you. Fie on your intellect. Fie on your 

beauty and conduct. Fie on your adviser. Fie on your 

maids too. 

17. Fie on us who brought you thus to the world, 
O daughter. O Narada, fie on your intelligence and fie on 
those seven sages who gave us wrong advice. 

18. Fie on the whole family. Fie on the efficiency in 

performing the rites. Fie on everything done by you. 

You have inflamed this household. Almost it has been a 
death blow to me. 

19. Let not the king of the mountains come near me. 
Let not the seven sages show their faces to me. 

20. Has anything been achieved ? Our whole race 
is wrecked by all conspiring together. How is it that I have 
not remained a barren woman ? How is it that a miscarriage 
did not take place when I conceived ? 

21. How is it that I did not die? How is it that 
this girl did not die ? Why is she not devoured by the 
demons and others from the sky ? 

22. I shall cut off your head. What shall I do with 
the bodies ? Abandoning you where shall I go ? Alas, my 
whole life is doomed. 

Brahma said : — 

23. After saying this Mena fell unconscious on the 

104 . It refers to the spiritual knowledge as revealed in the Upa- 
nisads and other treatises, e g. the identity of the individual soul with the 
universal soul, the reality of the spirit over the unreality of the matter 
and so on. 



658 Sivapurdna 

ground. Agitated by grief and anger she did not go near 
her husband. 

24. There was a great hue and cry at that time, O 
great sage. The gods came near her. 

25. O celestial sage, I too came myself. On seeing 
me, O excellent sage, you spoke to her. 

JV drada, said 

26. The real handsome form of Siva is not known 
by you. This form is assumed by Siva in a sportive mood. 
It is not the real form. 

27. Hence, O chaste lady, cast off anger. Be calm. 
Leave off your obduracy. Do what is proper to be done. 
Give Parvati to Siva. 

Brahmd said : — 

28. On hearing your words, Mena spoke to you — “O 
wicked one, get up and go away. You are base”. 

29. When she said thus, Indra and all other gods and 
the guardians of the quarters came and spoke. 

The gods said : — 

30. O Mena, O daughter of the Pitrs, listen to our 
words joyously. This Siva is the Supreme lord Himself, the 
bestower of the greatest happiness. 

31. He is favourably disposed to good devotees. On 
seeing your daughter’s severe penance He had appeared 
before her and granted her the boon. 

Brahmd said : — 

32. Mena cried aloud frequently and spoke to the 
gods — “My daughter will not be given to Siva of fierce 
features. 

33. Why have you all conspired together to render her 
beauty futile ?” 

34. O excellent sages, when she uttered thus, the 
seven sages, Vasi§tha and others, came there and spoke : — 

The seven sages said : — 

35. “O daughter of the Pitfs, O beloved of the 



Rudrasathhitd 659 

mountain, we have come here to achieve a purpose. In this 
important affair how can we entertain opposite views ? 

36. The very vision of Siva is the greatest gain. He 
has come to your palace as the suppliant for your gift”. 

Brahma said : — 

37. Though advised by them, Mena did not accept 
their proposal. Weak in knowledge she spoke to the sages 
in anger. 

Mend said : — 

38. I would rather slay her with weapons than give 
her to Siva. All of you go away. You shall never come 
near me. 

Brahma said : — 

39. O sage, on saying thus she stopped. She cried 
aloud in great excitement. A great hue and cry ensued due 
to her intercession. 

40. Then Himacala himself came there extremely 
agitated. In order to convince her he spoke lovingly pointing 
to her the reality of the situation. 

Hirrtacala said : — 

41. O beloved Mena, listen to my words. How is it 
that you have become dispirited ? How many important 
persons have come to our abode ! And you are insulting 
them ! 

42. You do not know Siva. Siva has many names 
and many forms. Seeing a peculiar distorted form you have 
become excited. 

43. He has been realised by me. He is the protector 
of everyone. He is worthy of worship of the most adorable. 
He can bless and countermand. 

44. Do not be obstinate. O faultless beloved, do not 
be grief-stricken. Get up. Hasten. O virtuous one, carry on 
your duties. 

45. Let me remind you of a former incident when 
Siva came to our place in a hideous form and exhibited 
his sports. 



46. But on seeing his greatness we both consented to 
give our daughter in marriage to him. O beloved, keep that 
promise. 

Brahma said : — 

47. After saying thus, the lord of the mountains stopped, 
O sage. On hearing it Mena, the mother of Siva, spoke to 
Himavat. 

Mend said : — 

48-50. “O lord, let my words be heard. You can 
carry out what I say. Take your daughter Parvati, tie her 
up and cast her down into a deep abysmal chasm. Or drown 
her in the deep sea and be happy. I am not going to give 
her to Siva. If you give your daughter to him who is of 
hideous features, O lord, I shall certainly leave off this mortal 
frame. 

Brahma said : — 

51. When these words were spoken by Mena in her 
obduracy, Parvati voluntarily spoke in a sweet voice. 

Parvati said: — 

52. “O mother, your noble intellect has become 
perverted. Why do you foresake virtue, you who ought to 
depend on virtue alone ? 

53. This Siva has no one else greater than him. He is 
Siva, the source of everything. He is beautiful, pleasing and 
eulogised in all the Vedas. 

54. Siva is the benefactor. He is the lord of gods. 
He is self-ruler. O mother, He is of many forms and names. 
He is served by Visnu, Brahma and others. 

55. He is the support of everything. He is the. creator 
and annihilator. He is free from aberrations. He is the lord 
of the three deities. He is indestructible and eternal. 

56. It is for him that all the gods, as attendants, have 
come here. They stand in a festive mood at your threshold. 
What more pleasure d6 you need ? 

57. Hence get up. Endeavour to make your life fruit- 
ful. Give me to Siva. Make my effort meaningful. 



Ruirasarhhitd 


661 


58. O mother, give me to lord Siva. O mother, agree 
to my humble entreaty. I request you. 

59. If you do not give me to Siva, I am not going to 
woo anyone else. How can a jackal, the cunning cheat, 
seize the share of the lion ? 

60. O mother, Siva has been wooed, yes, wooed by 
me mentally, verbally, and physically. You can do what you 
please. 

Brahma, said : — 

61-62. On hearing these words of Parvati, Mena, the 
beloved of the lord of mountains lamented much. She be- 
came angry. She caught hold of Parvati and thrashed her 
with fists, elbows gnashing her teeth. She was greatly agitat- 
ed and furious. 

63. O dear one, O sage, you and other sages who 
were there, separated her from the mother and took her far 
off. 

64. Mena then rebuked them again and again. She 
hurled harsh repulsive words at all of them. 

Mend said : — 

65. See what I will do to Parvati of evil inclination. I 
will give her deadly poison or I will push her down in a 
deep well. 

66. Or I will cut her into many pieces with weapons 
and arrows. Or I will drown my daughter Parvati in the 
deep sea. 

67. Or I will certainly cast off my body. But I will 
never give my daughter to Siva of hideous form. 

68. What an awful bridegroom has been secured by 
this wicked girl ? The mountain and I, nay the whole family, 
has been made a laughing stock. 

69. He has neither a mother nor a father. He has no 
brother no kinsman. He has not even a fellow clansman. 
He has no beauty, no skill, not even a house of His ownJ 

70. He has no good dress, no ornaments, no assistants 
His vehicle is not good. He is neither rich nor even in the 
prime of youth. 

71. He has no tidiness about him. He is not learned. 



662 


What a repulsive body he has ! What has he, on seeing 
which I may be tempted to give my good daughter to 
him ?” 

Brahma said : — 

72. O sage she lamented thus and in many a similar 
manner she cried in the excess of her grief. 

73. Then I came there quickly and narrated to her 
the principles of Siva which ought to have dispelled her 
perverted knowledge. 

74. “O Mena, you shall listen lovingly to my aus- 
picious words whereby your evil inclination shall cease. 

75. Siva is the creator, sustainer and annihilator of 
the universe. You do not know His real form. Wherefore 
do you then seek sorrow ? 

76. The lord has several forms and names. He indulges 
in many kinds of divine sports. He is the lord of all and 
independent. He is the master of delusion and free from 
doubtful alternatives. 

77. Realising this, O Mena, give your daughter to 
Siva. Abandon your misplaced stubbornness. Your evil 
inclination is destructive of all affairs”. 

78. Thus addressed by me Mena continued to cry 
again and again. Slowly, O sage, she eschewed all shame 
and spoke to me. 

Mend said : — 

79. O Brahma, why do you render her excellent 
beauty futile ? Why don’t you kill her yourself ? 

80. You shall not tell me again that she should be 
given to Siva. I will not give my daughter, dearer than 
my own life, to Siva. 

Brahmd said : — 

81. O great sage, when she expressed thus, Sanaka 
and other Siddhas came there and spoke lovingly. 

Siddhas said : — 

82 . This Siva is the supreme being, the bestower of 



Rudrasarhhitd 663 

supreme happiness. Out of His sympathy He has granted 
His vision to your daughter. 

Brahma said : — 

83. Then Mena said to them after sobbing frequently — 
“My riches are not to be given to Siva of hideous form. 

84 Why are you Siddhas collectively attempting to 
make her exquisite beauty futile ?” 

85. When this was mentioned by her I became stunned. 
All the gods, Siddhas, sages and human beings were bewil- 
dered. 

86. In the meantime, on hearing of her persistent 
obduracy, Visnu a favourite of Siva came there and spoke as 
follows. 

Visnu said : — 

87-88. You are the beloved mental daughter of the 
Pitrs. You are endowed with all good qualities. You are 
wife of Himavat himself. Yours is the excellent race of 
Brahma. Your well-wishers in the world are also like him 
(Brahma). You are really blessed. What more can I say? 
You are reputed to be a patron of virtue. Why do you then 
eschew virtue ? 

89. May this be pondered over by you yourself. Can 
anything against you be mentioned by the gods, sages, or 
Brahma or by myself ? 

90. You do not know Siva. He is both possessed and 
devoid of attributes. He is hideous as well as comely. He is 
worthy of worship by all. He is the ultimate goal of the 
good. 

91. The primordial nature is created by Him alone. 
Near her, the excellent primordial Being has also been 
created by Him. 

92. Brahma and I are created thereafter. Then, with 
the three attributes, Siva Himself, incarnated in order to be 
beneficial to the worlds. 

93. The Vedas originated from Him. The gods sprang 
up from Him. Whatever mobile and immobile there is in the 
universe, sprang up from him. 

94. Who has described His form ? By whom can it be 



known ? Even Brahma and I were not able to gauge him. 

95. Whatever is seen in the universe from Brahma 
down to a blade of grass is identical with Siva. Know it. 
There need not be any hesitation in this matter. 

96. He alone, in the course of his divine sport, has 
incarnated himself in divine form. It was by the fascination 
of Parvati’s penance that He has come to your threshold. 

97. Hence, O wife of Himavat, eschew your sorrow. 
Worship Siva. You will have great pleasure. All pain will 
be quelled. 

BrahmS said : — 

98. O sage, when instructed by Visnu, Menaka’s mind 
was somewhat softened. 

99. But she did not give up her obduracy She did 
not consent to the proposal of giving her daughter to Siva. 
Mena was deluded by Siva’s magic. 

100. On hearing the pleasing words of Visnu, the 
beloved of the mountain, the mother of Parvatl became 
slightly enlightened and spoke to Visnu. 

101. If He assumes a lovely form and body my 
daughter may be given to Him and not otherwise even if you 
attempt it a thousand times. This is my firm decision. 

102. After saying thus Mena of steady resolve kept 
quiet. She was induced by Siva’s will whose magical power 
deludes all. 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 

(Siva's comely form and the Jubilation of the 
Citizens 


Brakmd said : — 

1. In the meantime, O sage, urged by Visnu you 
went immediately to Siva to conciliate Him. 

2. After reaching there, with a desire to get the task 
of the gods fulfilled, you pleaded with Siva after eulogising 
Him with different kinds of hymns. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


665 


3. On hearing your words Siva joyously assumed a 
wonderfully excellent and divine form and showed His 
mercifulness. 

4. O sage, on seeing the comely form of Siva, the 
receptacle of exquisite beauty, far better than that of the 
cupid, you were greatly delighted. 

5. Highly delighted you eulogised Him again and 
again with different kinds of hymns and returned to the 
place where Mena was seated along with other gods. 

6. Reaching there, O sage, with great affection and 
delight, you spoke to the great pleasure of Mena, the wife of 
Himavat. 

Ndrada said : — 

7. O Mena of wide eyes, see the excellent features of 
Siva. The merciful Siva has taken great pity on us. 

Brahma said : — 

8. Extremely surprised on hearing your words, Mena 
the beloved wife of the mountain, saw Siva’s form that 
afforded great bliss. 

9-12. It was as refulgent as that of a thousand suns. 
Every part of the body was exquisite. The garments were 
of variegated colours. He was embellished with different 
ornaments. He was smiling with great delight. His comeli- 
ness was highly pleasing. He was fair-complexioned and 
lustrous. The crescent moon added to his beauty. Visnu 
and other gods lovingly served Him. The sun acted 
as His royal umbrella. The moon embellished Him. In 
every way He was extremely handsome bedecked in orna- 
ments. It was impossible to describe adequately the great 
beauty of His vehicle. 

13. The Gariga and the Yamuna were waving the 
Chowries. The eight Siddhis 106 danced in front of Him. 

14. Vi$nu, I, Indra and the other gods bedecked their 
bodies and dress and accompanied Siva. 

15. The Ganas of various forms and features shouted 

105. The eightfold Siddhis are personified here. For details see 
Note 203 P. 235 



666 Sioapur&Qa 

cries of “Victory 1 * “Victory** and walked in front of Siva. 

16. The Siddhas, the secondary gods, the extremely 
delighted sages went in company of Siva. The others too 
were equally delighted. 

17. Thus the fully decorated gods, were very jubilant 
and in the company of their wives they eulogised Siva, the 
Supreme Brahman. 

18. ViSvavasu 106 and others along with the celestial 
damsels sang songs of Siva’s glory. 

19. O excellent sage, when Siva was nearing the 
threshold ot the palace of Himavat, there was much jubila- 
tion there. 

20. O excellent sage, who can describe the exquisite 
splendour of the supreme lord at that time. 

21. On seeing Him in that form Mena stood stunned 
as though drawn in a picture for a moment, O sage, and 
spoke these words. 

Mend said : — 

22. O great lord, my daughter is indeed blessed, she 
by whom the great penance was performed. It is by virtue 
of that penance that you have come to my threshold. 

23. O lord of Parvatl, be pleased now. Pardon me 
for the heap of repulsive words I showered on Siva. 

Brahma said : — 

24. After saying thus and eulogising die moon-crested 
lord, Mena, the beloved of the mountain, bowed to Him 
with palms joined in reverence and stood shy. 

25. By that time the ladies of the town left the 
work they were engaged in, in their eagerness to see Siva. 

26. A certain lady in the midst of her bath and toilet 
was overwhelmed with the desire to see Siva, the bridegroom 
of Parvatl. She came out with the shampoo powder still 
held in her hands. 

1 06. Viivavasu is the chief of the Gandharvas in Indra’s heaven. 
He is a famous musician and is said to possess all girls from the advent 
of their youth and transfer them to Agni from whom the bridegrooms 
obtain them for producing wealth and sons. 



Ru drasarhhitS 


667 


27. A certain lady engaged in fanning her husband 
in the company of her maid left that job and came out to see 
Siva with the fan still in her hands. 

28. Another lady engaged in suckling her babe at her 
breast left him dissatisfied and came out eagerly to see 
the lord. 

29. Another lady engaged in trying her waist girdle 
came out with it. Another lady came out with garments 
worn inside out 

30. Another lady left her husband who had sat down 
to dine and came out a thirsting and enthusiastic to see 
the bridegroom. 

31. A certain lady holding the collyrium in her hand 
after applying it to one of her eyes came out to see the 
bridegroom of the daughter of the mountain with the salve 
stick still in her hand. 

32. Another damsel engaged in applying the red lac 
juice to her feet heard the tumult outside and so left it in 
the middle and came out to see the procession. 

33. Thus the ladies forsook their activities, left their 
houses and came out. On seeing the exquisite form of Siva 
they were greatly fascinated 

34. Delighted on seeing Siva and overwhelmed by 
affection they cherished the comely form in their hearts and 
spoke as follows : — 

The ladies said : — 

35. The eyes of the residents of this town have become 
fruitful. The life of the persons who have seen this comely 
form has become meaningful. 

36. The life is fruitful and the rites are fruitful only 
of the person who has seen Siva, the destroyer of all sins. 

37. Parvati has accomplished everything in asmuch 
as she performed penance for Siva. She is blessed, she is con- 
tented in securing Siva as her husband. 

38. If Brahma had not joined this pair, Siva and Sivi, 
his endeavour of creation would have entirely become fruitless. 

39. This is well done. The excellent pair has been 
united. Everything has become meaningful in every activity. 

40. A vision of Siva is inaccessible to men without 



penance. All of us have now become contented by seeing 
Siva. 

41. Just as LaksmI was blessed by securing Vi?nu as 
her lord, formerly, so also the gentle lady Parvati has 
become embellished on securing Siva. 

42. Just as Sarasvatl was blessed by securing Brahma 
as her husband, so also the gentle lady Parvati has become 
embellished on getting Siva as her husband. 

43. All of us, men and women, are blessed — we 
who see Siva, the lord of all, the husband of Parvati. 

Brahma, said : — 

44. Saying thus they worshipped Siva with sandal 
paste and raw rice grains. They showered Him with fried 
grains respectfully. 

45. The ladies standing near Mena were enthusiastically 
praising the good luck of Mena and the mountain. 

46. Hearing the auspicious stores and anecdotes of the 
ladies, the lopd became delighted, O sage, along with Visnu 
and others. 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 

( The arrival of the bridegroom) 

Brahmd said : — 

1. The delighted Siva accompanied by His Bhutas, 
Ganas, gods and others went to the abode of the mountain 
zealously. 

2. Mena, the exquisite beloved of Himacala, got up 
from her seat and went into the harem along with the women- 
folk. 

3. For the customary NIrajana (waving of lights) 
rites of Siva, the chaste lady came near the entrance with 
lights and vessels in her hands along with womenfolk of the 
sages. 

4. Mena saw with pleasure lord Siva, the bridegroom 



Rudrasarhhitd 669 

of Parvati, served by all the gods and who by that time had 
come there. 

5-11. Siva had the complexion of the colour of the 
Campaka flower. He had only one face but retained the 
three eyes. The face was beaming with a simple smile. He 
was bedecked in gems and gold and wore a garland of 
Malati flowers. The gemset crown was lustrous. He wore 
brilliant necklaces. He was bedecked in bangles and 
bracelets of fine workmanship. He was shining well with 
the two clothes of great value, fine texture and unrivalled 
beauty and purified in fire. Highly embellished in sandal 
paste, aguru, musk and fine saffron, he had a gemset mirror 
in his hand and his eyes were lustrous with the collyrium. 
He was shedding a halo around him enveloping everything. 
He was extremely beautiful. He appeared to be very young. 
His limbs had the full complement of their ornaments. He 
was very attractive to the ladies. He was not nervous or 
self-conscious. His lotuslike face had the brilliance of a 
thousand moons. His body shone with a refulgence more 
than that of a thousand cupids. He was beautiful in every 
limb. Seeing the lord thus as her son-in-law, Mena forgot 
all her grief. She was glad. 

12. She praised her good luck. She congratulated 
Parvati, the mountain and his entire family. She congratula- 
ted herself. She rejoiced again and again. 

13. Gazing at her son-in-law joyously with beaming 
face, the chaste lady performed the NIrajana rite. 

14. Remembering what Parvati had told her, Men£ 
was agreeably surprised and with a beaming lotus-like face 
full of delight she muttered to herself. 

15. “I see the beauty of the great lord far in excess of 
what Parvati had told me before. 

16. Siva’s loveliness cannot be expressed adequately 
now.” In the same state of pleasant surprise she went in. 

17. The young ladies proclaimed that the daughter of 
the mountain was fortunate. Some girls said that she had 
become a goddess. 

18. Some said — “Such a bridegroom has never been seen, 
not to our knowledge.” Some girls said to Mena — “Parvati is 
really blessed.” 



670 


SmpmrdQa 

19. The chief of Gandharvas sang songs. The celestial 
damsels danced. On seeing Siva’s lovely form, the gods were 
delighted. 

20. The instrument players played on musical 

instruments in sweet tones showing their diverse skill. 

21. The delighted Himacala too carried out the 
customary rites of reception at the entrance. Meni also 
jubilantly took part in the same along with all the women- 
folk. 

22. She made formal inquiries about the health of the 
bridegroom and gladly went into the house. Siva went to 
the apartments assigned to Him along with the Ga^as and 
the gods. 

23. In the meantime the servant-maids in the harem 
of the mountain took Parvati out in order to worship the 
tutelar family deity. 

24-30. There the gods saw joyously with winkless eyes 
the bride of dark complexion like the collyrium, and fully 
bedecked in ornaments in every limb. With a side glance 
she was respectfully looking at the three-eyed lord avoiding 
the eyes of others. With a gentle smile playing in her face 
she appeared very beautiful. Her plaited hair was thickly 
grown and looked beautiful. Decorative lines over her body 
were exquisite. She had the Tilaka with musk and saffron. 
Gemset necklace shone over her chest. Bracelets and bangles 
of gems and jewels shone brilliantly. With diamond ear- 
rings her cheeks appeared brilliant. Her rows of teeth 
sparkled like diamonds. Red lac applied over her lips which 
were naturally red like Bimba fruits was exquisite. She had 
a gemset mirror in her hand. A toy lotus also embellished 
her. Sandal paste, aguru musk and saffron were smeared 
over the body by her. Her feet and soles were naturally 
red. Tinkling anklets added to their beauty. 

31. On seeing the primordial deity, the mother of the 
universe along with Menaka,. the gods and others bowed 
down their heads with great devotion. 

32. The three-eyed deity saw her with the corner of 
an eye and was glad. On seeing the shapely body of Sati he 
forgot the pangs of separation. 

33. With his eyes riveted to her, he forgot everything 



Rudrasarhkitd 


671 


else. Hair stood on ends all over bis body, as he continued 
seeing her with delight. 

34. Then Parvat! went out of the city, worshipped the 
family goddess and returned to her parental abode along 
with the brahmin women. 

35. Siva went to the apartments indicated by 
Himacala, joyously along with the gods, Vi?nu and 
Brahma. 

36. All of them stayed there with joy, attending on 
Siva. They were duly honoured by Himavat, the mountainous 
lord. 


CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 

( The ceremonious entry of Siva into the inner apartments 
of the palace of Himavat) 

Brahma said : — 

1- Then the chief of mountains caused the investiture 
rite with the sacred thread for Parvatl and Siva with the 
Vedic hymns recited enthusiastically. 

2. Then Visnu, the other gods and the sages entered 
the inner apartments of the palace of the mountain 
enthusiastically at the request of Himacala. 

3. After performing the conventional rites in accordance 
with the Vedic injunctions and the social customs they 
decorated Parvati with the ornaments provided by Siva. 

4. First of all she was bathed, then bedecked with 
the ornaments. The Ntrajana rites too were also performed 
by the maids and brahmin women. 

5. The daughter of the mountain and the beloved of 
Siva, the lovely lady shone with the pair pf fresh 
clothes. 

6. O sage, an exquisite divine jacket studded with 
various gems was worn by the goddess who shone all the 
more. 

7. She wore a necklace studded with divine gems. 
Costly bangles of pure gold were worn by her. 



8. The lovely lady, the daughter of the great moun- 
tain, the mother of the three worlds staying there itself 
meditated on Siva and shone thereby. 

9. Then there was great jubilation delighting both the 
sides. Different kinds of charitable gifts were distributed 
among the brahmins. 

10. Monetary gifts were distributed among others. 
They were diverse. Many songs were sung jubilantly. 

11. Then Visnu, I the creator, Indra and other gods 
as well as the sages joined in jubilation with great 
pleasure. 

12. Then after bowing humbly to Parvati with 
devotion and remembering the lotus-like feet of Siva they 
returned to their camps obtaining the permission of 
Himavat. 

13. In the meantime Garga, a great expert in the 
science of astrology, spoke to Himavat, the lord of 
mountains. 

Garga said : — 

14. O Himavat, O lord, O father of Parvati, now 
fetch Siva to your palace for the marriage rites. 

Brahma, said : — 

15. On realising that the auspicious time for the 
marriage rites had been intimated by Garga, the mountain 
rejoiced much. 

16. With the desire to bring Siva there, the moun- 
tain gladly sent mountains, brahmins and others. 

17. The mountains and brahmins with auspicious 
holy objects in their hands jubilantly went to the place 
where lord Siva stood. 

18. Then the sound of the Vedic chants, musical 
instruments, songs and dances jubilantly arose there. 

19. On hearing the loud sound of musical instruments 
trumpets etc. the attendants of Siva simultaneously got up 
joyously along with the gods and sages. 

20. With great joy in their minds they said to one 
another — "O here come the mountains to take Siva 
over there ! 



Rudrasarhkitd 673 

21. The auspicious hour for marriage rites has come. 
We consider that our fortune is imminent. 

22. Indeed we are highly blessed as to witness the 
marriage ceremony of Siva and Parvatl, highly portentous 
of the good fortune of all the worlds.” 

BrahmS said : — 

23. Even as these confabulations were going on, the 
ministers of the lord of mountains came there. 

24. They approached Siva, Vi$nu and others and made 
their submission that the time for the celebration of marriage 
had arrived and that they would please hasten to the 
palace. 

25. On hearing that, O sage, Visnu and others 
rejoiced much and cried shouts of victory to the mountain. 

26. Siva too rejoiced much eager that he was 
approaching Parvatl but kept the signs of joy within his 
mind alone in a wonderfully serene manner. 

27. Then the ceremonial ablution with the sacred 
articles of toilet, was performed by the delighted trident- 
bearing lord eager to bless the worlds. 

28. The bath being over He wore fine clothes. He 
was attended upon by the guardians of the quarters and 
surrounded by several others. He was then seated on the 
shoulders of the Bull. 

29. With the lord in front, all of them entered the 
palace of Himavat playing on various musical instruments 
and exhibiting their eagerness. 

• 30. The brahmins sent by Himavat and the excellent 
mountains enthusiastically went ahead of Siva. 

31. The great royal umbrella was held aloft over the 
great lord. He was fanned by chowries and a canopy 
was spread over Him. 

32. Vi$nu, Indra, the other guardians of the quarters 
and I going ahead shone with great brilliance and 
splendour. 

33. In that great festivity conches were blown, 
drums were beaten and the musical instruments, pafaha, 
Anaka and Gomukha were played on, repeatedly. 



674 Saafmr&fa 

34. Musicians sang auspicious songs. Dancing girls 
danced to the tune. 

35. Accompanied by these, attended upon by all 
important gods and with flowers showered on Him delightedly, 
the sole kinsman of the universe -walked ahead shedding 
lordly splendour. 

36. Lord Siva, eulogised with many hymns of praise, 
entered the sacrificial altar. He was duly worshipped. 

37. The excellent mountains jubilantly made Siva 
dismount the bull and lovingly took Him within. 

38. After duly bowing to Siva who arrived there with 
the gods and Ganas, Himavat performed the Nirajana with 
great devotion. 

39. Praising his own good luck and bowing to all the 
gods, sages and others jubilantly he honoured them suitably. 

40. The mountain, after offering Padya and Arghya 
to them, took Siva along with Visnu and the important gods, 
within. 

41. In the quadrangle inside he made us, Visnu, 
Siva and other important persons sit on gemset thrones. 

42. The Nirajana rites was then performed by Mena, 
her maids and the brahmin women as well as other ladies 
of the city with joy. 

43. The necessary rites such as offering of Madhuparka 
etc. to Siva, the supreme soul, were joyously performed by 
the priest who knew his duties. 

44-45. O sage, urged by me, the priest carried out 
the auspicious rites relevant to the context after entering 
the enclosure where the altar had been built along with 
Himavat. Parvati bedecked in all her ornaments was seated 
as the bride. 

46. She was seated over the raised platform and Siva 
was led along with Vi?nu and me. 

47. Waiting for the auspicious Lagna befitting marriage, 
Bfhaspati and others became jubilant. 

48. Garga was seated in the place where the chrono- 
meter 107 had been kept. The Omkara Mantra was repeated 

107. Ghatfka or a waterclock was not only useful for carrying the 
nuptial programme at proper times but was also symbolical of time that 
ruled over the entire universe. 



Rudrasarhkitd 


675 


during the interval before the Lagna. 

49. Repeating the Punyaha mantras, Garga lifted the 
handful of rice-grains and handing them over to Parvati he 
made her shower it on Siva. 

50. Siva was duly worshipped by the joyful and sweet- 
faced Parvati with the rice-grains mixed with curd and 
Darbha water. 

51. Gazing at Siva for whom great penance had 
been performed by her formerly, Parvati shone beaming with 
pleasure. 

52. Requested by me and the sages Garga and 
others, Siva, following the worldly conventions worshipped 
her. 

53. Thus, worshipping each other Siva and Parvati 
identifying themselves with the universe, shone well. 

54. Both of them, enveloped by the glory of the three 
worlds and gazing at each other, were offered the Nirajana 
by Lak§mi and other ladies particularly. 

55. The brahmin ladies and the citizen ladies 
performed the Nirajana rites. All of them derived great 
pleasure and gaiety on seeing Siva and Parvati. 


CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 

(Description of Marriage) 


Brahmd said : — 

1. In the meantime, urged by the priest Garga 
Himavat started the rite of marriage in the company of 
Mena. 

2. Himavat and Mena held the gold pot on either 
side. Himavat was bedecked in fine clothes and ornaments. 

3. The joyous mountain with the assistance of his 
priest wooed the bridegroom after offering water, clothes, 
ornaments, sandal paste etc. 

4. Then the brahmins were requested by "Himavat 



676 Sivapur&pa 

“May the rite be formally started after narrating the Tithi 
etc. The auspicious hour has 00016 .“ 

5. After saying “So be it”, the excellent brahmins 
who knew the proper time proclaimed the Tithi etc. very 
delightedly. 

6. Then Himacala mentally urged with pleasure by 
lord Siva, the cause of great enjoyment, smilingly spoke to 
Siva. 

7. “O Siva, please do not delay. Please mention your 
genealogy, saintly lineage, 108 family, name and your Veda 
along with your branch of the Vedas. ” 

Brahma said : — 

8. On hearing these words of Himavat, Siva of sweet 
face, turned His face away. He without sorrow attained a 
pitiable plight. 

9. When lord Siva stood thus unable to say anything 
in reply and was seen so by the gods, sages, Gandharvas, 
Yak$as, and Siddhas, O Narada, you did something 
laughable. 

10. Urged by Siva mentally O Narada, you, the 
knower of Brahman with mind fixed in Siva, played on your 
Vina. 

11. You were forbidden strictly by the lord of 
mountains, Visnu, gods, sages and by me. 

12. When at the will of Siva you did not desist from 
it, you were again spoken to thus by the mountain then — 
“Do not play on the Vina now.” 

13. O celestial sage, O wise one, when you were thus 
strenuously forbidden, you remembered Siva and spoke to the 
lord of the mountains. 

N&rada said : — 

14. You have been utterly deluded. You do not know 


108. Before the bride is given away to the bridegroom, the names 
of the ancestors of both the parties with Gotra and Pravara are 
announced loudly so that the people assembled should know that both, 
the bride and the bridegroom, come of good families, the pedigree of 
which can be traced to many generations. The ceremony is called 
Gotroccftra in the GfhyaiUtras. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


677 


anything about Siva of whom you speak. You have no 
inner vision. 

15. Siva was directly asked by you to mention His 
Gotra. On this occasion these words are utterly ridiculous 
and derisible. 

16. O mountain, even Visnu, Brahma and other gods 
do not know His Gotra, family and name. What then can be 
said about others ? 

17. It was a result of the severe penance of Parvati 
that Siva was seen by you, O mountain, in one day 
according to whose calculation a crore of Brahmas become 
annihilated. 

18. He is the formless supreme Brahman. He is attri- 
buteless. He is greater than Primordial Nature. He has no 
shape, is free from aberrations He is the master of delusion. 
He is greater than the greatest. 

19. He has no Gotra, family or name. He is inde- 
pendent. He is favourably disposed to His devotees. At 
His will He assumes bodies taking many names. He is full of 
attributes. 

20. He is sugotrin (having good gotra) as well as 
devoid of gotra. He is of noble family as well as devoid of 
a family. Thanks to Parvati’s penance. He has now become 
your son-in-law. There is no doubt about it. 

21. The whole world consisting of the mobile and 
immobile has been deluded by Him in His divine sport. O 
excellent mountain, even the wisest of men does not know 
Him. 

22. The head of lord Siva of phallic image was not 
seen by Brahma. Visnu who went to the nether worlds 
did not see His foot. How surprised he was. 

23. O excellent mountain, of what avail is this talk ? 
Siva’s magical power is inscrutable. The three worlds, Visnu 
Brahma and others too are subservient to Him. 

24. Hence, O father of Parvati, ponder over this deep- 
ly. No doubt need be entertained by you even slightly with 
respect to this bridegroom of your choice. 

Brahm&said : — 

25. O sage, after saying this, you, of perfect wisdom, 



678 SwaputM^a 

who carried out the will of Siva replied again to the 
mountain after delighting him with your words. 

Narada said:— 

26. O dear, O great mountain, O father of Parvatl, 
listen to my words. After hearing them, give your daughter 
to Siva. 

27. Know that the divine sound alone is the gotra, 
and family of Siva in His divine form, who assumes forms in 
His divine sport. 

28. Siva is identical with Nada. 109 And Nada is identi- 
cal with Siva. There is no difference between the two — 
Nada and Siva. 

29. O lord of mountains, Nada being prior to Siva in 
His sportive, attributive form, Nada is the most excellent of 
all. 

30. Hence, O Himacala, mentally urged by Siva, the 
lord of all, I played upon my lute. 

Brahmd said : — 

31. O sage, on hearing your words, Himavat, the lord 
of mountains was satisfied and the bewilderment in his mind 
vanished. 

32. Then Vi?nu, the other gods and the sages said 
“Well done. Well done**. They were freed of all bewilder- 
ment. 

33. The shrewd people realised the majesty of lord 
Siva. They were pleasantly surprised and began to say to 
one another. 

34. “Siva is of the form of knowledge. He is greater 
than the greatest. It is at His bidding that the vast universe 
is bom He is of independent movement. He can be 
realised by the greatest concentration. He, the lord of the 
three worlds, is now seen by us.” 

35. Then Meru and the excellent mountains became 
agitated and simultaneously spoke to Himavat, the lord of 
mountains. 

iog. Nada it a mystical sound identical with Siva which symbolises 
his mystical origin. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


679 


The mountains said : — 

36. O mountain, be firm and stand by your decision 
to give your daughter. If you say “No”, you stand to lose. 
We speak the truth. Do not hesitate. Let the girl be given 
to Siva. 

Brahmd said : — 

37. On hearing the words of his friends, Himavat 
urged by Brahma gave his daughter to Siva. 

38. “O lord Siva, I am giving this girl, my daughter 
to you as your wife. O lord of all, be pleased to accept 
her.” 

39. Himavat gave his daughter PSrvati, the mother of 
the three worlds, to Siva the great, repeating the mantra 
“Tasmai Rudraya Mahate”. 

40. Placing the hand of Parvatl in the hand of Siva 
the mountain rejoiced much mentally. He had the satis- 
faction of crossing the ocean of his ambition. 

41 . Siva grasped the lotus-like hand of Parvatl in his 
hand repeating the Vedic mantras. Lord Siva was greatly 
delighted. 

42. Touching the ground and showing the worldly 
course of action, O sage, Siva recited the mantra “K£masya 
Kodat”. 110 

43. There was a great jubilation everywhere that 
gladdened everyone. Cries of “Victory” rose up in the 
heaven, the earth and the sky. 

44. The delighted people shouted “Well done” and 
“Obeisance to you”. The Gandharvas sang sweetly with 
pleasure. The celestial damsels danced. 

45. The citizens, the subjects of Himavat rejoiced in 
their minds. There was great auspicious jubilation. 

46. Visnu, Indra, I and the gods were delighted, with 
the faces beaming like full blown lotuses. 

47. Then the gleeful lord of mountains gave the ancil- 
lary articles of present to Siva in a fitting manner. , 

48. Then his kinsmen worshipped Siva with devotion 

no. VS. 7.48. The mantra begins with 



680 Sivapurfya 

and gave Parvati and monetary presents to Siva in accordance 
with the various injunctions of the Sastras. 

49. O excellent sage, in order to please Siva and 
Parvati, the delighted Himavat presented many gift** of 
articles. 

50. He gave to Siva some articles as dowry. Differ- 
ent kinds of gems and gemset vessels were given to him. 

51. He gave a hundred thousand cows, a hundred 
horses duly fitted up and a hundred thousand servant maids 
of loving nature and endowed with all necessary articles. 

52. O sage, he gave a crore of elephants and chariots 
inlaid with gold and made beautiful by gems. 

53. Thus Himavat attained perfect satisfaction after 
giving his daughter Parvati to Siva, the great lord, in accor- 
dance with the rules. 

54. Then the lord of mountains with palms joined in 
reverence eulogised lord Siva joyously with the hymns of 
the Yajurveda. 111 

55. Then at his behest, the sages jubilantly performed 
the holy ablution over the head of Parvati. Being conversant 
with the Vedas he asked them specially to perform this. 

56. Repeating the names of lord Siva, they performed 
Paryuk^ana rite. 111 There was a great jubilation and gaiety, 
O sage. 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 

( The delusion of Brahma) 

Brahmd said:— 

1. Then at my behest, the lord made the brahmins 
kindle the sacrificial fire and performed the homa, placing 
Parvati on the lap. 


111. MSdhyandina is a popular recension of the white Yajurveda 
of which the mantras are used by the priests in the nuptial and other 
ceremonies. 

1 1 2. It is a sprinkling of water collected from the sacred rivers by 
means of the leaves of sacred trees. 



Rudrasarhhitfi 


681 


2. Siva poured offerings into the fire with Mantras 
from Yajus and Sama Vedas. Parvatl’s brother Mainaka 
offered handfuls of fried grains. 119 

3. Then according to the worldly convention, Parvatl 
and Siva performed the circumambulation 114 round the fire, 
O dear. 

4. The husband of Parvatl exhibited a wonderful feat. 

0 celestial sage, listen to that. I shall mention it out of 
love for you. 

5. On that occasion, deluded by Siva’s power of illusion 

1 stared at the feet of the goddess as well as the crescent- 
shaped nails. 

6. On seeing them, O celestial sage, I became over- 
whelmed by passion. My mind was greatly disturbed. 

7. Deluded by the cupid I stared at her limbs frequ- 
ently. Then, immediately after staring at them, my semen 
dropped on the ground. 

8. I, the grandfather, was ashamed by the emission of 
my semen. O sage, I pressed the penis secretly with my 
feet. 

9. O Narada, on coming to know of it, the great God 
Siva became furious. He wanted to kill me immediately 
because I was overwhelmed by lust. 

10. O Narada, there was great hue and cry everywhere. 
All the people trembled. Even Visnu, the sustainer of the 
universe, was terrified. 

11. O sage, then Visnu and other gods eulogised Siva 
who was blazing furiously and who attempted to kill me. 

The gods said : — 

1 2. O lord of gods, O pcrvader of the universe, O 
Sadagiva, O lord of the universe, O lord of the world or the 
very world itself, be pleased. 

13. You are the supreme soul, the supreme lord and 
the cause of all emotions. You are free from aberrations, 

113. The brother of the bride pours out of his joined hands into 
her joined hands fried rice grains mixed with Sami leaves. The bridf 
sacrifices them with firmly joined hands standing, while the bridegroom 
recites the verses. For details see P.G.S. 1.6. i-a. 

1 14. See Note 70. P. 358. 



682 Sioapurltna 

devoid of wastage. You are eternal, free from suspicions and 
doubts. You are undying. You are the great god. 

14. You are Truth, Brahman and Consciousness. You 
are imperishable, from whom have originated the beginning, 
the end and the middle of visible worlds, even I too. 
These visible things are not the true ones. 

15. The sages, desirous of liberation, worship and 
meditate upon your lotus feet. They are steady in their 
resolve. They avoid attachment on either side. 

16. You are the perfect Brahman, the nectar, free 
from grief, devoid of attributes and the great one. You are 
the sole bliss, free from excitement, aberrations and even 
static and insentient. 

17. You are the cause of production, sustenance and 
dissolution of the universe Siva, the lord of souls, is greater 
than the universe. He is free from the necessity of its aid. 
He is always pervasive. 

18. You are the One, both Sat and Asat. You are 
non-dual. Gold whether as the basic metal or as the ready 
made ornament does not alter in its basic and intrinsic 
essence. 

19. People have doubts in you by their ignorance. The 
remedy for illusion lies in thinking on your Nirguna aspect, 
not by itself. 

20. O supreme lord, we are blessed by your very 
vision. O Siva, you are the bestower of supreme bliss to the 
people who are steady in their devotion. Have mercy. 

21. You are the primordial Being. You have no 
beginning. You are the Puru$a beyond the Prakf-ti. You 
are the lord of the universe. You are the lord of the world. 
You are free from aberrations. You are greater than the 
greatest. 

22. Your Rajasika manifestation is Brahma, the 
grandfather. O lord, thanks to your grace, Vi?nu is 
PurufOttama by your Sittvika nature. 

23. Your Tamasika manifestation is Rudra, the fire of 
dissolution. Siva is beyond the attributes, the great lord and 
omnipresent. 

24. O great lord of universal form, the manifest, the 



Rudrasathhiid 683 

great principle, the elements, the Tanmatras, and the sense- 
organs are presided over by you. 

25. O supreme lord, O merciful Siva, O lord of gods, 
be pleased, O best of Beings, be pleased. 

26. The seven oceans 115 are your clothes. The quarters 
are your long arms. The firmament is your head, O all- 
pervasive. The sky is your navel. The wind is your nose. 

27. O lord, the fire, the sun and the moon are your 
eyes. The clouds are your hair. The planets and the stars 
are your ornaments. 

28. O lord of gods, how shall I eulogise you ? O 
supreme lord, you are beyond description. O Siva, you are 
incomprehensible to the mind. 

29. Obeisance to Thee, the five-faced Rudra. Obeis- 
ance to thee, with fifty crores of forms. Obeisance to thee, 
the lord of three deities. Obeisance to the most excellent 
one. Obeisance to the principle of learning. 

30. Obeisance, Obeisance to the inexpressible, the 
eternal, the lightning-flamed, the flame-coloured. Obeisance 
to lord Siva. 

31. Obeisance, obeisance to thee stationed in the 
world with the form resembling a crore of lightning streaks, 
consisting of eight corners and very lustrous. 

Brahmd said : — 

32. On hearing their words, lord Siva was delighted. 
Favourably disposed to his devotees he offered me freedom 
from fear. 

33. O dear, then Visnu, the other gods and the sages 
began to smile and became merry. 

34. O dear, my semen pressed very frequently, turned 
into several sparkling drops. 

35. Thousands of sages called Valakhilyas sprang up 
from the sparkling drops. 

36. O sage, then the sages, gathered near me with 
great pleasure and said — “O father O father”. 

i if>. The seven mythical oceans are personified here* For details 
see S.M. Ali, Geography of the PurApas, Ch, II. on seven continents and 
oceans. 



684 Sivapurdna 

37. They were then sternly told by you urged by 
Siva’s wish. The Valakhilyas were rebuked angrily by you, 

Ndrada said:— 

38. All of you together go to the mountain Gandha- 
madana. 116 You shall not stay here. No purpose shall be 
served by your staying here. 

39. After performing great penance you will become 
great sages and disciples of the sun. This has been said by 
me at the behest of Siva. 

Brahma said : — 

40. Thus addressed, all the Valakhilyas went immedia- 
tely to the mountain Gandhamadana after bowing to Siva. 

41. O excellent sage, I was able to breathe fearlessly, 
thanks to Visnu and others, the noble souls urged by lord 
Siva. 

42. After knowing that Siva favourably disposed to 
His devotees can do everything and dispel the pride of the 
wicked, I eulogised Him, the lord of all. 

43. O great God, O lord of gods, the ocean of mercy, 
you are the creator, the sustainer and the annihilator of 
everything. 

44. It is at your will that the entire world including 
the mobile and immobile is kept checked as the bulls amongst 
a series of cows. 

45. After saying so I bowed to Him with palms joined 
in reverence. Visnu and others too eulogised lord Siva. 

46. On hearing the piteous eulogies made by me as 
well as by Visnu and others lord Siva became delighted. 

47 . He granted me the boon of fearlessness delightedly. 
All were happy, O sage, and I rejoiced much. 


1 1 6. Sec Note 309 P. 405 



Rudrasamhitd 


685 


CHAPTER FIFTY 

(Description of fun and frolic) 


Brahma said : — 

1 . O Narada, thereafter at the bidding of Siva, I 
carried out the concluding ceremonies of the wedding of Siva 
and Parvatl joyously through the sages. 

2. Their ceremonial head-bath 117 was respectfully gone 
through. The brahmins showed the Pole star Dhruva 11# with 
respect. 

3. Thereafter the rite of Hfdayalambhana 112 was per- 
formed. O great brahmin, then Svastipatha 120 was jubilantly 
celebrated. 

4. At the behest of the brahmins, Siva applied Red 
powder 111 on the head of Parvatl. The lustre of Parvatl at 
that time was beyond description and very wondrous. 

5. Thereafter at the bidding of the brahmins both sat 
on the same cushion and attained such a lustre as accentuated 
joy in the hearts of the devotees. 

6. O sage, then they returned to their apartment and, 
at my behest performed the rite of Samsrava PraSana*, of 
wonderful sportive nature that they were. 

7. When the sacrificial rites in marriage ceremony were 
thus concluded duly, lord Siva gave the Purnapatra 122 to me, 
the creator of the worlds. 

1 1 7. The bride is sprinkled on her head. The ceremony lenders the 
bride free from physical troubles and sanctifies her for the married life. 

1 18. In the night the bridegroom shows to the bride the polar 
star— a performance suggestive of firmness in the conjugal life. 

1 19. The husband touches the heart of the bride reaching over her 
right shoulder. The heart is the centre of feelings. By touching it the 
husband symbolically tries to rouse them and make them flow out to 
meet his own heart and thus unite them in the world of love. 

120. VS 25.19 and Ibid 25.14. These verses are usually recited on 
auspicious occasions. 

1 21. The printing of red lead on the head of the bride by the 
bridegroom is the most striking feature of the present day marriage 
ceremonies, nowhere mentioned in the Grhyastitra*. The later Paddhatis, 
however, refer to this custom. Cf. Gadidhara on P.G.S. 1.8.9. 

* It is the ceremonial licking up of the remains of libation. 

12 2. At the end of the nuptial ceremony, a vessel full of raw rice 
grains is given to the officiating priest who conducts the nuptials. A cow, 
as a ceremonial gift, is also offered along with some hard cash and clothes. 



8. Siva then made the gift of cows to the presiding 
priest. Other gifts of auspicious nature were also made. 

9. He gave the brahmins a hundred gold pieces each. 
A crore of gems and other articles were distributed among 
the people as gifts. 

10. The Gods, mobile and immobile creatures, rejoiced 
much. Shouts of victory rose up. 

1 1 . Auspicious sounds of music were heard everywhere. 
The sound of the musical* instruments was pleasing and 
increased the joy of everyone. 

12. Vi?nu accompanied by me, all the gods and sages 
took leave of the mountain and returned to their abodes. 

13. The ladies in the city of the mountain then took 
Siva and Parvati to the abode of Kubera. 

14. There several social customs and conventions were 
gone through by the ladies. All round, there was great 
jubilation. 

15. Then the couple, benefactors of the people, were 
led near the bed chamber. It was exquisitely decorated 
according to convention. 

1 6. The ladies of the city of Himavat approached them 
and performed the customary auspicious rites. 

17. Shouting cries of victory they untied the knot. 1 * 3 
They were smiling and ogling at one another with hairs 
standing on their ends due to pleasure. 

18-20. Entering the bedchamber and gazing at lord 
Siva, the beautiful damsels were much fascinated and they 
praised their good luck. He was gorgeously dressed in fine 
clothes. He was bedecked in gemset ornaments. He appeared 
to be in the prime of youth. He fascinated the ladies with 
charming loveliness. He was smiling gently and glancing at 
everyone lovingly. 

21-23. Then the sixteen celestial ladies arrived there 
and saw the couple with great respect. They were Sarasvati, 
Laksml, Savitri, Jahnavi, Aditi, &acl, Lopamudra, Arundhatl, 

123. Tying together, so as to form a knot, the garments of the 
bride and bridegroom at the commencement of the marriape ceremony is 
called Granthibandhana while untying the same after the ceremony is 
called Granthinirmocana. 



Rudrasarfifntd 


687 


Ahalya, Tulasi, Svaha, Rohini, Vasundhara, Satarupa, 
Samjfia and Rati. 

24. There were several virgins of the gods, Nagas, 
and the sages. They were charming and attractive. Who 
can enumerate them ? 

25. A gemset throne was offered to Siva who sat on 
it joyously The celestial ladies made these sweet witty 
remarks to Him one by one. 

Sarasvati said : — 

26. O great lord, Sati who was more than your life 
to you has now joyously rejoined you. O lover, seeing the 
face of your beloved of moonlike splendour, cast off the' heat 
of your distress. 

27. Spend your time, O lord of time, in the close 
embrace of Sati. Thanks to my fervent wish, there will be 
no separation at any time between you both. 

Lakfmi said : — 

28. O lord of gods, leave off your shyness. Take Sati 
to your bosom and stand close to her. Why do you feel 
shy of her without whom your vital airs may go off. 

Savitri said : — 

29. O Siva, give the sweets to Sati and eat them 
yourself. Do not be in a flutter. Perform Acamana and 
offer her betel leaves along with camphor. 

Jahnavi said : — 

30. Take hold of the hand of your beloved wife 
glittering with gold and stroke her hair. There is no higher 
pleasure at the hands of her lover to a loving maiden than 
this. 

Aditi said : — 

31. At the conclusion of the meal, for the purity of 
the mouth, please give water. The love of this pair is very 
rare to be seen. 



688 tiivapurana 

Sari said : — 

32. Why should you be shy of your beloved for whom 
you lamented and roamed here and there always keeping 
her in your heart ? 

Lopdmudrd said : — 

33. O Siva, a duty shall be performed by women in 
the bedchamber after the meal. Hence give Tambula 
(betel leaves with spices) to Siva and go to bed. 

Arundhatx said : — 

34. This lady was not intended at first to be given 
to you. But it is after my efforts that she has been given 
to you. Hence you must have a good dalliance with her. 

Ahalyd said : — 

35. Leave off your old age. Be extremely youthful so 
that Mena whose mind is fixed in her daughter may approve 
of you. 

Tulasi said : — 

36. Sati was formerly abandoned by you. Kama too 
was burnt. Then O lord, how is it that Vasisfha is sent as 
an emissary now. 

Svdhd said : — 

37. Now, O great lord, be steady in the words of 
women. There is a duty for women after marriage, 
maturity and loftiness of demeanour. 

Rohini said : — 

38. O lord, expert in erotic science and technique, 
fulfil the desire of Parvatl. Loving that you are, try to cross 
the ocean of the love of your beloved. 

Vasundhard said : — 

39. O lord, the knower of innermost thoughts, you 
know the emotions of love-oppressed maidens. It is not only 
the husband that she cherishes in her heart but she keeps 
the supreme lord too there for ever. 



40. A hungry person will not be satisfied until he 
partakes of a sweet hearty meal. 0 Siva do everything 
whereby the woman will be satiated. 

Sarhjha said:— 

41. Now please send off Siva along with Parvati to a 
secluded spot after making the bed, giving them betal and 
keeping the gem-bedecked lamp ready near by. 

Brahma said:— 

42. On hearing these words of the women, lord Siva, 
who was free from aberrations and was the supreme 
preceptor of great Yogins spoke to them. 

Siva said:— 

43. 0 dignified ladies, do not utter such words to me. 
You are the chaste mothers of the worlds, how do you speak 
so trivially in regard to your son ? 

Brahma said:— 

44. On hearing the words of Siva, the celestial ladies 
were ashamed. In their excitement they became motionless 
like dolls in a picture. 

45. Eating the sweets and performing Acamana lord 
Siva was much delighted. In the company of His wife 
He chewed the betal with camphor. 



690 Sivapwdna 

CHAPTER FIFTYONE 

( The resuscitation of Kdma) 

Brahma said : — 

1. At that time, thinking that the hour was favourable, 
Rati hopefully spoke to Siva who is favourably disposed towards 
depressed people. 

Rati said : — 

2. Why did you reduce my beloved husband to ashes 
without gaining any interest when he had come near you 
with Parvatl? He was my only fortunate possession very 
rare to get. 

3. Give me back my husband, the lord of my journey 
of life who used to work lovingly with me. Remove my 
distress caused by separation. 

4. O lord Siva, in the great festival of your marriage, 
all people are happy. I alone am unhappy without my 
husband. 

5. O lord, make me possessed of my husband. O 
Siva, be pleased. O lord, friend of the distressed, please 
make your words true. 

6. Excepting you, who is there in the three worlds 
including the mobile and immobile creatures who can 
destroy my sorrow. Knowing this, be merciful. 

7. O lord, merciful to the depressed, make me 
jubilant at the jubilant celebration of your marriage that 
gives pleasure to everyone. 

8. There is no doubt in this, that only when my lord 
is resuscitated will your sportive dalliance with your beloved 
Parvatl be complete and perfect. 

9. You are competent to do everything because you 
are the supreme lord. O lord of all, of what avail is this 
talk. Please resuscitate my husband quickly. 

Brahmd said:— 

10. After saying thus she gave him the ashes of the 
cupid along with the bag in which they had been contained. 



Budrasarhhitd 691 

“O lord, O lord”, saying thus she lamented much in front 
of Siva. 

11. On hearing the lamentation of Rati, Sarasvati 
and other celestial ladies wept bitterly and spoke in piteous 
tones. 

The celestial ladies said : — 

12. Obeisance to you, O lord, you are known as 
favourably disposed to your devotees. You are friend of the 
distressed, storehouse of mercy. Resuscitate the cupid. 
Make Rati jubilant. 

Brahma said : — 

13. On hearing their words, lord Siva was delighted. 
The lord, the ocean of mercy, glanced compassionately. 

14. Thanks to the nectarine glance of the Trident- 
bearing lord, Kama came out of the ashes, a comely wonder- 
inspiring body with splendid dress and features. 

15. On seeing her husband in the same form as before, 
wielding the bow and the arrows and smiling, Rati bowed 
to lord Siva. 

16. She became contented. With her husband resusci- 
tated and with palms joined in reverence she eulogised the 
lord, the bestower of her husband, frequently. 

17. On hearing the eulogy of Kama and his wife, 
Siva was delighted and he spoke with his heart melting 
with pity. 

Siva said : — 

18. O Kama, I am delighted by your eulogy in the 
company of your wife. O self-born, tell me the boon^ou 
desire. I shall grant it. 

Brahma said : — 

19. On hearing these words of Siva, Kama was highly 
delighted. Humbly and in faltering accents he spoke with 
palms joined in reverence. 

Kdma said : — 

20. O lord of gods, O ocean of mercy, if you, the 



692 Swapurina 

lord of all, are pleased with me please > be delightful 
to me. 

21. O lord, please forgive my fault formerly perpe- 
trated by me. Please grant me great affection towards my 
people and devotion to your feet. 

Brahma said : — 

22. On hearing the words of Kama, lord Siva was 
delighted. Giving consent, the lord of mercy laughingly 
said. 

Lord Siva said : — 

23. O Kama, I am delighted. O intelligent one, do 
not fear. Go near Vi$nu and wait outside. 

Brahma said : — 

24. On hearing these words he bowed to, circum- 
ambulated and eulogised the lord. Then he went out and 
bowed to Visnu and gods. 

25. Addressing Kama, the gods congratulated him 
and offered him their .auspicious blessings. Remembering 
Siva, Visnu and others spoke to him. 

The gods said : — 

26. O Kama, you are blessed. Burnt by Siva you 
have been blessed by Him. The lord of all has resuscitated 
you by means of his sympathetic glance, the Sattvika part. 

27. No man causes happiness or sorrow to another man. 
Man experiences the fruits of what he does. Who can ward 
off the destined protection, marriage or consummation 
at the proper time ? 

Brahma said : — 

28. After saying thus, the gods happily honoured him. 
Vi§nu and other gods who had realised their desire stayed 
there with pleasure. 

29. He too remained there, at the bidding of Siva, 
with great delight. There were shouts of “Victory” “Obeis- 
ance” and “well-done”. 

30. At the bed-chamber Siva placed Parvati on His 



Rudrasarhhitd 693 

left side and fed her with sweets. She too delightedly fed 
him with sweetfc in return. 

31. Siva according to the conventions of the world 
performed the customary rites. Taking leave of Mena and 
the mountain He came to the audience hall. 

32. O sage, there was great jubilation then. Sounds 
of Vedic chants rose up. People played on the four kinds of 
musical instruments. 

33. Coming back to His apartment, Siva saluted the 
sages, Visnu and me according to the worldly convention. 
He was duly saluted by the gods and others. 

34. Shouts of “Victory” and “Obeisance” rose up 
along with the sound of Vedic mantras which were auspicious 
and which removed all obstacles. 

35. Then Visnu, I (Indra) , gods, sages, Siddhas, secondary 
gods and the Nagas eulogised Him severally. 

The gods said : — 

36. O Siva, be victorious. O lord Siva, the support of 
all, be victorious. O Rudra, O great lord, the supporter of 
the world, be victorious. 

37. O Parvati’s lord, O lord, accentuator of pleasure, O 
threc-cyed one, O lord of all, the lord of illusion, be 
victorious, be victorious. 

38. O lord, devoid of attributes, bereft of desires, O 
lord beyond all causes, O omnipresent, O playful support of 
all, Q assumer of forms, Obeisance to you, be victorious. 

39-40. O lord, bes tower of good desires to your devotees, 
O merciful one, O bliss-formed, assuming forms through magic 
illusions, be victorious. Be victorious, O kind, O All-soulcd 
one, friend of the distressed, storehouse of mercy, O lord of 
illusion, free from aberrations, whose body is beyond the 
reach of speech and mind. 

Brahma said : — 

41. Eulogising thus, Visriu and others joyously served 
lord Siva, the husband of Parvatl duly, and with great love. 

42. O Narada, Siva, the lord who had assumed body 
sportively, granted boons and honour to all present there. 



694 


43. O dear one, Vi$nu and others taking leave of the 
great lord delightedly returned to their respective places. 
They were duly honoured and their faces beamed with 
pleasure. 


CHAPTER FDTYTWO 

(The bridegroom's party is fed and Siva retires to bed ) 
Brahma said : — 

1. O dear one, then the clever chief of mountains 
caused suitable arrangements to be made in the courtyard for 
feeding the visitors. 

2. He caused the ground to be swept clean and scrub- 
bed well. Different kinds of fragrant stuffs were used to make 
the place attractive and pleasing. 

3. Then the mountain invited all the gods and others 
along with the lord for taking food, through his sons and 
others. 

4. O sage, on hearing the invitation of the mountain, 
the lord accompanied by Visnu, the gods and others went 
gladly to take His meal. 

5. The mountain received the lord and all those duly 
and made them sit in good seats in the inner apartment. 

6. After serving sweet and well-cooked delicious food- 
stuffs, he requested them to take their food with palms joined 
in reverence and head bent down. 

7. Then duly honoured, Vi?nu and other gods keeping 
Sada£iva at the head took their food. 

8. They sat in rows together, took their food simul- 
taneously laughing ( and talking) . 

9. Nandin, Bhrngi, Vlrabhadra and his Ga$as took 
their meals separately. The fortunate people took food enth- 
usiastically. 

10. The gods, with Indra, the guardians of the 
quarters all forunate and brilliant took their food cracking 
jokes and talking. 

11. The sages and brahmins, Bhfgu and other sages 
sat in separate rows and took their food with pleasure. 



Rudrasathkitd 


695 


12. The Ganas of Cancel took their meals and then 
cracked jokes and talked merrily. 

13. After taking meals and rinsing their mouths Vi$QU 
and others went to their apartments for rest. 

14. At the bidding of Mena, the chaste ladies requested 
Siva humbly and made Him stay in the bedchamber where 
great festivities were going on. 

15. Seated on a gemset throne offered by Meni, Siva 
surveyed the bedchamber with pleasure. 

16. It was brightly illuminated with hundreds of 
gemset lamps. There were many gemset vessels. Pearls etc. 
were gorgeously displayed. 

17. Gemset mirrors, white chowries, pearl necklaces 
and gorgeous things were richly displayed. 

18. It was unequalled in its divine exquisiteness highly 
pleasing and richly decorated. 

19. It was evincing the powerful influence of the boon 
granted by Siva. It appeared to be a replica of Siva Loka 
itself. 

20. It was richly rendered fragrant with various sweet 
smelling substances. It was very bright. There was sandal 
paste and aguru. Beds were richly strewn with flowers. 

21 . Many wondrous things of variegated colours and 
shapes were displayed there. It had been constructed in gems 
by ViSvakarman* himself. 

22. In some places replicas of Vaikunfha, Brahmaloka 
and the cities of the guardians of the quarters were seen. 

23. In a certain place the beautiful Kailasa was 
represented. In another place Indra’s palace was depicted. 
Over all was represented the Sivaloka. 

24. Seeing all these wonderful representations lord Siva 
praised Himavat and was very glad. 

25. In that bedchamber, in a beautiful gemset couch 
lord Siva lay down with pleasure. 

26. Himavat fed all his brothers and others with 
pleasure and attended to the subsequent duties. 

27. While the supreme lord had his sleep and the 
lord of the mountains was engaged in these duties, the 
night passed away giving place to dawn. 

•See Note 301 P. 401; Note 295 P. 389. 



696 


28. In the morning the enthusiastic people began to 
play on different kinds of musical instruments. 

29. Visnu and the other gods got up with joy, remem- 
bered the lord of gods and excitedly got ready. 

30. They got their vehicles ready for the departure to 
Kailasa and sent Dharma to SiVa. 

31. At the bidding of Vi?nu, Dharma went near the 
bed chamber. The Yogin Dharma addressed Siva, the lord 
of Yogins, in a manner befitting the context. 

Dharma said : — 

32. Get up, get up O Siva, O lord of the Pramathas. 
Please come over to the audience hall. Make the assembled 
people gratified. 

Brahma said : — 

33. On hearing these words of Dharma lord Siva 
laughed. He surveyed him with sympathetic looks and got 
up from the bed. 

34. He laughingly said to Dharma — “You go ahead. 
I shall come there presently. There is no doubt in this 
matter. 

35. Thus addressed by Siva, he returned to the audience 
hall. The lord Siva too wanted to go. 

36. On coming to know of it the ladies came enthusi- 
astically. With their eyes fixed on the feet of Siva, they sang 
auspicious songs. 

37. Siva then, in accordance with the worldly customs, 
went through his morning routine. He took leave of Mena 
and the mountain and went to the audience hall. 

38. There was great jubilation there, O sage. Vedic 
mantras were recited loudly. The people played on the four 
kinds of musical instruments. 

39. Siva came to His apartment and bowed to the 
sages, Vi$nu and me in accordance with the worldly conven- 
tions and was saluted by the gods and others. 

40. Shouts of' Victory and Obeisance rose up along 
with the auspicious sound of Vedic chants. There was great 
tumult. 



RudrasaAhstd 


697 


CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 

( Description of Siva's return journey ) 

Brahmd said : — 

* ti 

1. Then Visnu and other gods, the sages and ascetics 
sent message to the mountain about their intention to leave 
after finishing their immediate duties. 

2. Then the lord of mountains finished his ceremonial 
ablution and the worship of his favourite deity. Calling his 
kinsmen in the city, he came to the audience hall joyously. 

3. There he worshipped the lord with pleasure and 
requested him to stay in his house for a few days more along 
with all the people. 

4. “O Siva” he said “I am contented by your sight. 
I am blessed since you came here with the gods”. 

5. Saying these words and many more, the lord of 
mountains pleaded with palms joined in reverence to the lord 
along with Visnu and other gods. 

6. Then the gods and sages remembered Siva and 
spoke with delight. 

The gods said : — 

7. O lord of the mountains, you are blessed. Your 
glory is great. Even in the three worlds, there is none equal 
to you in merit. 

8. At your very door, lord Siva, the supreme Brahman, 
the goal of the good and favourably disposed to His devotees, 
has deigned to come along with us, His slaves. 

9. O lord of mountains, this audience hall is very 
excellent. You have honoured us in diverse ways. The 
foodstuffs served to us were extraordinary. It is impossible 
to describe them suitably. 

10. It is no wonder that everything is perfect where 
the goddess Parvati is present. We too are blessed since we 
came. 

Brahmd said : — 

1 1 . Thus there was mutual admiration and glorification 
of an enlightened nature. There was great jubilation. The 



698 


sound of Vedic chant and shouts of victory were heard every 
where. 

12. There were auspicious songs. The celestial dam- 
sels danced. The bards sang songs of praise. There was a 
liberal exchange of monetary gifts. 

13. Then the mountain took leave of the lord of gods 
and went home. He made arrangements for a joyous 
feast with all paraphernalia in accordance with the rules. 

14. He brought the lord with all his attendants and 
followers for the feast. He was very enthusiastic. 

15-16. He washed the feet of Siva, Visnu and mine 
with reverence. He seated all of us, including the gods, the 
sages and others in the altar. The lord of mountains was 
assisted by his kinsmen. 

17. The mountain satiated them with various kinds 
of juicy foodstuffs. All of them took food including Siva, Vi?nu 
and me. 

18. Then the ladies of the city indulged in the 
customary utterance of foul abusive words laughing, jingling 
and peeping at all of them. 

19. O Narada, they took their food and rinsed their 
mouths. Taking leave of the mountain they returned to 
their apartments fully satisfied and pleased. 

20. O sage, on the third day similarly they were thus 
duly honoured by the lord of mountains with customary gifts. 

21 . On the fourth day, the rite of Caturthikarman 1 * 4 was 
performed with due observance. Without this the marriage 
rites would have been incomplete. 

22. There was diverse jubilant festivity. Shouts of 
“well-done”, “Victory” etc were heard. There were exchanges 
of gifts, sweet music and different kinds of dances. 

23. On the fifth day the delighted gods lovingly 
intimated to the mountain about their desire to go back. 

24. On hearing that, the lord of mountains spoke to 
the gods with palms joined in reverence “O gods, please stay 
a few days more”. 

124. This rite is so named because it is performed on the fourth 
day after the wedding- It is performed at the house of the bride's father 
before the marriage party leaves it. The purpose of this rite is to remove 
evil influence from the person of the bride which may cause harm to the 
family. For details see P.G.S. 1. 11.13. 



Rudrasarhkitd 


699 


25. Saying thus with great love he made all of us, 
the lord, Vi$nu and others stay there for many days, 
honouring us duly every day. 

26. Thus many days elapsed as the gods continued to 
stay there. Then the gods sent the seven sages to the lord 
of the mountains. 

27. They enlightened the mountain and Mena with 
what was relevant to the occasion. They told them about 
Siva's principles with* due praise. 

28. O sage, the proposal was agreed to by the great 
lord. Then Siva went to the mountain to tell him about 
the intended journey, along with the gods and others. 

29. When the lord of gods started on his journey 
towards his mountain along with the gods, Mena cried aloud 
and told the merciful lord. 

MenS said : — 

30. ^ O merciful lord, do mercifully protect Parvati. 
You are quickly pleased. Hence you will please forgive even 
a thousand faults in her. 

31. My dear daughter is devoted to your lotus- like feet 
in every birth. Even sleeping or awake she does not think 
about anything else. 

32. O conqueror of death, even on hearing about 
your devotion she is filled with tears of pleasure and 
horripilation. On hearing your censure she becomes silent 
as though dead. 

Brahma said : — 

33. Saying this, Menaka dedicated her daughter to 
Him and crying aloud became unconscious in front of them. 

34. When she regained consciousness, Siva took leave 
of her and the mountain and set on journey with the £ods 
jubilantly. 

35. The gods with the lord and His Ganas started on 
their journey silently. They wished the mountain well. 

36-37. The lord and the gods waited in a part outside 
the city of Himavat for the arrival of Parvati there. O great 
sage, thus I have narrated the journey of Siva. Now listen 
to the journey of Parvati and of her departure with festivities. 



CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 


(Description of the duties of the chaste wife) 

Brakmd said : — 

1. Then the seven sages spoke to the lord of the 
mountains — <l O mountain, hiake arrangements for the journey 
of your daughter today itself.’ * 

2. O great sage, on hearing these words and knowing 
her pangs of separation, the lord of mountains was greatly 
affected by his love towards her and remained silent for a 
short while. 

3. After some time, the lord of the mountains regained 
his consciousness and said — “Let it be so”. He then sent 
the message to Mena. 

4. O sage, on hearing the message of the mountain, 
Mena was both delighted and sorry. She immediately set 
about arranging for her journey. 

5. O sage, Mena, the beloved of the mountain, made 
arrangements for all kinds of festivities in accordance with 
the tradition of her family and the injunctions of the 
Vedas. 

6. She bedecked Parvatl with twelve kinds of ornaments 
and good silken garments of nice border. All kinds of 
embellishments befitting her royal state were made. 

7. Realising Mena’s inclinations a chaste brahmin 
lady instructed Parvatl in the duties of a chaste wife. 

The brahmin lady said : — 

8. O Parvatl, listen to my words with love that 
accentuate righteousness, that increase the pleasure here 
and hereafter and afford happiness to those who pay heed 
to them. 

9. A chaste lady sanctifies the worlds, destroys sins 
and is blessed. None else is so worthy of respect. 

10. O Parvatl, she who serves her husband with 
love and considers him her sole lord, enjoys all pleasures 
here and obtains salvation hereafter along with her 
husband. 

11-13. The chaste 


ladies — Savitri, LopamudrS, 



Rudrasaihhitd 


701 


Arundhati, San^ilya, Satarupa, Anasuya, Lak$mi, Svadha, 
Sati, Samjria, Sumati, Sraddha, Mena, Svaha and several 
others whose names are not mentioned lest the list should be 
too detailed have attained adoration from all people by their 
virtue of chastity. They have l^een honoured by Brahma, 
Visnu, Siva and great sages. 

14. Lord Siva, benefactor of the depressed, worthy 
of worship and the goal of the good shall be served by 
you always. 

15. The duty of a chaste lady is very important and 
it has been mentioned in the Vedas and Smrtis. No other 
duty is so admirable as this. 

16. A chaste lady shall take food only after her 
husband has taken it. O Siva, if he stands, the woman too 
shall remain standing. 

17. When he sleeps she can also sleep. But she must 
intelligently wake up before him. She shall do what is 
beneficial to him. She shall love him without any sort of 
deception. 

18. O Siva, she shall never show herself unembellished 
to him. If for any important work he is on exile she shall 
never adorn herself. 

19. A chaste lady shall never mention her husband’s 
name. If the husband scolds or rebukes her she shall not abuse 
him in return. Even when beaten by him she shall remain 
glad and say “I may even be killed, O lord. Be kind 
to me.” 

20. When called by him she shall leave the work she 
is engaged in and approach him immediately. With palms 
joined in reverence and love she shall bow to him and say 
as follows. 

21. ‘‘O lord, be pleased to say what I have ,been 
called for.” Whenever ordered by him to do any job she 
shall do it gladly. 

22. She shall not stand near the entrance for a long 
time. She shall not go to other people’s house. She shall 
not take his money, even though it be a little, and give it 
to others. 

23. Without being told she shall arrange the necessary 



702 SwapwrSQa 

requisities for his daily worship. She shall wait for the 
opportunity to do him a timely service. 

24. Without the permission of her husband she shall 
not go even on pilgrimage. She shall eschew the desire to 
attend social festivities. 

25. If a women wants holy water she shall drink the 
same with which her husband’s feet have been washed. All 
holy rivers are present in that water. 

26. She shall partake of the leavings of her husband’s 
food or whatever is given by him saying “This is thy 
great grace.” 

27. She shall never take food without first offering 
due share to the gods, the Pitrs, the guests, the servants, cows 
and saintly mendicants. 

28. A gentle lady of chaste rites shall always be clever 
to manage the household with limited requisites. She shall 
be averse to spend unnecessarily. 

29. Without being permitted by her husband she shall 
not observe fast and other rites. Should it be so, she will 
derive no benefit. She may fall into hell in other worlds. 

30. While the husband is sportively engaged or seated 
comfortably she shall not worry him to get up under the 
pretext of attending to some household work. 

31. Whether he is impotent, distressed, sick or senile, 
happy or unhappy, the husband shall never be transgressed. 

32. During the three days of her monthly course she 
shall neither show her face nor speak to him. She shall not 
speak within his hearing till she becomes pure after her 
bath. 

33. After her bath she shall see her husband’s face 
and not that of anyone else. Or after thinking on her 
husband she shall then gaze at the sun. 

34-35. If a chaste lady wishes for the longevity of her 
husband she shall not forsake turmeric, vermilion, saffron, 
collyrium, a blouse, the betel, the necklace, ornaments, 
brushing and plaiting the hair bangles and earrings. 

36. A chaste woman shall never associate intimately 
with a washerwoman, a harlot, a female ascetic or a fallen 
woman. 

37 . She shall not talk to any woman who disparages 



Rudrasarhhita 70S 

or hates her husband. She shall not stand alone anywhere 
nor shall she take bath in the nude. 

38. A chaste lady shall never sleep on a mortar 
threshing rod, a broom, a grinding stone, a machine or on 
the threshold. 

39. Except at the time of 1 sexual intercourse she shall 
never show her maturity and initiative. She shall like 
whatever her husband is interested in. 

40. A chaste lady shall be delighted when her husband 
is delighted and dejected when he is dejected. She shall 
always wish for his benefit. 

41. She shall be virtuous and equanimous in affluence 
and adversity. She shall have fortitude and shall never go 
astray. 

42. Even when ghee, salt, oil or other things are ex- 
hausted she shall not tell her husband openly about it lest he 
should be subjected to undue strain. 

43. O Goddess, the husband is superior to Brahma, 
Visnu or Siva, for a chaste lady her husband is on a par 
with Siva. 

44. She who transgresses her husband and observes 
fast and other rites wrecks the longevity of her husband and 
after death goes to hell. 

45. If she furiously retorts to her husband she is born as 
a bitch in a village or as a vixen in a secluded place. 

46. The chaste lady shall never take a higher seat 
never approach a defiled person, never speak to her husband 
in agitation. 

47. She should avoid slanderous words, shun quarrels 
and shall not speak aloud or laugh in the presence of elders. 

48-49. She who delights her husband delights all the 
worlds. When she sees her husband coming home she shall 
hasten to serve him food and water, hand him betel and 
change of garments, and serve him by massaging his feet. By 
pleasing words she shall fascinate him and dispel his gloom. 

50. What father gives is limited, what brother gives is 
limited and what the son gives is also limited. A chaste lady 
shall worship her husband who gives what has no limit. 

51. To a wife the husband is god, preceptor, virtue, 



holy centre and sacred rite. She should cast off every- 
thing and adore him alone. 

52. She who forsakes her husband and secretly violates 
her fidelity is born as a she-owl of cruel nature wasting its 
days in the hollow of a tree. 

53. If she desires to beat her husband in retaliation, she 
becomes a tiger or a wild cat. She who ogles at another 
man becomes squint-eyed. 

54. She who partakes of sweet dish denying the same 
to her husband becomes a pig in the village or a wild goat 
eating its own dung. 

55. She who addresses her husband in singular becomes 
dumb. She who is jealous of a co-wife becomes ill-fated in 
matrimony again and again. 

56. She who casts glance on another person hiding it 
from her husband becomes one-eyed, twisted-faced or ugly. 

57. Just as a body bereft of the soul becomes unclean 
in a moment, similarly a woman without a husband is always 
unclean even though she may take a neat bath. 

58. Thfc mother, the father and the husband are blessed 
if there is a chaste lady in the house. 

59. The three families — that of the father, that of the 
mother and that of the husband —enjoy the pleasures of 
heaven due to the merit of the chaste woman. 

60. Disloyal women cause the downfall of the three 
families, that of the father, mother and husband and become 
distressed here and hereafter. 

61. Wherever the chaste lady sets her foot, the sin is 
dispelled therefrom and the place is sanctified. 

62. Even the sun, moon and wind touch the chaste 
woman to sanctify themselves and not otherwise. 

63. Waters desire the touch of the chaste lady think- 
ing— “Now our sluggishness is gone. Now we are able to 
purify others”. 

64. Wife is the root of the household, and of its hap- 
piness; she is the source of the fruit of virtue and for the 
flourishing of the family. 

65. In every house there are women proud of their 
exquisite beauty and comely appearance. But it is only 
due to the devotion of Siva that a chaste lady is obtained. 



Rudrasarfihitd 


705 


66. The present and the next world can be won through 
her. A wifeless man is not authorized to perform the rites of 
gods, Pitrs guests and sacrifices. 

67. He alone is the true householder in whose house 
there is a chaste lady. The others are devoured by an ogress 
or old age. 

68. Just as the body is purified by a plunge in the 
Gariga, so everything is sanctified on seeing a chaste woman. 

69. A chaste lady is not different from Ganga. She 
and her husband are like Parvati and Siva. Hence a sensible 
man shall worship them. 

70. The husband is the high tone and the wife is the 
quarter tone. The husband is austerity and the woman is 
forbearance. The husband is the fruit and the wife is a 
sacred rite. O Parvati, such a pair is blessed. 

71. O daughter of the lord of mountains, thus the 
duty of a chaste wife is described to you. Now, listen to 
their classifications with attention and love. 

72. O gentle lady, the chaste ladies can be divided in- 
to four classes. Even when they are remembered they dispel 
sins. The divisions comprise of the superior etc. 

73. They are superior, middling, inferior and very in- 
ferior. I shall explain their characteristics. Listen with 
attention. 

74. O gentle lady, she whose mind is not aware of 
any one else and who is conscious of her husband even in her 
dreams is the noblest of all. 

75. O daughter of the mountain, she who sees another 
man as her father, brother or son with a clean conscience is 
the middling among chaste ladies. 

76. O Parvati, she who ponders over her duty mentally 
and desists from going astray is inferior among the chaste. 
Of course she is pure in conduct. 

77. She who remains chaste for fear of her husband 
or the family is very inferior among the chaste ladies, so say 
the ancient poets. 

* 78. O Parvati, these four types of chaste ladies dispel 
sins. They sanctify all the worlds. They are delighted here 
and hereafter. 

79. A brahmin who died due to the curse of Var&ha 



706 Sivapurtya 

(Boar), was at the request of the three deities, resuscitated 
by Atri's wife (Anasuya), thanks to tjie power of chastity. 

80. O Siva, O daughter of the mountain, knowing this 
well, you shall render service to your husband every day with 
pleasure as it bestows all desires. 

81. You are the Goddess and the mother of the uni- 
verse. Siva Himself is your husband. By remembering you 
women become chaste. 

82. O Parvati, O gentle lady, what avails mentioning 
all this to you. Still I mention this just to follow the worldly 
convention. 

Brahmd said : — 

83. Saying this, the brahmin lady stopped and bowed 
to her. Parvati, the beloved of Siva, derived great pleasure. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE 

(Siva returns to Kaildsa ) 


Brahmd said : — 

1. Thus instructing the goddess in the rites of a chaste 
lady, the brahmin lady told Mena while taking leave of her 
“Make arrangements for her journey”. 

2. Saying “So be it” she became exasperated by her 
affection. Controlling herself a little she called Parvati to 
her when her agitation due to imminent separation became 
all the more unbearable. 

3 Embracing her she cried loudly and frequently. 
Parvati too cried uttering piteous words. 

4. The beloved of the mountain as well as her daughter 
became unconscious due to grief. The wives of the gods too 
fainted on hearing Parvati cry. 

5. All the ladies cried. Everything became senseless. 
Who else, even the great lord, the leader of Yogins, cried at 
the time of departure. 

6. In the meantime, Himavat came hurriedly along 
with his sons, ministers and brahmins. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


707 


7. Holding his dear daughter to his bosom and saying 
“Where are you going ?” with frequent vague vacant 
glances, he cried due to his fascination. 

8. Then the chief priest in the company of other 
brahmins enlightened everyone. The wise priest by his spiri- 
tual discourse was able to convince them easily. 

9. With great devotion Parvati bowed to her parents 
and the preceptor. Following the worldly convention she cried 
aloud frequently. 

10. When Parvati cried the ladies cried too, particularly 
the mother Mena, sisters and brothers. 

1 1 . Her mother, sister, brothers, father and the other la- 
dies who were affectionately attached to her cried frequently. 

12. Then the brahmins respectfully intimated to them the 
auspicious hour for the starting of the journey and consoled 
them. 

13. Then Himavat and Mena composed themselves and 
caused the palanquin to be brought for Parvati to get in. 

14. The brahmin ladies helped her to get into the 
palanquin. They gave their blessings. Her parents and the 
brahmins too offered their blessings. 

15. Mena and the lord of mountains gave her a royal 
send-off with various auspicious rare presents not acces- 
sible to common people. 

16. O sage, Parvati started after bowing to the prece- 
ptors, elders, father, mother, the brahmins, the chief priest, 
sisters and the other women. 

1 7. Himavat, the sensible affectionate father with his sons 
accompanied her as far as the place where the lord was wait- 
ing joyously along with the gods. 

18. Everyone was jubilant and jolly with love. They 
bowed to the lord with devotion. Praising Him they retur- 
ned to Kailasa. 

19. Then Siva told Parvati — “I am reminding you 
although you know the previous birth. If you remember, 
speak out. In my divine sport you are always my beloved.” 

Brahmd said : — 

20. On hearing the words of Siva, Sat! Parvati the 
beloved of Siva replied smiling. 



Pdrvati said : — 

21. O dear lord, I remember everything as well as the 
fact that you became a silent ascetic. Obeisance to you. 
Please do everything necessary now befitting the occasion. 

Brahmd said : — 

22. . On hearing her words as pleasing as the steady flow 
of nectar, Siva rejoiced much, eagerly devoted to the way of 
the world. 

23. Getting every requisite thing ready, he fed the gods 
including Visnu and others with various pleasant things. 

24. He fed all the others who had attended' His 

marriage with juicy cooked food of various sorts. 

25. After taking food the gods and the Ganas, with 
their womenfolk fully bedecked in gems and jewels bowed 
to the moon-crested lord. 

26. After eulogising Him with pleasing words and 
circumambulating Him with joy they praised the marriage 
celebration and returned to their abodes. 

27. O sage, Siva Himself bowed to me and to Vi$nu 

following the worldly convention as Visnu had bowed to 

Katyapa. 

28. Considering Him the supreme Brahman I eulogised 
him in the excellent manner after embracing him and 
offering him my benediction. 

29. Visnu and I with palms joined in reverence, 
took leave of them and praising the marriage of Siva and 
Parvati went back to Visnu’s abode. 

30. On the mountain, Siva stayed with Parvati and 

continued his divine sports with joy. The Ganas too were 

happy and they worshipped the married couple. 

31. O dear, I have thus narrated the auspicious story 
of the marriage of Siva, that dispels sorrow, generates 
delight and increases wealth and longevity. 

32. He who hears this story with pure mind fixed on 
them or narrates the same, shall attain Sivaloka. 

33. This narrative is said to be wondrous and the 
cause of everything auspicious. It quells all hindrances and 
ailments. 

34. It is conducive to glory and the attainment of 



R*drasathkitd 709 

heaven. It bestows longevity, sons and grandsons, all 
cherished desires, worldly pleasures and salvation too. 

35. It wards off premature death. It is auspicious and 
it causes peace. It makes bad dreams subside. It is an 
instrument for the acquisition of keen intellect. 

36. It shall be read on all occasions of Siva's festivals 
by the people who desire auspicious results. It gives satis- 
faction to Siva. 

37. At the installation of the idols of the deities this 
shall be particularly read. At the beginning of all auspicious 
rites it shall be read with pleasure. 

38. With purity in mind and body it shall be heard. 
All affairs become fruitful thereby. This is true, really true. 



RUDRA-SAMH1TA 


SECTION IV 

Knmara Khanda 

• • 

CHAPTER ONE 

[The dalliance of Siva) 

1. I salute Siva who is satisfied with salutation, who 
loves great devotion, who bestows affection, who makes 
others too perfect and complete and who is the abode of all 
fortune and achievements. I salute Siva who is eulogised 
by Vi?nu and Brahma, who urged by His sympathy assumes 
visible forms, who bestows truth, who loves truth, whose 
assets are the threefold truths and who is identical with 
truth. 

tfarada said : — 

2. O Brahma, after marrying Parvati and returning to 
His mountain what did Siva the benefactor of the worlds do ? 
Please narrate it to me. 

3. Who was the son born to Siva, the great soul, for 
which purpose the lord, though He rests and revels in Him- 
self, married Parvati ? 

4. O Brahma, the benefactor of the gods, how was 
Tiraka m slain ? Please have pity on me and narrate all 
tins in full. 

Sttta said : — 

5. On hearing these words of Nirada, Prajapati was 
highly delighted and he replied after thinking on Siva. 


■ a;. Tiraka, the son of VajiiAga, was a Daily a whose austerities 
made him formidable to the gods. The present section narrates the birth of 
Kumftra, known as Skanda. Guha, k&rttikeya etc. who slew the dcmop 

Tirakft. 



Rudrasarhhitd 711 

Brahmd said:— 

6. O Narada, listen to the tale of Siva, the moon- 
crested lord. I shall narrate the story of Guha’s 126 birth and 
the slaying of the demon Taraka. 

7. Let it be heard. I shall tell you the story that 
destroys all sins, on hearing which a man is freed from all 
sins. 

8. This narrative is sinless. It is a wonderful secret. 
It dispels the distress caused by sin and wards off all 
obstacles. 

9. It bestows everything auspicious. It is the essence 
of the Vedas and is pleasing to the ears. It is conducive to 
happiness. It is the cause of liberation and cuts off the 
roots of all actions. 

10. Returning to Kailasa after marrying Parvati, Siva 
attained added lustre. He thought over the task of the gods 
and the pain of the people involved in the fulfilment of 
that task. 

1 1 . When Siva returned to Kailasa, the joyful Ganas 
made all arrangements for His happiness. 

12. When Siva returned to Kailasa, there was great 
jubilation there. The gods returned to their realms with 
their minds full of joy. 

13. Then taking Parvati, the daughter of the mountain, 
with Him, Siva, the great Lord, went to a delightful 
brilliant isolated place. 

14-15. Making a wonderful bed conducive to good 
sexual pleasure, rendered smooth and fragrant with flowers 
and sandal paste and auspiciously supplemented with objects 
of enjoyment, lord ‘Siva* the bes tower of honour, indulged in 
dalliance with Parvati for a thousand years of god. 1 * 7 

16. In that divine sport at the mere contact with 


126. Guha, better known as KArttikcya was the son of Siva. Bom in 
a thicket in a forest, out of the semen of Siva, without the intervention 
of Parvati he was fostered by the Pleiades (Krttikis) whence he recrived 
the title KA ttikeya. When grown into youth, he became the Comman- 
der-in- Chief fsen&pati) of the army of Siva, fought and slew the Daitya 
Taraka As he killed (m&ra) the evil (ku) Asura, he became known as 
kumSra. 

127. For different calculations of the time-durations see Sk. P. Ch. 
■4M45- 



712 


Parvati, Siva lapsed in unconsciousness. She too lapsed into 
unconsciousness due to the contact with Siva. She neither 
knew the day nor the night. 

17. When Siva following the* worldly way began his 
enjoyment of pleasures, O sinless one, a great length of 
time passed by as though it was a mere moment in their 
awareness. 

18. Then, O dear, Indra and the gods gathered together 
on the mountain Meru and began their mutual discussion. 

The gods said : — 

19. It is for the fulfilment of our task that Lord Siva, 
the leader of Yogins, free from aberrations, the unsullied, 
revelling and resting in his own Self, has married. 

20. No son is born to Him. We do not know the reason. 
How is it that the lord of gods is delaying the action? 

Brahma said : — 

21. In the meantime, from Narada who has the divine 
vision the gods came to know of the extent of the enjoy- 
ment of the couple engaged in dalliance. 

22. Realising that their enjoyment had extended over 
a long time, the gods became worried. Making me Brahma 
as their leader they approached Vi$nu Narayana 128 . 

23. After bowing to him I narrated to him all the details 
we desired to convey. The gods stood steady and silent like 
dolls painted in a picture. 

24. For a thousand years according to the calculation 
of the gods, Siva the Yogin has been engaged in sexual 
dalliance. He does not desist from it. 

Lord Vifnu said : — 

25. O creator of the universe, there is nothing to worry 
about. Everything will be well. O lord of gods, seek refuge 
in the great lord Siva. 

26. O lord of subjects, the people who dedicate their 


ia8. The epithet ‘N&r&yana’ is applied to Visnu because the waters 
(n&ra) were his first place of motion (ayana). In Hindu Mythology 
yis^u is represented as lying on the serpent couch in the midst of ocean. 



Rudrasaihhitd 


713 


minds to and seek refuge in Him joyously and devoutly have 
nothing to fear from any quarter. 

27. The interruption to amorous dalliance will take 
place at the proper time, not now, O Brahma. Any task 
carried out at the proper time shall be crowned with success, 
not otherwise. 

28. If the enjoyment is desired by Siva who can check 
it? When another thousand years are completed He will 
desist from it, out of his own will. 

29. If any one separates the copulated pair by a 
tricky expedient, he will have the pangs of separation from 
his wife and sons in every birth. 

30. He will fall from perfect wisdom. His glory will 
be destroyed. He will lose his fortune. That sinner after 
his death will suffer the tortures of the hell Kalasutra 1 * 9 for a 
hundred thousand years. 

31. The sage Durvasas 1 * 0 separated Indrain copulation 
with Rambha 131 and the sage got separation from his wife as 
a result thereof. 

32. He took another woman as his wife and thus put 
an end to the pangs of separation lasting for a thousand 
years of the gods. 

33. Brhaspati hindered Kama in copulation with 
Ghrtaci 132 but within six months the moon abducted his wife. 

34. He then propitiated Siva, fought a battle over 
Tara, enjoyed her even as she was pregnant and tried to 
dispel his pangs of separation. 

35. The sage Gautama forced the moon in the company 
of Rohini to desist from sexual dalliance and he suffered the 
pangs of separation from his wife. 

36-37. Hariscandra expelled a ploughman in copulation 
with a Sudra woman, to wander in a lonely forest. Listen 

129. K&lasiitra is one of several hells wherein the wicked are 
tortured. For details see Visnu Purana II. 214 

130. Durvasas, the son of Atri and Anasuya was a sage of irascible 
temper. 

1 31. Rambha, a celestial damsel is represented as the type of 
female beauty. She was one of the rarities produced at the churning of 
the ocean. 

132. Ghftacl, a celestial damsel, was known for her rare beauty and 
charms. 



to the effect thereof. He lost his wife, son and kingdom. He 
was tarmented by Visvamitra. It was only after propitiating 
Siva that he could get released from that sin. 

38. Though Ajamila, 153 a noble brahmin, was in copula- 
tion with a Sudra woman, gods did not interfere due to this 
fear. 

39. Everything can be achieved through the discharge 
of the semen. O Brahma, the process of discharge is very 
effective. The discharge that is fruitful none can withhold. 

40-41. O gods, Siva’s act of enjoyment will extend to 
a thousand years of celestial calculation. After that period is 
over, you can go there and do such things as will necessitate 
the fall of the semen on the ground. The son of the lord 
named Skanda will be born of that. 

42. O Brahma, return to your abode along with the 
gods. Let Siva carry on enjoyment in the isolated place in 
the company of Parvati. 

Brahmd said : — 

43. After saying this, the lord of Laksmi immediately 
returned to his harem. O great sage, the gods too returned 
to their abodes along with me. 

44. On account of the dalliance of Siva and Parvati, 
the earth quaked with the weight along with Sesa (the ser- 
pent) and Kacchapa 134 (the tortoise). 

45. By the weight of Kacchapa, the cosmic air, the 
support of everything, was stunned and the three worlds be- 
came terrified and agitated. 

46. Then the gods along with me sought refuge in Visnu 
and in our depression intimated to him the news. 

The gods said : — 

47. O Visnu, the lord of the gods, O lord and pro- 
tector of all, save us who have sought refuge in you and 
whose minds are acutely terrified. 

48. The vital air of the three worlds is stunned. We 
do not know wherefore. The three worlds including the 

*33* Ajamila was a Brahmaga of Kanauj who married a Sudra 
woman and had children of whom he was very fond. 

134. §e$a (the serpent chief) and Kacchapa (the tortoise) are said 
to support the earth in turns on the hoods and the back respectively. 



RudrasarfihitS 


715 


mobile and immobile as well as the gods and the sages are 
excited. 

Btahmd said: — 

49. After saying this, O great sage, all the depressed 
gods, stood silent along with me in front of Visnu with great 
misery. 

50. On hearing those words, Visnu took us all imme- 
diately to the mountain Kailasa, the favourite haunt of Siva. 

51. After going there in the company of the gods and 
rne, the favourite deity of the gods went to the excellent re- 
sort of Siva with a desire to see Siva. 

52. Unable to see Him there, Visnu and the gods 
became surprised. With humility he asked the Ganas of 
Siva who were there. 

Visnu said : — 

53. O Ganas of Siva, where has Siva, the lord of all 
gone ? Sympathetically intimate this to us who are 
depressed. 

B/ahma said : — 

54. On hearing these words of Visnu in the company 
of the gods, the Ganas of Siva lovingly replied to Visnu. 

The Ganas of Siva said : — 

55. O Visnu, please listen along with Brahma and the 
gods, we shall tell you the truth and the details out of love 
for Siva. 

56. Siva, the lord of all, had gone into the apartment 
of Parvati after stationing us here with love. He is an 
expert in indulging in divine sports. 

57. O lord of Lak$mi, many years have gone by.. We 
do not know what Siva, the great lord, is doing within her 
apartment. 

Brahma said : — 

58. On hearing their words, O excellent sage, Vi$nu, 
the gods and I were perplexed and went to the doorway of 
Siva’s apartment. 



716 Sivapurdna 

59. After going there along with me and the gods, 
Visnu, the favourite deity of the gods, spoke in dejection but 
with joy in the heart. 

60. O excellent sage, standing there, along with me 
and the gods, he eulogised Siva, the lord of all the worlds with 
great pleasure. 

Visnu said : — 

61. O great lord, what are you doing there inside? 
Save us who arc harassed by Taraka and who have sought 
refuge in you. 

62. O great sage, praising and pleading like this to 
Siva, Visnu wept bitterly along with the gods harassed by 
Taraka. 

63. O great sage, the tumultuous cry of the heaven- 
dwellers distressed by the demon got mingled with the sound 
of eulogy to Siva. 


CHAPTER TWO 

( The birth of £iva's son) 

Brahma said : — 

1 . On hearing that, the great lord, an expert in Yogic 
theory, though free from lust, did not emit the semen, fearing 
to offend Parvati. 

2. He came to the door, near the gods distressed by 
the demon. Siva is the benefactor favourably disposed to 
His devotees. 

3. On seeing lord Siva, favourably disposed to His 
devotees, the gods including me and Visnu became extremely 
happy. 

4. O sage, bowing down with stooping shoulders the 
gods along with me and Vi$nu eulogised Siva with great 
pleasure. 

The gods said : — 

5. “O great God, O lord of gods, O ocean of mercy, 



Rudrasarhhiti 


717 


O Siva, you are the immanent soul of all. You know every- 
thing. 

6. O lord, carry out the task of the gods. O great lord, 
save the gods. Slay Taraka and other demons and take pity 
on us.” 

7. On hearing these words of the gods, lord Siva agit- 
ated in soul and dispirited in the mind, replied. 

Siva said : — 

\ 

8. “ O Visnu, O Brahma, O gods, you are '^he goal of 
everybody’s mind. What should happen necessarily must 
happen. There is none to stop it. 

9-11. What has happened has already happened. Now 
O gods, listen to what is relevant to the context. Let him 
who will, take up this discharged semen”. After saying this 
He let it fall on the ground. Urged by the gods Agni became 
a dove and swallowed it with his beak. O sage, in the 
meantime Parvati came there. 

12. When Siva took a long time to return, she hastened 
there and saw the gods. On coming to know of the incident 
she became very furious. 

13. She told Visnu and the gods as follows. 

The goddess said : — 

14. Hi Hi, O gods, you are wicked and particularly 
selfish and for that purpose you give pain to others. 

15. O gods, for the sake of realising your self-interests 
you all propitiated the lord and spoilt my dalliance. I have 
become a barren woman therefore. 

16. O gods, after offending me none can be happy. 
Hence O wicked heaven-dwellers, you will remain unhappy. 

Brahma said : — 

17. After saying these words Parvati, the daughter of 
the king of mountains, blazing with fury cursed Visnu and all 
other gods. 

Parvati said : — 

18. From now onwards let the wives of the gods be 
utterly barren and let the gods who offended me be unhappy. 



Sivapurana 


718 

Brahma said : — 

19 . Cursing Visnu and other gods, Parvati furiously 
told Agni who had swallowed Siva’s semen. 

Parvati said : — 

20. O Agni, be the devourer of everything and let your 
soul be afflicted. You are a fool. You do not know Siva’s 
fundamental principles. You have come forward to carry out 
the task of the gods. 

21. It is neither proper nor beneficent to you to have 
eaten up Siva’s semen. You are a rogue, a wretched vile, pay- 
ing heed to the wicked counsel of the wicked. 

Brahma, said : 

22. After cursing the fire thus, O sage, Parvati, the 
daughter of the mountain, immediately returned to her 
apartment along with Siva, dissatisfied that she was. 

23. O great sage, after returning she persistently pleaded 
with Siva and bore a son named Ganesa. 

24. O sage, the details of that story I shall narrate to 
you later on. Now listen to the story of the birth of Guha 
which I am going to narrate. 

25. The gods are wont to partake of the offerings of 
food etc. consigned to the fire in accordance with the Vedic 
text. Hence the gods became pregnant. 

26. Unable to endure the force of the semen they be- 
came afflicted. Vi?nu and other gods had already lost their 
sense at the curse of Parvati. 

27. Then Visnu and other gods were overwhelmed and 
scorched. In this state they sought refuge in Siva. 

28. After reaching the threshold of Siva’s apartment, the 
gods humbly eulogised Parvati and Siva with pleasure and 
with palms joined in reverence. 

The gods said : — 

29. O lord of gods, O great lord, consort of Parvati, 
what has happened now? Your magical power is incapable of 
being transgressed. 

30. We have become pregnant and also scorched by 



Rudrasaihhitd 719 

your semen. O Siva, take pity on us. Remove our miserable 
plight. 

Brahma said : — 

31. O sage, on hearing the eulogy of the gods, Siva, the 
lord of Parvati came immediately to the threshold where the 
gods stood waiting. 

32. The gods including Visnu bowed humbly with 
great devotion and eulogised Siva who is favourably disposed 
to His devotees, who came near the entrance. 

The gods said : — 

33. O Siva, O great lord, we bow to you particularly, 
save us seeking refuge in you on being scorched by your 
semen. 

34. O Siva, please remove our misery. We will cer- 
tainly die otherwise. Save you, none can remove the misery 
of the gods. 

Brahma said : — 

35. On hearing these piteous words, the lord of the gods 
laughingly replied to the gods with his usual sympathy towards 
his devotees. 

Siva said : — 

36. O Vi$nu, O Brahma, O gods, all of you listen to 
my words with attention. You will be happy. Be careful. 

37. At my behest you shall vomit this semen virile of 
mine. You will be happy thereby. 

Brahma said : — 

38. Accepting this command with bent head Visnu and 
the other gods immediately vomitted it out after duly 
remembering Siva the imperishable. 

39. The semen of Siva lustrous and golden in colour 
falling on the ground seemed to touch the heaven as it was 
as huge as a mountain. 

40. Vi$nu and other gods became relieved and they 
eulogised the great lord Siva who is favourably disposed to 
His devotees. 



720 Sivapurana 

41. O great sage, only Agni did not become happy. 
Siva, the great lord, gave a separate hint to him. 

42. Then the distressed fire, O sage, eulogised Siva with 
palms joined in reverence and piteously spoke these words. 

Agni said : — 

43-44. O lord of gods, I am a stupid and deluded 
servant of yours. Forgive me my fault. Please remove my 
burning sensation. O lord, you are the benefactor and 
sympathetic to the distressed. 

Brahma said : — 

45. On hearing the words of Agni, Siva the great lord 
spoke delightedly to Agni He is favourably disposed to 
His devotees. 

Siva said : — 

46. An improper action has been committed by you 
in swallowing my semen. Hence your sin has become formi- 
dable at my bidding and the burning sensation has not been 
cured. 

47. Now that you have sought refuge in me you are 
sure to be happy. I am pleased with you. All your misery 
will be dissolved. 

48. Deposit carefully that semen in the womb of some 
good woman. You will become happy and particularly relieved 
of the burning sensation. 

Brahma said : — 

49. On hearing these words of Siva, Agni replied to 
Siva, the benefactor of the devotees with pleasure and bow- 
ing down with palms joined in reverence. 

50. “O lord Siva, this splendour of yours is inaccessible 
and unbearable. There is no woman in the three worlds 
except Parvatl to hold it in her womb.” 

51. O excellent sage, when fire said like this, you, 
urged by Siva, said thus in order to help Agni. 

Narad a said : — 

52. “O Agni, listen to my words that will dispel your 



Rudrasarhhitd 721 

burning sensation* It will yield great pleasure and ward off 
your pains. 

53. O Agni, taking recourse to the following expedient 
you will be relieved of the burning sensation and be happy. O 
dear, this has been explained by me well at the will of Siva. 

54. O Agni, you shall deposit this semen of Siva in the 
bodies of the ladies who take their morning baths in the 
month of Magha.” 

Brahma said : — 

55. O sage, meanwhile the wives of the seven celes- 
tial sages came there desirous of taking their early morning 
bath in the month of Magha with other observances of rites. 

56. After the bath, six of them were distressed by the 
chillness and were desirous of going near the flame of fire. 

57. Arundhatl of good conduct and perfect knowledge 
saw them deluded and dissuaded them at the behest of Siva. 

58. O sage, the six ladies stubbornly insisted on going 
there to ward off their chill ness because they were deluded by 
Siva’s magical art. 

59. Immediately the particles of the semen entered 
their bodies through the pores of hairs, O sage. The fire was 
relieved of their burning sensation. 

60. Vanishing immediately from the scene, Agni in 
the form of a flame, went back happily to his region, mental- 
ly remembering you and Siva. 

61. O saintly one, the women became pregnant and 
were distressed by the burning sensation. They went home. 
O dear, Arundhatl was displeased with fire. 

62. O dear, the husbands on seeing the plight of their 
wives became furious. They consulted one another and dis- 
carded them. 

63. O dear, on seeing their own state the six ladies 
felt very miserable and distressed. 

64. The wives of the sages cast off their semen in the 
form of a foetus at the top of Himavat. They felt then 
relieved of their burning sensation. 

65. Unable to bear that semen of Siva and trembling 
much, Himavat became scorched by it and hurled it in the 
Ganga. 



66. O great sage, the intolerable semen of lord Siva 
was deposited by Gahga in the forest of Sara grass by means 
of its waves. 

67. The semen that fell was turned in a handsome 
good-featured boy, full of glory and splendour. He increased 
everyone’s pleasure. 

68. O great sage, on the sixth day of the bright half 
of the lunar month of Margasirsa, the son of Siva was born 
in the world. 

69. At that time, O Brahmin, on their mountain, 
Parvati the daughter of Himavat and Siva became very happy. 

70. Out of joy, milk exuded from the breasts of 
Parvati. On reaching the spot everyone felt very happy. 

71. O dear, there was auspiciousness in the three worlds, 
pleasing to the good. There occurred obstacles to the wicked 
and particularly to the demons. 

72. O Narada, there was a mysterious sound of 
Dundubhi drum in the sky. Showers of flowers fell on the 
boy. 

73. O excellent sage, there was great delight to Visnu 
and the gods. There was great jubilation everywhere. 


CHAPTER THREE 

( The boyhood sports of Karttikeyd) 

Narada, said : — 

1. O lord of subjects, O Brahmin, O creator, what 
happened thereafter ? Please tell me the same. 

Brakmd said : — 

2. O dear, then the powerful sage ViSvamitra, urged by 
Brahma, came there casually and was delighted. 

3. On seeing the unearthly splendour of that brilliant 
boy, he became very delighted. He bowed to the boy. 

4. With a delighted mind he eulogised him with the 
words prompted by Brahma. Visvamitra realised his power. 

5. The boy too was delighted and became the source of 



Rudrasarhhitd 723 

great enjoyment. Laughingly he spoke to Visvamitra. It was 
very surprising. 

Siva's son said : — 

6. “O great one of perfect wisdom, it is due to the will 
of Siva that you have come here by chance. O dear, per- 
form my purificatory rites in accordance with Vedic injunc- 
tions. 

7. From now onwards you remain my priest con- 
ferring your love on me. It is certain that you will become 
the object of worship of all.” 

Brahma, said : — 

8. On hearing his words, Gadhi’s son 135 (Visvamitra) 
was highly delighted and surprised. He spoke to him in a 
tone, by no means highly accented. 

Visvamitra said: — 

9. Listen, O dear, I am not a brahmin. I am a Ksatriya, 
son of Gadhi, famous as Visvamitra and a servant of brah- 
mins. 

10. O excellent boy, I have thus narrated my life to 
you. Who are you ? Now mention everything about your 
life to me who am surprised. 

Brahma said : — 

11. On hearing his words the boy told him about his 
life. The divine boy, the cause of great enjoyment and pro- 
tection, said to Gadhi’s son with great pleasure. 

Siva’s son said : — 

12. O Visvamitra, thanks to my favour, you now 
become a brahminical sage. Vasistha and others will for ever 
regard you with respect. 

13. Hence, at my behest you shall perform my puri- 
ficatory rites. Keep this as a great secret. You shall not 
mention it anywhere. 

I3j. Visvamitia, the son of Gadhi or Gathin, was a born Ksatriya 
who by inu-nsc austerities attained Brahman ahood. $P. attributes this 
change to the favour of Kumara who raised him to Briihm ana hood in 
order to enable him to per form his purificatory rites. 



Sivapurdna 


724 

Brahma said : — 

14. O celestial sage, in the manner laid down in the 
Vedas he performed the purificatory rites for the son of Siva. 

15. Siva’s son, the cause of great enjoyment and pro- 
tection, was glad and conferred divine wisdom on the sage. 

16. The son of Agni made Visvamitra his priest. 
Form that time onwards he became a great brahmin and an 
expert in divine sports of various sorts. 

1 7. O sage, the very first sport that he performed thus 
has been narrated to you by me. O dear, listen to another 
sport of his with wonder. I shall narrate it to you. 

18-19. At that time he was known as white in colour. 
Agni went there and seeing his son who was divine and very 
holy called him “O dear son.” Agni embraced and kissed him 
too. He gave him a miraculous weapon, spear. 

20 Guha took the spear and ascended the peak. He 
hit the peak with his spear and the peak fell down. 

21. Ten thousand billions of heroic demons came there 
to attack him but were killed on being hit with the spear. 

22. There was great hue and cry. The Earth, the 
mountains and the three worlds quaked. Indra the lord of 
gods came there. 

23. With his thunderbolt he hit on his right side. A 
person named “Sakha” 138 of great strength came out of that 
side. 

24. Sakra struck him again with his thunderbolt on 
his left side. Another strong person named Visakha came 
out of that side. 

25. Then Indra struck his heart with his thunderbolt. 
Another person very powerful like him named Naigama 
came out. 


136 Sakha. Visakha and Naigama are the three brothers of 
Kumai'i- Airoiding to SP. tiny are his very self SP RS. iv. 23-25 

V.S Agiawal gives quite a different interpolation. According to 
him Kumara is the symbol of the life-principle manifesting in every in- 
dividual. Krttikrts ate the six yogie cakras located i,n the human body in 
the golden reed. Kumara who , is born in this six-jointed single reed is 
called (n Karttikeya and (li) Sakha. The life-principle then blanches 
out in the form of five gross elements and the mind which together ate 
railed (iii,> Viiakha. As the popular God of the merchant community 
K. uni 41 a is called (iv; Naigama or Naigameya. 



Rudrasarhhita 


725 


26. Then the four of great heroic strength including 
Skanda rushed to attack Indra. I offered my protection to 
Indra. 

27. Afraid of Guha, Indra with all the gods went 
away to his region agitatedly. O sage, he did not know his 
secret. 

28. That boy remained there itself as fearless as before. 
O dear, he was highly pleased and continued his divine 
sports of various sorts. 

29. Meanwhile the six ladies named Krttikas came 
there for bath and they saw the lordly boy. 

30. All of them desired to take and fondle him O sage, 
as a result of their simultaneous desire for taking and fondl- 
ing the boy, a dispute arose. 

31. In order to quell their mutual dispute, the boy 
assumed six faces and drank milk off their breasts. O sage, 
they were all satisfied. 

32-33. Realising his desire, the Krttikas, O sage, took him 
to their region joyously. Feeding him with their breast milk 
they nursed and nurtured Siva’s son who was more refulgent 
than the sun. 

34. They never let him go out of their sight. He 
became the object of their love, dearer to them than their 
own lives. Verily he who nurses and nurtures the child has 
the right of possession over the son. 137 

35. With great love they gave him the rarest garments 
and excellent ornaments in the three worlds. 

36. Feeding him specially on the choicest delicacies 
day by day they brought up the boy prodigy. 

37. O dear, once that son of the Krttikas went to the 
celestial assembly and showed wonderful feats. 

38. The boy of wonderful miracles showed his rare 
splendour to the gods including Visnu. 

39-40. On seeing him, the gods and sages including 
Vi$nu became surprised and asked the boy “Pray, who are 
you ?" On hearing it he did not say anything in reply. He 
returned to his abode and remained concealed as before. 

137. Verses 31-36 of this chapter are the same as verses 31-32 of the 
following chapter. 



CHAPTER FOUR 

( Search for Karttikeya and his conversation with Nandin) 
Ndrada said : — 

1* O lord of people, O Brahma, O lord of gods, what 
happened after that ? Narrate it to me kindly besides the 
description of Siva’s sports. 

Brahma said : — 

r 2. O sage, after the son of Siva had been taken over 
by the Kfttikas some time elapsed but the daughter of Hima- 
vat had no knowledge of the same. 

3. Meanwhile Parvati beaming with her lotus like face 
told her husband Siva, the lord of the gods. 

Parvati said : — 

4. O lord of the gods, listen to my auspicious words. 
O lord, you have been attained by me, thanks to my previous 
merits. 

5. Although you are the most excellent among the 
Yogins, O lord, you became desirous of dalliance. But my 
dalliance with you was interrupted in the middle by the 
gods. 

6. O lord, your semen fell on the ground and not 
in my womb. Where did it go ? Among the gods by whom 
could it have been concealed? 

7. O lord, infallible is your semen, how can it be 
fruitless ? Or has it developed into a child somewhere ? 

Brahmd said : — 

8. O great sage, on hearing the words of Parvati, the 
lord of the universe called the gods and the sages and 
laughingly said to them. 

Lord Siva said : — 

9. O gods, listen to my words. Has Parvati’s state- 
ment been heard by you ? Where has my unfailing semen 
gone ? By whom has it been concealed ? 

10. If he, out of fear, falls at my feet quickly he 
may not be punished. If a king, competent enough, does 



Rudrasarhhitd 727 

not rule firmly he will be harrassed by the subjects. He 
cannot be a protector. 

Brahmd said : — 

1 1 . On hearing the words of Siva and after consulting 
one another they replied one by one. They were so afraid 
of the great lord. 

Vifnu said : — 

12. Let those who have concealed your semen incur 
the sins of those who utter lies, of those who outrage the 
modesty of preceptor’s wife, and of those who are engaged 
in insulting the preceptor always. 

Brahmd said : — 

13. Let him who has concealed your semen anywhere 
in the holy centres of Bharata be debarred from the privilege 
of serving or worshipping you. 

The guardians of the quarters said : — 

14. Let him who has concealed your semen suffer 
continuously from the pang as a result of that sinful 
action. 138 


The gods said : — 

15. Let him who has concealed your semen incur the 
sin of that stupid person who does not fulfil the promise he 
himself has made. 

The urives of the gods said : — 

16. Let her who has concealed your semen be deprived 
of mother and kinsmen and incur the sin of those base 
women who hate their husband and carry on an affair with 
another man. 

Brahmd said : — 

17. On hearing the words of the gods, Siva the lord 
of the gods threatened Dharma and others the cosmic wit- 
nesses of all activities. 

138. The original of this translation is defective. 



Lord Siva said : — 

18. The infallible semen of mine, has not been con- 
cealed by the gods. By whom could it then have been 
concealed ? 

19. All of you are the witnesses of all actions always. 
Has it been concealed by you ? Have you come to know of 
it ? Please narrate. 

20. On hearing the words of Siva they nervously 
looked at one another and spoke before the lord one 
by one. 


Brahma, said : — 

21. The infallible semen of Siva, infuriated at the 
intervention in the course of his sexual dalliance, fell on the 
ground. This was observed by me. 

The Earth said : — 

22. I was unable to bear the terrible semen. Hence 
I dropped it into the fire. O lord, please forgive me. 

The fire said : — 

23. O Siva, assuming the form of a dove I gulped 
the $emen but could not bear the terrible thing. Hence 
I immediately dropped it on the mountain Kailasa. 

The mountain said : — 

24. O lord of the worlds, I too was unable to bear 
the terrible thing. O lord, I dropped it in the Gariga. 

Gahga said: — 

25. O lord of the worlds, I too was unable to bear 
your terrible semen. O lord, completely exhausted, I dropped 
it in the grove of Sara plants. 

Vdyu said : — 

26. O Siva, the semen that fell among the Sara plants 
immediately became a very beautiful boy on the holy banks 
of the celestial river. 

The sun said : — 

27. On seeing the crying boy, O lord, I went to the 



Rudrasarfihitd 729 

western mountain, urged by the revolving wheel of time, 
being unable to stay there at night. 

The moon said : — 

28. Taking the crying boy, the Krttikas returned to 
their abode. O Siva, they went to Badarika hermitage. 

The waters said : — 

29. O lord, taking the crying child with them and 
feeding him with their own breast milk they nurtured your 
son, as refulgent as the sun. 

The dusk said : — 

30. Now, he is the nursling son of the Krttikas in the 
forest. In their eagerness they named him Karttikcya 
lovingly. 

The night said : — 

31. They never let the boy go out of their sight. He 
is the object of their love, dearer to them than their own 
lives. Verily he who nurtures, possesses the son. 

The day said : — 

32. They fed him on the choicest delicacies. They 
gave him the rarest garments and excellent ornaments. 

Brahma said : — 

33. On hearing their words, the destroyer of Pura 130 
became glad. In his joy he gave monetary gifts to the 
brahmins. 

34. On receiving the news of her son, Parvati was 
delighted. She distributed a crore of gems and much 
wealth among the brahmins. 

35. Laksml, Sarasvati, Mena, Savitri and alb other 
women, Visnu and all other gods gave much wealth to the 
brahmins. 

36. Urged by the gods, sages and mountains, the lord 

*3'). Siva is called Purasiidana, Tripurari or Purari, “the slayer 
of Pura”, for he destroyed B&na wfco was called Tripurftsura because he 
had received in gift three cities from Siva, Brahma a^d Vi§pu. 



730 Sivapwr&tia 

sent his Ganas as his emissaries to the place where his son 
was staying. 

37-39. O Narada, he sent VIrabhadra, Visalaksa, 
Sankukarna, Parakrama, NandHvara, Mahakala, Vajra- 
damstra, Mahonmada, Gokarnasya, Dadhimukha who was 
comparable to the blazing flame of fire, a hundred thousand 
Ksetrapalas, three hundred thousand Bhutas, Rudras, 
Bhairavas, and innumerable others of the same exploit as 
that of Siva and of hideous features. 

40. All the emissaries of Siva went and haughtily 
encircled the abode of the Krttikas with various miraculous 
weapons in their hands. 

41. On seeing them the Krttikas were extremely 
terrified. They spoke to Karttikeya blazing with divine 
splendour. 

Krttikas said : — 

42. Dear boy, innumerable soldiers have encircled the 
house. What shall be done ? Where are we to go. A 
great danger has beset us. 

Karttikeya said : — 

43. O good women, O mothers, cast off your fear. 
When I am here what fear need you have ? Although I am 
a boy I am invincible. Who can thwart me ? 

Brahma, said : — 

44. In the meantime, Nandlsvara the commander-in- 
chief sat in front of Karttikeya and said. 

Nandiivara said : — 

45. O brother, O mothers, listen to my auspicious 
mission. I have been commissioned by lord Siva, the 
annihilator. 

46. O dear, all the gods, Brahma, Visnu, Siva and 
others are holding a jubilant conference at Kailasa. 

47. At that time Parvati addressed Siva the bene- 
factor of all, in that assembly urging a search for you. 

48 . Siva asked the assembly severally about you in 



RudrasarhhitS 731 

order to get you back. They too replied in a suitable 
manner. 

49. They said to Siva that you were here in the 
abode of Krttikas. Dharma and others who are the cosmic 
witnesses of all righteous and unrighteous activities revealed 
your whereabouts. 

50. Formerly Parvatl and Siva indulged in their secret 
sexual dalliance. The semen of Siva seen by the gods fell 
on the ground. 

51. The earth dropped it into the fire, the fire on the 
mountain, the mountain in the Ganga and the Ganga 
transmitted it to the grove of Sara plants by her following 
currents and waves. 

52. There you developed into a boy, the lord with 
the mission of fulfilling the task of the gods. There you 
were picked up by the Krttikas. Now you shall come down 
to the Earth. 

53. Siva will be crowning you in the company of the 
gods. You will get miraculous weapons and will slay the 
demon Taraka. 

54. You are the son of the annihilator of the universe 
and these (Krttikas) are impatient to gain possession of you 
as the dry tree tries to conceal fire within its hollow though 
it is incapable of holding it. 

55. You are brilliant enough to illuminate the uni- 
verse. You do not fit in well in this abode just as a majestic 
elephant fallen in a deep well does not retain splendour. 

56. You can shed splendour if your brilliance is not 
hidden just as the sun illuminates the world only when it is 
not hidden by the cloud. 

57. In the matter of omnipresence in the universe you 
alone are Visnu, O Siva’s son. The all-pervading sky is not 
pervaded by anything else. 

58. A Yogin is not entangled in the activities of 
nurturing himself. The soul is not involved in the physical 
activities. 

59. You are the creator of the universe, you are the 
lord. Your place is not among these. You are a mass of 
attributes and splendour as the soul of a Yogin. 

60. O brother, those who do not know you are of 



732 Sivapurdna 

damned intellect. Although the toads and lotuses are in 
the same pond toads are not honoured. 

Kdrttikeya said : — 

61. O brother, you know everything. You are per- 
fectly wise possessing the knowledge of the past, present and 
future, since you are an attendant of Siva. Hence no praise 
of yours is specially called for. 

62. O brother, people get reconciled to whatever 
form of species of life they are born. Their own actions are 
responsible for their birth and they are satisfied. 

63. The Krttikas are wise women of Yogic practice. 

They are the digits of Prakrti. They have helped in 

nurturing me with their own breast milk. 

64. I am their fostered son. They are my own part 

and parcel. I am born of Prakrti and the semen of the 

lord of Prakrti. 

65. O NandikeSvara, I am not severed from the 

daughter of the lord of mountains who is virtually my 
mother just aa these ladies on the basis of virtuous rites. 

66. You have been sent by Siva. You are like a son 

unto Siva. I am coming with you. I shall see the gods. 

67. After saying so and hurriedly taking leave of the 
Krttikas, Karttikeya started along with the attendants of 
Siva. 


CHAPTER FIVE 

(Kdrttikeya is crowned) 


Brahma said : — 

1-2. In the meantime he saw an excellent, lustrous and 
wonderful chariot, made by Visvakarman. It was a com- 
modious with a hundred wheels. It was beautiful and had 
the quickness of the mind. It had been sent by Parvatl and 
was surrounded by the excellent attendants of Siva. 

3. With an aching heart, Karttikeya, born of the semen 



Rudrasarhhita 733 

of lord Siva, the perfectly wise and endless being, got 
into it. 

4. At the same time, the distressed grief-stricken 
Krttikas approached him with dishevelled hair and began to 
speak like mad women. 

Krttikas said : — 

5. O ocean of mercy, how is it that you ruthlessly 
leave us and go ? This is not a virtuous thing for a fostered 
son to forsake his mothers. 

6. You have been brought up by us affectionately. 
Hence you are our son in virtue of that. What shall we 
do? Where shall we go? What can we do ? 

7. After saying this and closely embracing Karttikeya, 
the Krttikas fell into a swoon due to the imminent separa- 
tion from their son. 

8. Restoring them to consciousness and instructing 
them with spiritual utterances, O sage, he got into the 
chariot along with them and the Parsadas too. 

9. Seeing and hearing various auspicious and pleasing 
things Kumara went to the palace of his father along with 
the Parsadas. 

10. Kumara reached the foot of a Nyagrodha tree at 
Kailasa in the fast chariot along with Nandin seated to 
his right. 

11. There Kumara, the son of Siva, an expert in 
various divine sports, waited along with the Krttikas and 
the chief of Parsadas, in great delight. 

12. Then all the gods, sages, Siddhas, Caranas, Vi?nu 
and Brahma announced his arrival. 

13. Then in order to see him Siva, along with Vi?nu, 
Brahma, the gods, sages and others went there. 

14. Many conches, Bherls and Turyas were spunded. 
There was great jubilation among the delighted gods. 

15. Virabhadra and other Ganas followed them with 
different chiming cymbols beating the time and sporting 
about. 

16. Eulogising and being eulogised they sang songs 
of praise. 



17. Shouting cries of “Victory” and “Obeisance” the 
delighted people went to see the excellent son of Siva born 
in the grove of Sara plants. 140 

18. Parvati caused the entire outskirts of the city 
fully decorated with Padmaraga and other gems. The main 
highway was rendered beautiful and auspicious. 

19. The thirty goddesses Laksmi and others stood in 
front, along with chaste ladies whose husbands and sons 
were alive and Parvati stood ahead of them. 

20. At the bidding of Parvati, the smiling celestial 
damsels, Rambha and others, dressed gorgeously, were 
engaged in singing and dancing. 

21. Those who looked at Kumara resembling Siva 
saw a great halo pervading the three worlds. 

22. Immediately they saluted Kumara who was 
enveloped by the brilliant halo, the lustre of molten gold 
and the refulgence of the sun. 

23. With shoulders stooping down and eagerly engaged 
in shouting the cry of “Obeisance* ’ they flanked him to the 
right and left and stood by. 

24. Visnu, Indra and I as well as the gods prostrated 
on the ground and went round Kumara. 

25. In the meantime Siva, and Parvati highly 
delighted and jubilant came there and saw their son. 

26. On seeing his son, the great lord Siva, the sole 
kinsman of the universe along with the great goddess Parvati 
was filled with pleasure and love — the lord who wore snakes 
on his body and was surrounded by the Pramathas. 

27. On seeing Parvati and Siva, karttikeya got down 
from the chariot immediately and saluted them. 

28. Embracing him with love, Siva kissed Kumara on 
the head, lie, the cause of great affection, was highly 
delighted. 

29. Embracing him in great excitement and melting 
with love, Parvati suckled him at her breasts. 


140. Kumara is said to be born of Siva’s semen that was first 
swallowed by the Fire assuming the form of a pigeon, then by the 
Kfttikas, the six wives of the sages, then by Gahga who deposited it in 
the reeds. Kumara is thus called 3TT*%*T> and SnTC'Sf I 



Rudr&sarhhita 735 

30. The Nlrajana rite was performed by the delighted 
gods in the company of their wives. 

31. The sages adored Kumara with the Vedic chants, 
the musicians by singing songs, and others by playing upon 
musical instruments. 

32. Placing Kumara shining with brilliant lustre on 
his lap Parvatl shone with glory as the greatest among 
women who carried sons. 

33. At the bidding of Siva, Kumara in the company 
of his Ganas came to Siva’s abode. He felt very happy in 
the company of jubilant gods. 

34. The couple shone simultaneously being saluted by 
the sages and surrounded by the important gods. 

35. Kumara delightedly played about in the lap of Siva. 
He teased Vasuki 141 round Siva’s neck with his hands. 

36. Seeing that sportive act -with his merciful vision, 
lord Siva spoke about it to Parvatl laughingly. 

37. Seeing the gentle smile of Kumara, lord Siva and 
Parvatl attained great joy. The lord, the sole ruler of the 
worlds and kinsman of the universe uttered nothing with his 
throat choked through affection. 

38. Then Siva, the lord of the universe, following the 
worldly convention delightedly placed Karttikeya on a beautiful 
gemset throne. 

39. With hundreds of gemset pots filled with the 
waters of holy centres sanctified by Vedic mantras he 
performed his ceremonial ablution joyously. 

40. Visnu gave him a crown, a coronet and bracelets 
moulded and set in gems, his own necklace Vaijayanti and 
the discus. 

41. Siva gave him the trident, the bow Pinaka, the 
axe, the arrow Pasupata, the weapon of destruction and the 
greatest lore. 

42. I gave him the holy thread, the Vedas, the mantra 
Gayatrl, the vessel Kamandalu, the arrow Brahmastra and 
the lore that destroys the enemy. 

43. Then Indra gave him a lordly elephant and a 

141 Vasuki, the King of the Nfigas, is said to adorn Siva’s neck. 



736 


thunderbolt. The lord of the waters, Varuna, gave him a 
white umbrella and a necklace of gems to wear. 

44. The sun gave him a chariot as fast as the mind 
and a coat of mail with great equipments; Yama his own staff; 
the moon a vessel full of nectar. 

45. Agni lovingly gave him a spear; Nirrti his own 
weapon and the wind his own weapon. 

46. Kubera gave him a mace; Siva a spear; the gods 
different kinds of weapons and implements. 

47. The delighted lord of Kama gave him the weapon 
of love, a club and his own lore with great pleasure. 

48. The ocean of milk gave him valuable gems and a 
splendid anklet set with gems. Himavat gave him divine 
ornaments and garments. 

49. Garu^a gave him his own son Citrabarhana; 
Aruna a powerful cock Tamracuda. 

50. Parvatl gave him power and prosperity smilingly 
and joyously. She gave him longevity too with great pleasure. 

51. LaksmI gave him divine wealth and a great and 
beautiful necklace. Savitrl gave him the entire Siddhavidya 142 
with joy. 

52. O sage, the other goddesses too who had come 
there gave him their respective presents. The Krttikas 
too did the same. 

53. O excellent sage, there was great jubilation there. 
Everyone was delighted, especially Parvatl and Siva. 

54. In the meantime, O sage, the powerful Siva, 
spoke to Brahma and to other gods laughingly and joyously. 

Siva said : — 

55. “O Visnu, O Brahma, O gods, you listen to my 
words. I am delighted in all respects. Please choose the 
boons you wish.” 

Brahma said : — 

56. O sage, on hearing those words of Siva, Vi§nu 


142. Siddhavidya is the supreme knowledge of Yogic attainment 
that renders a person spiritually efficacious. 



Rudrasarhhttd 737 

and other gods spoke to Siva with faces beaming with 
pleasure. 

The gods said: — 

57. “ O lord, Taraka will certainly be killed by 
Kumara. It is for that purpose that he is born. 

58. Hence in our effort to kill him we shall start 
this very day. Please give your directions to Kumara. 1 et 
him slay Taraka for our happiness. 

59. Thinking that it shall be so, lord Siva entrusted 
his son to the gods in order to kill Taraka, urged by his 
mercy that he was. 

60. At the bidding of Siva, Brahma, Vi$nu and other 
gods jointly started from the mountain keeping Kumara 
in front. 

61. After coming out of Kailasa, at the behest of 
Visnu, Tvastr built a wonderfully fine city very near the 
mountain. 

62. There he built a divine, exquisite and wonderfully 
brilliant house for Kumara. Tvastr set up an excellent 
throne there. 

63. The intelligent Visnu performed the auspicious 
ceremony of crowning Karttikeya in the company of the 
gods by means of waters from all holy centres. 

64. He bedecked Karttikeya in every manner and 
dressed him gorgeously. He went through the ceremony in 
brief and made everyone celebrate the event with 
pleasure. 

65. Visnu joyously gave him the suzerainty of the 
universe. He applied the Tilaka mark and worshipped him 
along with the gods. 

66. Bowing to Karttikeya with pleasure along with the 
gods and sages he eulogised the eternal form of Siva with 
various hymns. 

67. Karttikeya seated in the excellent throne and 
assuming the lordship and protectorate of the universe shone 
extremely well. 



738 



CHAPTER SIX 

(The miraculous feat of Kdrttikeya) 

Brahma said'.— 

1 . There Kumara showed a miraculous feat. O 
Narada, listen to it that bestows devotion. 

2. 1 hen a certain brahmin Narada came there, seeking 
refuge in Kumara. He was glorious and had been per- 
forming a sacrifice. 

3. Approaching Kumara, bowing to and eulogising 
him with auspicious hymns the delighted brahmin related 
his tale. 

The brahmin said : — 

4. O lord, listen to my words. Relieve my distress. 
You are the lord of the universe. I seek refuge in you. 

5. I began a goat sacrifice. The goat got loosened 
and strayed away from my house. 

6. I do not know where it has gone. I have searched 
for it here and there but have not found it. Hence this 
will cause a serious default in my sacrifice. 

7. While you are the lord, how can there be an 
obstacle to my sacrifice ? O lord, after pondering over this 
matter please fulfil my task. 

8. O lord, O son of Siva, who else can I approach 
except you, who are worthy of being resorted to, who are 
the lord of the entire universe and are served by all 
the gods. 

9-10. You are the kinsman of the distressed. You are 
worthy of being served well. You arc favourably disposed 
to your devotees. You are the great lord eulogised by 
Visnu, Brahma and other gods. You are Skanda the 
delighter of Parvati, the sole destroyer of enemies, the great 
soul, the lord who bestows his own self upon the good 
seeking refuge in him. 

11. O lord of the distressed, O great lord, O son of 
Siva, O lord of the three worlds, O master of magical art, 
I have to seek refuge in you. O favourite of the brahmins, 
save me. You are the lord of all. You are eulogised by 



Rudrasarhhita 


739 


Brahma and other gods who bow to you. You have 
assumed forms through magical art. You are the bestower 
of happiness to your devotees. You are eager to protect. 
You wield power of deluding others. 

12. You love devotees as your own vital air. You are 
the receptacle of all attributes. You are beyond three attri- 
butes. You are the beloved of Siva. You are Siva Himself. 
You confer welfare. You are the bestower of happiness with 
delight. You are the great Existent and cosmic conscious- 
ness. You are the son of Siva, the omniscient who destroyed 
the three cities of Asuras. You are always subservient to 
great and pious love. You have six faces. You love the 
saintly persons who kneel to you. You are the lord of all 
people and their benefactor. You destroy those, who harass 
the good. You are the preceptor of even Siva. You are 
the lord of the entire universe. Your feet are served by all 
the gods. O lover of service, save me. 

13. O Skanda, terrible to the enemies, the benefactor 
of the devotees, I bow to your lotus-like feet. You are the 
refuge of people and source of their happiness. Please hear 
my submission through your ears. Please instil into the 
heart of everyone the feelings of devotion to you. 

14. If you are the protector with efficient honour 
what harm can an opponent do even if he be strong and 
efficient and protected on either side ? What harm can even 
Taksaka 143 or even a carnivorous animal do unto him. 

15. Even the preceptor of the gods cannot eulogise 
you adequately. Then tell me, how can I a foolish and 
wretched creature ? O Skanda, pure or impure, noble or 
ignoble, of whatever nature I be, I pray unto the dust of 
your lotus-like feet. 

16. O lord of all, ocean of mercy, favourably disposed 
to devotees, I am your own servant. May even a hundred 
sins of your own servant or a leader of the Ganas be forgiven. 
O lord, you know even the slightest act of devotion done 
anywhere. You are the destroyer of the distress of your 
servants. O lord, there is no other protector save you and 
no other wretched vulgar person than I. 


143. Taksaka, the son of Kadru, is a venomous serpent chief. 



740 Sivapurana 

17. O lord, you are the cause of welfare, the 

destroyer of the sins of Kali age and a friend of Kubera. 

Your heart melts with pity. You have twelve eyes and 

you shine with six faces. Please makte my sacrifice complete 
and perfect. 

18. You are the protector of the three worlds, 

favourite of those who seek refuge in you. You are the 
performer and sustainer of sacrifices. You remove those who 
bring in obstacles. 

19. O warder of obstacles, the cause of the creation 
of the good in every respect, O son of I£ana, please make 
my sacrifices complete. Obeisance be to you, 

20. O Skanda, you are the protector of all, the 
knower of all and the lord of all and Isana. By your penetra- 
tion you protect all. 

21. You alone are the knower of music, the great 
lord and knower of the Vedas. You are all-in-all, the 
creator, the lord of the gods and the goal of the good. 

22. You are the joy of Parvatl, the son of Siva. You 
are the perfect wisdom, the self-ruler, the meditator and the 
object of meditation. You are the father of the fathers and 
the source of origin of good souls. 

Brahma said : — 

23. On hearing his words, Siva’s son, the emperor of 
the gods, sent his attendant Virabahu on that mission. 

24. At his bidding, the great hero Virabahu who 
bowed to his master with devotion started in search of it. 

25. He searched throughout the universe but nowhere 
did he find the goat (although) he heard about the havoc 
done by it. 

26. Then he went to Vaikunjha where he saw the 
powerful goat working havoc with the sacrificial stake tied to 
its neck. 

27. The hero dragged it catching hold of its horns and 
brought it quickly before his lord even as it was bleating 
loudly. 

28. On seeing it, lord Karttikeya who could carry the 
weighty universe, and the worker of great miracles, quickly 
rode on it. 



Rudrasamhita 


741 


29. Within a Muhurta, O sage, the goat walked round 
the universe and without exhaustion returned to the same 
place. 

30. Then the lord got down and resumed his seat. The 
goat stood there itself. Then the brahmin Narada told the 
lord. 

Narada said : — 

31. Obeisance to you, O lord of gods, O storehouse 
of mercy, give the goat to me. Let me perform the sacrifice 
with pleasure. Please assist me as my friend. 

Karllikeya said : — 

32. O brahmin Narada, this goat does not deserve to 
be killed. Return home. May your sacrifice be complete. It 
has been so ordained by iny favour. 

Brahma said : — 

33. On hearing the words of the lord, the brahmin was 
delighted. He returned home after bestowing his excellent 
blessings. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

(Commencement of the War) 


Brahma said : — 

1. On seeing that miraculous feat of Kumara, Vi$riu 
and other gods became delighted. They were convinced of 
his prowess. 

2 Keeping Kumara at the head, shouting and roar- 
ing, purified by Siva’s splendour they started to attack 
Taraka. 

3. When he heard about the preparation of the gods, 
the powerful Taraka rushed to fight back the gods with a 
great army. 

4. On seeing the great army of Taraka approaching, the 
gods were surprised but roared like lions. 



742 Sioapurdna 

5. Then a celestial voice, prompted by Siva addressed 
Vi$nu and all other gods. 

The celestial Voice said ; — 

6. O gods, keeping Kumara at the head you have 
entered the lists. Defeating the Asuras in the battle, you will 
be victorious. 

Brahma said : — 

7. On hearing the celestial voice, the gods became 
enthusiastic. Fearlessly they roared like heroes. 

8. With their fear subsided, and keeping Kumara 
ahead, the gods went to the confluence of the river Mahi and 
the ocean 144 desirous of fighting. 

9. Immediately Taraka, along with a great army, 
came to the place where the gods stood and was surrounded 
by them in a body. 

10. Battle drums were sounded as loud as the rumbl- 
ing sound of the clouds at the dissolution of the world. 
The harsh musical instruments were also played when he 
came. 

11. The Asuras in the company of Taraka roared and 
shook the ground with their thudding footsteps, leapings and 
bouncings. 

12. Undaunted by that terrible noise, the gods simul- 
taneously rose up to fight Taraka. 

13. Accompanied by the great army of the gods and 
the guardians of the quarters, lord Indra seated Kumara on 
an elephant and rushed forward. 

14. Great wardrums, Dundubhis, Bheris and Turyas, 
lutes, flutes and Mrdangas were sounded and the Gandharvas 
sang war songs. 

15. Leaving the elephant to lord Indra, Kumara 
got in an aerial chariot of wonderful build and studded 
with different sets of gems. 

16. Seated in the aerial chariot, the son of Siva 

144.. The scene of the battle between the gods and Asuias is placed 
in the Western India on the coast of the Arabian sea where the'sacrrd 
river Mahi that issues from Sahyapfida hill falls into it For details see 
Dr. Avastlii: Studies in Skandapurana, pp. 128, 140, i6u, iGO. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


743 


endowed with good qualities and of great renown shone 
with great splendour. He was being fanned with lustrous 
chowries. 

17. The lustrous umbrella presented by Varuna, 
shining with various gems was held aloft over his head. 
Beams of light as though of infinite moons shed great lustre 
around. 

18. Indra and other gods of great strength, desirous 
of fighting, joined him with their own divisions of the 
army. 

19. The gods and the demons stood in their arrays 
on the ground with a vast army ready to start the battle. 

20. With the bards singing their songs of praise, the 
armies of the gods and the Asuras shone in their eagerness 
to pounce on and crush each other. 

21. The two armies as vast as a wild jungle roared. 
They were terrific to the coward and pleasing to the brave. 

22. In the meantime the rank and file of the Asuras 
and the gods, haughty of their strength and blazing with 
fury came together in a mutual clash. 

23. A terrific tumultuous fight between the gods and 
the Asuras ensued. Within a moment the place was littered 
with severed heads and headless trunks. 

24. Wounded and killed by great weapons, hundreds 
and thousands of heroic soldiers fell on the ground. 

25. The arms of some were cut off by terrible blows 
from swords. Others lost their thighs in the battle of those 
honourable, heroic people. 

26. The entire body of some was smashed by the 
maces; the chests and hearts of some were pounded by iron 
clubs; some were felled to the ground by spears and dragged 
with nooses. 

27. The backs of some were torn with javelins and 
goads. Several heads chopped off by double-edged swords 
fell on the ground. 

28. Hundreds of headless, limbless trunks were seen 
daqcing' and bouncing with arrows sticking to their hands. 

29. Blood flowed like streams in hundreds of places. 
Hundreds of ghosts and goblins flocked there. 

30. Jackals and vixens began eating the flesh. Numbers 



744 SioapurSna 

of vultures, kites, crows and carnivorous birds devoured the 
flesh of those falling down. 

31. In the meantime Taraka, the demon of great 
strength, came there with a huge army to fight with the 
gods. 

32. On seeing the haughty warrior rushing on them, 
Indra and others, turned against him. Then a tumultuous 
sound arose from both the armies. 

33. Duels were fought by the gods and the Asuras 
crushing each other, on seeing which heroes were delighted 
and cowards were terrified. 

34. The Asura Taraka of great strength fought with 
Indra, Samhrada with Agni and Yama with Jambha. 

35. Lord Varuna fought with Nairrta and Bala. 
Suvira, the king of Guhyas, fought with Vayu. 

36. Sambhu fought with Isana. Sumbha an expert 
in battle fought with Sesa. Kumbha the Asura fought with 
the Moon. 

37. Kunjara of great strength and exploit, an expert in 
different kinds of battles, fought with Mihira, using great 
weapons. 

38. Thus the gods and the Asuras, fought duels using 
their full strength with resolution. 

39. O sage, desiring to gain the upper hand and vying 
with each other, the powerful gods and the Asuras were equally 
invincible in the battle. 

40. The fight between the gods and the Asuras desi- 
rous of victory over each other was very tumultuous. It was 
pleasing to the brave and terrible to the others. 

41. The battle ground became impassable and awful 
with the corpses of the gods and Asuras lying there in thous- 
ands but it was very pleasing to the brave. 



Rudrasarhhita 


745 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

( The battle between the gods and Asuras) 

Brahma said : — 

I. O Narada, O dear, thus I have described to you 
the fight between the rank and file of both the armies of the 
gods and Asuras. The fight was very tumultuous. Now 
listen to the fight between the two leaders on either side. 

2-3. In the tumultuous fight that ensued reducing the 
numbers of the gods and the demons, lord Indra struck by 
the great spear fell from his elephant and became unconscious. 
The thunderbolt-bearing lord of gods attained great depres- 
sion of spirits and swooned. 

4. In the same manner, O dear, the guardians of the 
quarters, though powerful, were defeated in battle by the 
Asuras, great experts in warfare. 

5. The other gods too were fought and defeated by the 
Asuras. Unable to bear their ferocity they took to flight. 

6. The victorious Asuras, their effort having been 
successful, roared like lions and raised shouts of jubilation. 

7. In the meantime Vlrabhadra reached the place fur- 
iously along with his heroic Ganas and approached Taraka 
who professed to be a great hero. 

8. The leader of the Ganas, the strong one born of the 
anger of Siva, kept the gods in the rear and faced Taraka 
desirous of fighting him. 

9. Then the Pramathas and the jubilant Asuras, fond 
of great battle, fought one another. 

10. Skilled adepts in warfare they hit and smashed one 
another with tridents, double-edged swords, nooses, axes and 
sharp-edged spikes. 

II. Immediately after being hit hard with, a trident 
by Vlrabhadra, Taraka fell unconscious on the ground. 

12. Regaining consciousness quickly Taraka the excel- 
lent Asura got up and forcefully hit Vlrabhadra with his 
spear. 

13. In the same manner, the heroic Vlrabhadra of 
great brilliance hit Taraka with his sharp terrible trident. 



746 Sivapurdna 

14. The powerful king of the Asuras, the heroic Taraka, 
hit Virabhadra 145 again with spear. 

15. Fighting each other thus they hit each other with 
various weapons and missiles both being equally skilful in 
the art of warfare. 

16. Even as others stood gazing, the two of great 
energy continued their duel causing hair to stand on ends, 
with tumultuous noise. 

17. Then various military bands and drums like Bherls, 
Mrdangas, Pafahas, Anakas and Gomukhas were sounded by 
the soldiers terrifying those who happened to hear. 

18. Both of them were severely wounded by the mutual 
hits and thrusts but still they continued their fight with 
added vigour like Mercury and Mars. 

19. On seeing the fight between him and Virabhadra, 
you, the favourite of Siva went there and said to Virabhadra, 

Ndrada said : — 

20. “O Virabhadra, of great heroism, you are the leader 
of the Ganas. Please desist from this fight. Your killing him 
does not fit in properly”. 

21. On hearing your words, the leader of the Ganas 
Virabhadra became furious but spoke to you with palms joined 
in reverence. 

Virabhadra said : — 

22. O excellent sage, of great wisdom, listen to my 
weighty words. I will kill Taraka. See my exploit today. 

23. The soldiers who bring their masters to the battle- 
field are sinners. They are no better than eunuchs. They are 
doomed in the battle. 

24. They will go the way of the wicked. Hell is 
definitely in store for them. Virabhadra should never be 
considered by you as such a despicable person. 

l 45* Virabhadra, the chief of the gapas of Siva has become a mythi- 
cal Being. In the scriptures m the caves of Elephanta and Ellora he is 
represented with eight hands. According to tradition, he was created by 
Siva to d-stroy Dakja’s sacrifice, to harry away the Gods and sages who 
had assembled there. Dawson: H. M. 

In the present context he figures as a prominent combatant on the 
side of the Gods against the A s ura chief Taraka. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


747 


25. Those whose bodies are rent and split with weapons 
and missiles, but who still fight fearlessly shall be praised 
here and hereafter. They derive wonderful happiness. 

26. Let Visnu and other gods listen to my words — I shall 
make the earth freed of Taraka today even without bringing 
my master here. 

27. Saying thus and taking up his trident, Virabhadra 
mentally meditated on Siva and fought with Taraka, accomp- 
anied by Pramathas. 

28. With many heroic soldiers riding on bulls, wielding 
the tridents and possessing three eyes he shone well in the 
midst of that battle. 

29. Keeping Virabhadra at their head, and shouting 
fearlessly jubilantly, hundreds of the Ganas fought with the 
Asuras. 

30. The Asuras too, the dependants of the demon 
Taraka, all equally strong and heroic, began to smash the 
Ganas furiously. 

31. The terrific mutual fights between the demons and 
the Ganas happened again and again. Ultimately the Ganas, 
experts in the use of great missiles, came out victorious and 
were jubilant. 

32. Defeated by the Ganas of great strength, the Asuras 
turned their faces and began to flee. They were distressed 
and agitated. 

33. On seeing his army vanishing thus in flight, their 
protector, the Asura Taraka, furiously rushed at the gods and 
the Ganas. 

34. He assumed ten thousand hands and rode on a 
lion. In the battle that followed he felled the gods and the 
Ganas quickly. 

35-36. On seeing such a perpetration of Taraka, 
Virabhadra, the leader of the Ganas, became very, furious. In 
order to kill him he took up his trident after remembering 
the lotuslike feet of Siva. His brilliance then brightly illu- 
minated all the quarters and the sky. 

37. In the meantime, the master stopped the war. He 
prevented Virabahu and others immediately in order to show 
his own might. 

38. At his bidding Virabhadra returned from the bat- 



748 Shapurdna 

tic. The heroic leader of the Asuras, Taraka, was still in 
his unabated fury. 

39. Then the Asura showered arrows on the gods and 
put them to distress. He was skilful in the use of various 
missiles in the war. 

40. After causing a great havoc, Taraka, the protector 
of Asuras, the most excellent among the brave, seemed in- 
vincible to the gods. 

41. On seeing the gods terrified and slaughtered, 
Visnu became furious and got ready to fight. 

42. Taking discus SudarSana, the bow Sarnga and 
other weapons with him, lord Visnu rushed to meet the great 
Asura in the battle. 

43. O sage, a great fight ensued between Visnu and 
Taraka. It was very fierce It caused horripilation to the 
onlookers. 

44. Lifting up his club, Visnu hit the Asura with 
great force but the powerful Asura split it with his trident. 

45. The infuriated lord offering shelter to the gods hit 
the leader of the Asuras by arrow? discharged from his bow. 

46. The heroic Asura Taraka, the slayer of enemies, 
immediately split the arrows of the gods by his own sharp 
arrows. 

47. The Asura Taraka then quickly hit Visnu 14 ® with 
his spear. On being hit thus, Visnu fell unconscious on the 
ground. 

48. In a trice, Visnu got up and in rage seized his 
discus that was blazing with flames and he roared like a lion. 

49. Visnu hit the king of Asuras with it. Overwhel- 
med by the forceful hit he fell on the ground. 

50. Getting up again, the foremost among Asuras and 
their leader, Taraka using all his strength immediately split 
the discus with his spear. 

51. Again he struck Visnu the favourite of the gods 
wi^h that great spear. The heroic Vi§nu hit him back with 
Nandaka. 

146. Murftri: ‘The enemy of Mura\ It is an appellation of Vi.«pu 
who slew the Asura Mura. The latter was an ally of the Asura Naraka 
who ruled over Pragjyotisa (modem Assam). 



Rudrasarhhitd 749 

52 O sage, both Visnu and the Asura, equally power- 
ful, hit each other in the battle with unabated strength. 


CHAPTER NINE 

(The boasting of Tar aka and the fight between him and Indr a , 
Visnu, Virabhadra) 

Brahma said : — 

1 . O Guha, O lord of gods, O son of Siva and Parvatl, 
the fight between Visnu and Taraka is not proper. It is 
futile. 

2. Taraka the powerful cannot be killed by Visnu. 
He has been granted such a boon by me. It is truth. I am 
telling you the truth. 

3. O son of Parvatl, none except you can be the 
slayer of this sinner. O great lord, my words shall be carried 
out by you. 

4. O scorcher of enemies, please get ready to slay him. 
O son of Parvatl you are born of Siva for killing that demon. 

5. O great hero, save the gods distressed in the battle. 
You are neither a boy nor a youth but the lord of all. 

6 . See Indra and Visnu. They are agitated and dis- 
tressed, So also the gods and the Ganas. Slay this great 
demon. Make the three worlds happy. 

7. Formerly Indra and the guardians of the quarters 
had been conquered by him. Due Jo the power of his pen- 
ance, the heroic Visnu too has been threatened by him. 

8 . The entire universe of the three worlds has been 
defeated by this wicked Asura. Now, because of your presence, 
they have fought again. 

9 . Hence, O son of Siva, this sinful being Taraka 
shall be killed by you. Due to the boon granted by me he 
cannpt be slain by any one else.” 

Brahma, said : — 

10. On hearing these words of mine, Kumara, son of 
Siva, was delighted and he laughed. “So be it”, said he. 



11. Resolving to kill the Asura, the great lord, son of, 
Siva got down from the aerial chariot and stood on the 
ground. 

12. Running on foot, seizing his lustrous spear blazing 
like a meteor, the powerful warrior Kumara born of Siva 
shone well. 

13. On seeing the incomprehensible six-headed deity 
coming forward, fierce and unagitated, the Asura spoke to the 
gods derisively — “O this child indeed will slay the enemies !” 

14. I will fight with him single-handed. I will kill 
the soldiers, the Ganas and the guardians of the quarters led 
by Visnu. 

15. Saying thus, the powerful Asura rushed at Kumara 
to fight with him. Taraka seized his wonderful spear and 
spoke to the gods. 

Tdraka said : — 


16. “How is it that you all kept Kumara face to face 
with me? You gods are shameless especially Indra and 
Vi$nu. 

17. Formerly, both of them had acted in violation of 
the Vedic path. Listen. I shall describe the same. 

18. Vi?nu is deceptive, defective and indiscreet. It 
was by him that Bali 147 was formerly bound by taking 
recourse to deception with sinful intention. 

19. The Asuras Madhu and Kai^abha 148 were beheaded 
by his roguishness. He forsook the Vedic path. 

20. When the gods and Asuras sat for drinking the 
nectar it was he who violated the sanctity of the vows when 
he assumed the form of an enchantress. 149 Thus he slighted 
the Vedic path. 

147. Bali, the son ofViiocana. was an Asura-< hief Hr was deceived 
by Vi?nu in the foim of a dwarfish Brahmin. The latte: asked Bali to 
grant him three steps of ground and Bali consenting, the dwarl stepped and 
covered heaven and earth in two strides. However he desisted from 
taking the third step and left the nether region for Bali’s sake. 

148. Madhu and Kaitabha wcie the two demons sprung from the 
ear of Visnu while he was asleep at the end of a Kalpa. They were 
about to kill Brahma but were treacherously killed by Vispu and thrown 
into the sea. 

149. In the guise of an enchantress, Visi?u depiived Asuras of their 
right of drinking nectar produced from churning the ocean. 



kudrasarhhitd 


751 


21. Taking birth as Rama he killed a woman 
(Taclaka). Ball’s death was brought about by him with a vile 
trick. A brahmin descendant of ViSravas was killed by 
him. 150 Thus he violated the injunction of the Sruti. 

22. Sinful that he was, he forsook his own innocent 
wife. There too, he violated the path of Sruti for achieving 
his selfish end. 

23. In his sixth incarnation (as Paras urama ) 161 he cut 
off the head of his own mother. This wicked man insulted 
his own preceptor’s son. 162 

24. Incarnating as Krsna he defiled the wives of others 
and forced them to violate the traditional virtues of the 
family. He contracted his marriages without any reference 
to the Vedic path. 

25. Again in his ninth incarnation 163 he slighted the 
Vedic path and contrary to its principles, preached and 
established the atheistic philosophy called Buddhism. 

26. How can he be considered an excellent, virtuous 
man, how can he be victorious in battle who has committed 
sin without caring for Vedic cult ? 

27. Indra, his cider brother, is a greater sinner. He 
has committed many sins for his self-interest. 

28. To gain his selfish end, by him Dili’s foetus was 
destroyed; 164 the modesty of Gautama’s wife was outraged, 166 
Vrtra, the son of a brahmin, was killed. 186 


if,o. This refers to the slaying of the woman Ta^lakfi and the 
monkey chief Bali as well as the Brahmana King R&vana by Rama, the 
son of Dasaratha, the seventh incarnation oi Visnu 

i r ) i . Visnu in his sixth incarnation as Parasurama is said to have 
cut ofF the head of his mother Renuka who had incensed her husband by 
entertaining impure thoughts. 

152 The event may refer to Parasurama who severed a tusk of 
Ganesa, the son of his preceptor. 

1 . Gotama Buddha, the ninth incarnation of Visnu, had revolted 

agiinst Vedic docLiincs and preached heretic and revolutionary thoughts of 
his own. 

1^4. It refers to the episode of Indra, the elder brother of Vi?nu 
who entered into the womb of Diti. the wife of Kafyapa and cut the un- 
born child into fortynine pieces with his thunderbolt. 

155. Indra seduced Ahalya, the wife of Gautama and had to suffer 
for his adultery. 

156. Indra incurred the sin of slaying Vrtra, an Asura Biahmapu. 



752 


29. He beheaded the brahmin ViSvarupa, 157 the 
nephew of Bjrhaspati. Thus he transgressed the Vedic path. 

30. Doing such sinful acts frequently Vi?nu and Siva 
are already deficient in splendour and their prowess is 
spent out. 

31. You will never gain victory in the battle by 
relying on them. Why then did you foolishly come here to 
lose your lives ? 

32. These two, always seeking selfish ends, do not 
know what is virtue. O gods, without virtue every rite 
becomes futile. 

33. These two impudent fellows are presumptuous 
enough to place a child in front of me. Why ? I will kill 
the child too. They too will have it. 

34. But let the child leave from here and save his 

life.” After saying this, hinting at Indra and Visnu he 
turned to Virabhadra and said. 

35. “Formerly in the sacrifice of Daksa, many brahmins 
had been killed by you, O sinless one, I shall show you the 
fruit thereof” 

Brahma said : — 

36. Saying this and dispossessing himself of his own 
merit by that act of censure, Taraka the foremost among 
war-mongers seized his wonderful spear. 

37. Indra who was going ahead of Kumara hit the 

demon Taraka forcibly with his thunderbolt as he was 
approaching the boy. 

38. Taraka was shattered and split by that blow of 
the thunderbolt, his power being sapped up already by the 
act of censure. He fell on the ground. 

39. Though he fell down, he got up immediately and 
furiously hit Indra who was seated on an elephant, with 
his spear and felled him to the ground. 

40. When Indra fell down there was a great hue 

and cry. On seeing it a great pain entered the army of 

the gods. 

41. Know from me the vile action that Taraka has 

1-7. Indra cut off the thrte heads of Vi&varupa, the son of Tva$tr. 



Rudrascutihiti 753 

committed against virtue which is sure to bring about his 
own ruin. 

42. He stamped on Indra with his foot after he fell 
down and seized his thunderbolt with which he hit him 
with great force. 

43. Seeing Indra thus insulted, the powerful lord 
Visnu lifted his discus and hit Taraka. 

44. Hit by the discus he fell on the ground. Getting 
up again, the lord of the Asuras hit Visnu with his spear. 

45. On being hit by the spear Visnu fell on the 
ground. There was a great uproar. The gods lamented 
much. 

46-47. Within a moment Visnu got up but by that 
time Virabhadra came near the demon and dexterously 
raised his trident. The powerful Virabhadra hit him with 
all his force. 

48. Hit by the trident he fell on the ground. Though 
he fell down, Taraka of mighty splendour got up again. 

49. The great hero, the leader of the entire host of 
Asuras hit Virabhadra in his chest with his great spear. 

50. Virabhadra, hit by the spear furiously in his chest, 
fell unconscious on the ground. 

51. The gods, the Ganas, Gandharvas, Serpents and 
Raksasas lamented frequently with cries of “Alas” ‘‘Alas.” 

52. Within a moment, the powerful Virabhadra, the 
slayer of enemies, got up lifting his trident aloft, that had 
the lustre of lightning and was blazing forth. 

53. The trident had a halo around, like that of the 
sun, the moon and the fire. It illuminated the quarters by 
means of its brilliance; caused terror even in the hearts of 
the brave. It had a deadly splendour and blazed well. 

54. When the powerful Virabhadra was about to hit 
the Asura with his trident, he was prevented by Kumara. 



754 


CHAPTER TEN 

(Jubilation of the gods at the death of Tdraka) 

Brahmd satd . . — 

1. After preventing Vlrabhadra, Kumara, the slayer 
of enemies, desired the destruction of Taraka after remember- 
ing the lotuslike feet of Siva. 

2. Then the powerful Karttikeya of great splendour 
roared. Angrily he got ready for the fight. He was surrou- 
nded by a vast army. 

3. Shouts of victory were raised by the gods and the 
Ganas. He was eulogised by the celestial sages with pleasing 
words. 

4. The fight between Taraka and Kumara was terrific 
and unbearable. All the living beings were afraid. 

5. O sage, even as all the persons stood gazing wonde- 
ringly, both of them fought each other with spears in their 
hands. 

6. Each was wounded in the heart by the other with 
the spear. Each tried to escape from the other’s, thrust. Both 
were equally strong like two lions. Both were fully equipped 
for the fight. 

7. They fought and hit each other’s spear taking recourse 
to the mantras Vaitalika, Khecaraka, Praptika etc. 

8. With these mantras they were possessed of magical 
properties. They wonderfully fought each other using their 
full strength and exploits. 

9. They were equally good adepts in fighting. Each 
wanted to kill the other. They utilised all their power. With 
the edges of spears they hit each other. 

10. They hit or cut each other’s head, neck, thighs, 
knees, hips, heart, chest and the back. 

11. They continued the fight swaggering and vaunting 
with heroic words. They were experts in different tactics of 
warfare. They were equally strong. They desired to kill 
each other. 

15R. Vaitalika, Khecaraka and Prapti signify the various attainments 
of magical or supernatural type which can be exploited for various 
purposes. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


755 


12. All the gods Gandharvas and Kinnaras stood as 
mere onlookers. “Who will win this battle ?” they asked 
each other. 

13. Then a celestial voice rose appeasing the gods — 
“In this battle Kumara will kill the Asura Taraka. 

14. None of the gods need be anxious. All shall rest 
assured. For your welfare Siva Himself is standing here in 
the form of His son.” 

15. On hearing the auspicious words uttered by the 
celestial voice, Kumara became happy. He was surrounded 
by the Pramathas. He resolved to kill Taraka, the king of 
Asuras. 

16. The infuriated Kumara of powerful arms used his 
full strength and hit Asura Taraka in between his nipples. 

1 7. Slighting that blow, the leading demon Taraka, hit 
Kumara angrily with his spear. 

18. At the blow of the spear, the son of Siva became 
unconscious. He regained his consciousness in a few minutes. 
He was eulogised by the great sages. 

19. Kumara became furious like a maddened lion and 
was desirous of killing the Asura. The powerful Kumara hit 
Taraka with his spear. 

20. Thus both Kumara and Taraka equally inflamed 
and equally well versed in the battle of spears fought each 
other. 

21. Both appeared to possess plenty of practice. Both 
had the desire to gain the upper hand. Both fought on foot, 
had wonderful forms and features and were equally cou- 
rageous. 

22. With massive heaps of fatal missiles they hit each 
other. They had various ways of attack. They roared. They 
exhibited their all exploits. 

23. The onlookers, the gods, the Gandharvas and the 
Kinnaras were much surprised. They did not speak anything 
there. 

24. The wind did not blow. The sun became dim. 
The earth quaked along with mountains and forests. 

25. In the meantime Himalaya and other mountains 
anxious to see Kumara out of affection came there. 

26. On seeing the mountains extremely terrified, 



756 Sivapur&Qa 

Kumara the son of Siva and Parvatl spoke enlightening them 
thereby. 

KumSra said : — 

27. O mountains, O fortunate sirs, do not be vexed, 
oi* worried. Even as you stand looking on I will kill this 
sinner. 

28. Consoling the mountains, the gods and the Ganas 
thus, and bowing to Siva and Parvatl he took up his brilliant 
spear. 

29. The heroic Kumara, son of Siva the great lord, 
with the spear in his hand shone in his resolve to kill Taraka. 

30. Possessing the brilliance of Siva, Kumara with his 
spear struck Taraka who had harrassed the worlds. 

31. Immediately the Asura Taraka the ruler of the 
hosts of Asuras, although very heroic, fell on the ground with 
all his limbs shattered. 

32. The great warrior Taraka was slain by Kumara. 
O sage, even as all were looking on, he passed away. 

33. On seeing the powerful Asura fallen dead in the 
battle, the hero did not go and attack him again. 

34. When the powerful Asura was slain, other Asuras 
were killed by gods and Ganas. 

35. Some of the Asuras who were afraid joined their 
palms in reverence. In the battle the limbs of many Asuras 
were chopped off and severed. Thousands were killed too. 

36. Some of the Asuras shrieking “O save O save” 
with palms joined in reverence sought refuge in Kumara. 

37. Numberless Asuras were killed. Many fled. The 
fleeing Asuras were beaten and harassed by the gods and the 
Ganas. 

38. Thousands of them fled to Patala for their life. 
Those who tried to flee were disappointed and put to distress. 

39. O great sage, thus the entire army of the Asuras 
disappeared. None dared to remain there for fear of the gods 
and the Ganas. 

40. When the wicked Asura was killed, the whole uni- 
verse became freed of thorns, freed from the danger and nui- 
sance of the Asuras. Indra and other gods became happy. 



Rudmsariihitd 


757 


41. Thus when Kumara came out victorious the gods 
were happy. The three worlds attained great pleasure. 

42. On knowing about the victory of Karltikeya, Siva 
came there joyously with his beloved and the Gan as. 

43. He took his son on his lap and fondled him with 
pleasure. Parvati in her flutter of affection took Kumara, 
resplendent as the sun, on her lap and fondled him with 
pleasure. 

44. Then Himavat came there along with his sons, 
kinsmen and servants. He eulogised Siva and Guha 

45. The delighted gods, Ganas and sages, Siddhas and 
Caranas eulogised Parvati, Siva and the son of Siva. 

46. The secondary gods poured a great shower of 
flowers. The chiefs of Gandharvas sang. The celestial damsels 
danced. 

47. The musical instruments were played sweetly then. 
Frequent loud shouts of “Victory” and “Obeisance” were 
raised. 

48. Visnu too in my company was very glad. He 
respectfully eulogised Siva, Parvati and Kumara. 

49. Keeping Kumara in front, Brahma, Indra and 
other gods performed the rite of Nirajana lovingly. Other 
sages too did likewise. 

50. Then there was great jubilation with vocal and 
instrumental music and chantings of the Vedas. Hymns too 
were sung. 

51. The lord of the universe was eulogised, O sage, by 
the delighted gods and Ganas by means of vocal and instru- 
mental music. 

52. Then eulogised by all, lord Siva along with Parvati 
the mother of the universe, went to his mountain surrounded 
by the Ganas. 



758 


l na 


chapter eleven 

( The Victory of Kumara and the death of 
Bana and Pralamba) 


Brahmd said : — 

1. O sage, in the meantime the mountain Kraufica, 
harassed by Bana came there and sought refuge in Kumara. 

2. This Bana had been fleeing from the previous 
battle, unable to bear the brilliance of the lord. He with 
the army of ten thousand persons, inflicted pain on Kraunca 
with the tip of his missiles. 

3. The mountain Kraunca devoutly bowed at the lotus- 
like feet of Kumara and eulogised him with reverence with 
words full of love. 

Kraunca said : — 

4. O Kumara, O Skanda, O lord of gods, O slayer 
of the Asura Taraka protect me who have sought refuge 
in you. I am harassed by the Asura Bana. 

5. O Mahasena, O lord, O merciful one, routed and 
uprooted from the battle with you he came and harassed 
me. 

6. Afflicted by him I have run from him and sought 
refuge in you. O lord of gods, born amongst the reeds, be 
merciful. 

7. O lord, please slay the Asura Bana. Make me 
happy. You are the slayer of Asuras and a special saviour 
of the gods. You are a self-ruler. 

Brahmd said : — 

8. Skanda who was thus eulogised by Kraufica became 
delighted. He, the saviour of the devotees, took up his 
matchless spear and remembered Siva. 

9. The son of Siva hurled the spear aiming at Bana. 
It gave loud report, blazing forth the quarters and the sky. 

10. O sage, reducing the Asuras to ashes along with 
his army in a trice, the great spear returned to Kumara. 

11. The lord Kumara told Kraufica, the chief of the 



Rudra$arhhit& 


759 


mountains, “Go home fearlessly. That Asura has been slain 
along with his army.” 

12. On hearing the words of the lord, the delighted 
lord of the mountains eulogised Kumara the slayer of his 
enemy and went back to his abode. 

13. O sage, with great pleasure and observing the 
rules Skanda installed three phallic emblems of Siva that 
quell all sins. 

14. The first is called Pratijfiesvara, the second 
KapaleSvara and the last KumareSvara. The three are 
capable of conferring all the achievements. 

15. Thereafter Kumara, the lord of all, joyously in- 
stalled the phallic image Stambhesvara, 169 near the column 
of victory. 

16. Then Vi$nu and other gods joyously installed the 
phallic emblem of Siva, the lord of the gods. 

17. The glory of the phallic emblems of Siva was 
marvellous,* conferring all cherished desires and salvation to 
the devotees. 

18. Then the delighted Visnu and the gods desired to 
go to the chief of mountains joyously putting Brhaspati 
ahead. 

19. Then Kumuda 180 the son of Sesa who was harassed 
by the Asuras came and sought refuge in Kumara. 

20. Another follower of Taraka — Pralamba who had 
fled from the previous battle wrought great havoc with full 
force. 

21. Kumuda, the great son of Sesa the lord of serpents, 
sought refuge in Kumara the son of Parvatl and eulogised 
him. 

Kumuda said : — 

22. O excellent son of great lord, lord of the gods, O 

1 50. The four ph illic images of Siva named Pratijfiesvara. Kap&leSvara, 
Kumareftvara and Stambhesvara were set up at Cambay, the scene of the 
battlefield, to commemorate the Victory of Guha over Hiraka, the Asura- 
chief. 

160. According to this account, Kumuda, the son of the serpent- 
chief Sesa, was troubled by the Asura Pralamba who was the ally of 
Tftraka. Kuinuda slew Pralamba and relieved Kumuda of distress. 

This Pralamba is distinct from the Asura of the same name whose 
destruction at the hands ofBalarama is recorded in the Mah2bh£rata. 



great chief, I am afflicted by Pralamba and am seeking 
refuge in you. 

23. O Kumara, O Skanda, O lord of the gods, O 
great lord, O slayer of Taraka, save me harassed by the 
Asura Pralamba and seeking refuge in you. 

24. You are the kinsman of the distressed, the ocean 
of mercy, favourably disposed to the devotees, the slayer of 
the wicked, worthy of refuge and the goal of the good. 

25. Eulogised thus by Kumuda and requested to slay 
the demon Pralamba, the lord took up his spear after remem- 
bering the lotus-like feet of Siva. 

26. The son of Parvatl hurled the spear at Pralamba. 
It made a loud report. The quarters and the sky blazed. 

27. Reducing that powerful Asura to ashes in a trice 
the spear carried out the job without strain and returned to 
Kumara. 

28. Then Kumara told the Naga child Kumuda — “Go 
home fearlessly. That Asura has been slain along with 
his army.” 

29. On hearing the words of Guha, Kumuda, the 
son of the Naga chief eulogised and bowed to Kumara and 
went to Patala 161 in great delight. 

30. Thus the story 162 of the victory of Kumara, includ- 
ing the wonderful way in which Taraka was slain, has been 
narrated by me, O noble sage. 

31. It is the divine story that removes all sins. It 
bestows all desires on men. It is conducive to the increase 
of wealth, glory and longevity. It confers worldly pleasures 
and salvation on the good. 

32. Those who recite this divine story of Kumara 
and glorify him are infinitely fortunate and attain Sivaloka. 

1 6 f . Patala is an island accessible through the searoute. It is an 
abode of the Nigas with Bhogavati as the capital (cf M M K. 'Palala, 
XL P. 454) It is variously identified with Ceylon in the mid-ocean. 
C P. 1. 69. 24), Indo-China and old Annam. See Avasthi, Studies in 
Sk. P. P- 113* 

162. As SP states, the victory of Kum&ra over the Asura T&raka is 
a factual happening (vrttam), while V. S. Agrawal insists on the symbolic 
interpretation of the legend. ^According to him Taraka is the Asuric form 
in the individual which remains in contact with the matter and is soiled 
by it. This form is suppressed and sublimated by Kum&ra who is the 
symbol of Sakti quickened by Siva. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


761 


33. Those who listen to his glory with devotion and 
faith will attain divine salvation hereafter after enjoying 
great happiness here. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

( The story of Siva and Parvati including that of K&rttikeya) 
Brahma said : — 

1. On seeing Taraka killed, Visnu and other gods, with 
faces refulgent with pleasure, eulogised Karttikeya with 
devotion. 

The gods said : — 

2. Obeisance to you of good features, obeisance to 
you who confer auspiciousness on the universe, O kinsman of 
the universe, obeisance be to you. Obeisance to you, O puri- 
fier of the universe. 

3. Obeisance to you, the slayer of the chief of the 
Asuras. O lord, obeisance to the slayer of the Asura Bana. 
Obeisance to the destroyer of Pralamba. Obeisance to you 
of holy features. Obeisance to you, O son of Siva. 

4. You alone are the creator, sustainer and annihilator 
of the universe. You, born of fi regod, be pleased. Your cosmic 
image is identical with the universe. O son of Siva, kinsman 
of the distressed, be pleased. 

5. O lord, protector of the gods, O lord, save us always. 
O merciful one, protector of gods, be pleased. 

6. After killing the Asura Taraka along with his followers, 
O great lord, the gods have been freed from adversities by you. 

Brahmd said : — 

7. O sage, thus eulogised by Vi?nu and the other 
gods, lord Kumara granted them fresh boons in order. 

8. On seeing the mountains eulogising, the son of Siva 
became very glad and spoke to them after granting boons. 

Skanda said : — 

9. All of you mountains will become* worthy of being 



762 Sivapwrd^a 

worshipped by the sages and resorted to by persons following 
the paths of action and knowledge. 

10. O mountains, at my word you will be assuming 
the forms of phallic emblems, the special forms of Siva. There 
is no doubt about it. 

11. My maternal grandfather, the excellent mountain 
Himavat, will become the fortunate bestower of fruits to 
ascetics. 

The gods said : — 

12. By killing Taraka the lord of Asuras, and by 
granting boons thus, all of us including the mobile and 
immobile beings have been made happy by you. 

13. Now, it behoves you to go to Kailasa with great 
pleasure, to the abode of Siva in order to see your mother 
and father Siva and Parvatl. 

Brahma, said : — 

14. After saying thus and obtaining his permission, Visnu 
and other gods went jubilantly to that mountain along with 
Kumara. 

15. When the lord Kumara started to Kailasa, the 
abode of Siva, sounds of “Victory” arose indicating great 
auspiciousness. 

16. Kumara got in the richly decorated aerial chariot 
that shone above all the things. 

17. O sage, with great pleasure, Visnu and I held 
the chowries aloft above the head of the lord with alertness. 

18. Indra and other gods, rendering suitable service to 
Kumara went ahead joyously flanking him on all sides. 

19. They reached Siva’s mountain crying shouts of 
victory to Siva, They entered the precincts with delight. 
Auspicious sounds arose. 

20. On seeing Siva and Parvatl, Vi§nu and other gods 
bowed to Siva with devotion and stood there humbly with 
palms joined in reverence. 

21. Kumara descended from the aerial chariot in all 
humility and bowed joyously to Siva and Parvatl seated on 
a throne. 



Rudrasarhhitd 763 

22. O Narada, on seeing their beloved son Kumara, 
the lordly couple Siva and Parvati rejoiced much. 

23. The great lord got up, kissed him on the head 

with joy, stroked him with the hand and placed him on 
his lap. 

24. With great affection, the highly delighted Siva 
kissed the face of Kumara, the great lord and the slayer of 
Taraka. 

25. Parvati, too got up and placed him on her lap. 
Keeping him close to her head with great affection she 
kissed his lotus-like face. 

26. O dear Narada, the joy of the couple — Siva and 
Parvati who followed the worldly conventions, increased very 
much. 

27. There was great jubilation in the abode of Siva. 
Everywhere the sound of shouts “Victory” and ‘‘Obeisance” 
rose up. 

28. O sage, then Visnu, other gods and the sages 
bowed joyously to Siva. They eulogised Him. 

The gods said : — 

29. O lord of the gods, O bes tower of protection to 
your devotees, Obeisance, Obeisance to you many times, O 
merciful lord Siva. 

30. Wonderful indeed, O great lord, is your divine 
sport, conferring happiness to all good men, O Siva, kinsman 
to the distressed, O lord. 

31. We are deluded m our intellects. We are igno- 
rant of the procedure of your worship, O eternal one. We 
do not know your invocation nor your wonderful course, 
O lord. 

32. Obeisance to you, the support of the waters of the 
Ganga, to the deity possessed of the attributes, obeisance to 
the lord of the gods, obeisance to Siva. 

33. Obeisance to the bull-bannered lord Siva, obeisance 
to the lord of Ganas; Obeisance to the lord of all. Obeisance 
to the lord of the three worlds. 

34. O lord, obeisance to you, the annihilator, the 
sustainer and creator of the worlds. O lord of gods, obeisance 
to you, the lord of three attributes and the eternal. 



35. Obeisance to the lord free from attachment; 

obeisance to Siva the great soul. Obeisance to the pure beyond 
the world of matter, obeisance to the great, the unwasting. 

36. Obeisance to you the god of death holding the 

staff of punishment and noose in the hand. Obeisance to 
the chief of the deities invoked by Vedic mantras. Obeisance 
to you the hundred-tongued deity. 

37. O lord, everything has come out of your body 

whether past, present or future, whether mobile or immobile. 

38. O lord, protect us always. O supreme lord, we 
have sought refuge in you in every respect. 

39. Obeisance to you, the blue-necked Rudra, of the 
form of offering. Obeisance to you both possessed and devoid 
of forms, the multiformed one. 

40. Obeisance to Siva, the blue-necked, the wearer 
of ashes on the limbs from the funeral pyre. Obeisance to 
you Srikaptha and Nilasikhanda. 

41. Obeisance to you saluted by all, saluted by the 
Yogins. Obeisance to you, the great lord, whose feet are 
worshipped by all. 

42. You are Brahma among all the gods, you are 
Nilalohita among Rudras; you are the soul in all living 
beings; you are the Purusa of Sahkhya system. 

43. You are Sumeru among mountains, you are the 
moon among the stars. You are Vasi?tba among the sages 
and you are Indra among the gods. 

44. You are Oriikara among all Vedic passages; O 
great lord, be our protector. For the benefit of the worlds 
you nourish the Beings. 

45. O great lord, O fortunate one, O scrutinizer of 
the good and evil, O lord of gods, make us flourish as those 
who carry out your instructions. 

46. In your millions and millions of forms we are 
unable to realize your true self. O lord of gods, obeisance 
be to you. 

Brahmd said : — 

47. After eulogising thus and bowing to him frequently, 
Vi?Qu and other gods stood before him after placing Skanda 
ahead. 



Budrasarhhitd 


765 


48. On hearing the eulogy of the gods, Siva, the lord 
of all, the self-ruler was delighted. The compassionate lord 
then laughed. 

49. Siva the great Isana, the kinsman of the distressed, 
the goal of the’ good, became delighted and spoke to Vi$nu 
and other important gods. 

Siva said : — 

50. O Vi§nu, O Brahma, O gods, listen to my words 
with attention. I am merciful. I shall by all means protect 
you, the gods. 

51. The lord of the three worlds is a slayer of the 
wicked. He is favourably disposed to his devotees. He is the 
creator, sustainer and annihilator of all yet free from 
aberrations. 

52. O excellent gods, whenever you are faced with 
misery you shall worship me for your happiness. 

Bra fund said : — 

53-54. O sage, thus ordered, Visnu, the other gods and 
the sages bowed to Siva, Parvatl, and Kumara joyously, and 
returned to their abodes in great delight singing the pleasant 
glory of Siva, Parvatl and their son. 

55. Siva stayed on the mountain joyously along with 
Parvatl, the Ganas and Kumara. Lord Siva was much 
pleased. 

56. Thus O sage, the divine and pleasant story of 
Kumara and Siva has been narrated to you. What else do 
you wish to hear ? 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

{The birth of GaneSa) 


Suta said : — 

1 . On hearing the marvellously excellent story of the 
slayer of Taraka thus, Narada was highly delighted and he 
lovingly asked Brahma. 



766 Sivapurfya 

N&rada said : — 

2. O lord of gods and people, O storehouse of Siva’s 
cult, the excellent story of Karttikeya, far better than nectar, 
has been heard by me. 

3. Now I wish to hear the excellent story of Gane£a, 
the details of his divine nativity, auspicious of the auspicious. 

SUta said : — 

4. On hearing the words of Narada the great sage, 
Brahma became delighted and replied to him remembering 
Siva. 

Brahmd said : — 

5. Due to the difference of Kalpas, the story of the 
birth of Ganesa is told in different ways. According to one 
account he is born of the great lord. His head looked at by 
Sani 163 was cut off and an elephant’s head was put on him. 

6. Now we narrate the story of the birth of GaneSa in 
Svetakalpa 164 when his head was cut off by the merciful Siva. 

7. No suspicion need be entertained, O sage. Siva is 
certainly the cause of enjoyment and protection. He is the 
lord of all. Siva is possessed as well as devoid of attributes. 

8. It is by His divine sport that the entire universe is 
created, sustained and annihilated. O excellent sage, listen 
to what is relevant to the context, with attention. 

9. A long time had lapsed after the marriage of Siva 
and His return to Kailasa that Gane£a was born. 

10. Once the friends Jaya and Vijaya conferred with 
Parvati and discussed. 

11. All the Ganas of Rudra carry out the orders of 


163. Sani (the planet Saturn) is called the evil-eyed (Kruradr$)» 
for his glance casts an evil effect. The present context refers to a legend 
of P&rvati who proud of her son, Gai>eia, asked Sani to look at him. Sani 
looked and the child's head was burnt to ashes. Parvati felt greatly dis- 
tressed and Brahma offered consolation advising her to replace the head 
with the first she could find and that was an elephant's. 

164. Svetakalpa, a short form of Svetav§r&ha Kalpa, is one of the 
thirty Kalpas. According to the Purapas the legends of one Kalpa are 
repeated in the other. In this process some modifications in the accounts 
are bound to happen with the changes in the happenings. The legend of 
Gapeia as recorded in this chapter belongs to Svetavirfchakalpa. It is dis- 
tinct from the one referred to above. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


767 


Siva. They all, Nandin, Bhrngin and others are in a way 
our own. 

12. Pramathas are numerous. But none of them can 
be called our own. They all stand at the portals, subservient 
to Siva’s behests. 

13. They also may be called our own but our mind is 
not in unison with them. Hence, O sinless lady, one, our 
own must be created. 

Brahma said : — 

14. Goddess Parvati to whom this charming suggestion 
was made by the two friends considered it wholesome and 
resolved to carry it out. 

15. Once when Parvati was taking her bath, Sada§iva 
rebuked Nandin and came into the inner apartment. 

16. The mother of the universe, seeing the untimely 
arrival of Siva in the midst of her bath and toilet stood up. 
The beautiful lady was very shy then. 

17. The goddess decided that her friend’s suggestion 
would be conducive to her good and was so enthusiastic. 

18. At the time when the incident occurred, Parvati, 
the great Maya, the great goddess, thought as follows. 

19. “There must be a servant of my own who will be 
expert in his duties. He must not stray from my behest even 
a speck.” 

20. Thinking thus the goddess created a person with 
all the characteristics, out of the dirt 166 from her body. 

21. He was spotless and handsome in every part of his 
body. He was huge in size and had all brilliance, strength 
and valour. 

22-23. She gave him various clothes and ornaments. 
She blessed him with benediction and said— “You are my 
son. You are my own. I have none else to call my own”. 
Thus addressed the person bowed to her and said: — 

Ganefa said : — 

24. “What is your order ? I shall accomplish what 
you command.” Thus addressed, Parvati replied to her son. 

165. According to this account, Gapesa was born of the scurf of 
Parvati's body, without the intci vent ion of Siva. 



P&roati said : — 

25. “O dear, listen to my words. Work as my gate- 
keeper from today. You are my son. You are my own. It 
is not otherwise. There is none-else who belongs to me. 

26. O good son, without my permission, no one, by 
any means, shall intrude my apartment. I tell you the 
fact.” 

Brahma said : — 

27. O sage, saying this, she gave him a hard stick. 
On seeing his handsome features she was delighted. 

28. Out of love and mercy she embraced and kissed 

him. She placed him armed with a staff at her entrance as 

the gatekeeper. 

29. Then the son of the goddess, of great heroic 

power, stayed at the doorway armed with a staff with a 

desire to do what was good to her. 

30. Thus placing her son at the doorway, Parvati 
began to take bath with her friends, unworried. 

31. O excellent sage, at this very moment Siva who 
is eagerly indulgent and an expert in various divine sports 
came near the door. 

32. Not knowing that he was lord Siva, the consort 
of Parvati, GaneSa said — ‘‘O sir, without my mother’s 
permission you shall not go in now. 

33. My mother has entered the bath. Where are you 
going now ? Go away” saying thus, he took up his staff 
to ward him off. 

34. On seeing him Siva said “O foolish fellow, whom 
are you forbidding ? O wicked knave, don’t you know me ? 
I am Siva, none else”. 

35. Thereupon Gane£a beat Siva with the staff. Siva 
expert in various sports became infuriated and spoke to his 
son thus. 

Siva said : — 

36. “You are a fool, You do not know that I am 
Siva, the husband of Parvati. O boy, I go in my own house. 
Why do you forbid me?” 



Rudrasarfihitd 769 

Brahma said : — 

37. When lord Siva tried to enter the house, GaneSa 
became infuriated, O brahmin, and struck him with his staff 
once again. 

38. Then Siva too became furious. He commanded 
his own Ganas — “Who is this fellow here ? What is he doing? 
O Ganas, enquire.** 

39. After saying this, the furious Siva stood outside 
the house. The lord, following the worldly conventions, is 
capable of various wonderful sports. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

( The Ganas argue and wrangle) 


Brahma said : — 

1 . The infuriated Ganas of Siva at his bidding went 
there and questioned the son of Parvati who stood at the gate. 

Siva's Ganas said : — 

2. “Who are you? Whence do you come? What do you 
propose to do? If you have a desire to remain alive go 
away from here.” 

Brahma said : — 

3. On hearing their words, the son of Parvati who was 
armed with the staff spoke to the Ganas as follows: — 

GaneSa said : — 

4. O “handsome fellows, who are you? Whence have 
you come ? Go away. Why have you come here and why 
do you stand in opposition to me ?** 

Brahma said : — 

5. On hearing his words, Siva's Ganas of great heroism 
and arrogance laughingly spoke to one another. 

6. After conferring with one another, the infuriated 
Parsadas of Siva replied to Ganeia, the doorkeeper. 



Siva's Ganas said : — 

7. “Listen. We are the excellent Ganas of Siva. We 
are his doorkeepers. We have come here to throw you out 
at the bidding of lord Siva. 

8. Considering you too, as one of the Ganas, we are 
not going to kill you. Otherwise you would have been killed. 
Better stay away yourself. Why do you court death ?” 

Brahmd said : — 

9. Though warned thus, Ganesa, the son of Parvatl, 
stood fearless. He did not leave his post at the door. He 
rebuked Siva’s Ganas. 

10. After hearing his words, the Ganas of Siva went 
back and informed Siva about his stand. 

11. O sage, on hearing their words, lord Siva of 
wonderful divine sports, following the worldly conventions 
rebuked his Ganas. 

Lord Siva said : — 

12. “Who is this fellow ? What does he say ? He 
is standing there haughtily as though he is our enemy. What 
will that wicked knave do ? Certainly he wants to die. 

13. Why ? Are you dastardly eunuchs to stand here 
helplessly and complain to me about him. Let this new door- 
keeper be thrown out.” 

Brahmd said : — 

14. Thus commanded by lord Siva of wonderful sports 
the Ganas returned to the place and spoke to the door- 
keeper. 

Siva’s Ganas said : — 

15. O gatekeeper, who are you standing here ? Why 
have you been stationed here ? Why don’t you care for us. 
How can you thus remain alive ? 

16. We are here the duly appointed doorkeepers. What 
are you saying ? A jackal sitting on a lion’s seat wishes for 
happiness. 

17. O fool, you will roar only as long as you do not 



Rudrasarhhitd 771 

feel the brunt of our attack. Erelong you will fall by feeling 
the same.” 

18. Thus taunted by them, Ganeia became furious and 
took the staff with his hands and struck the Ganas even as 
they continued to speak harsh words. 

19. Then the fearless Ganeia, son of Parvatf rebuked 
the heroic Ganas of Siva and spoke as follows: — 

The son of Pdrvati said : — 

20. “Get away. Get away. Or I shall give you a fore- 
taste of my fierce valour. You will be the laughing-stock of 
all.” 

21. On hearing these words of Geneva, the Ganas of 
Siva spoke to one another. 

Siva's Ganas said : — 

22. What shall be done ? Where shall we go ? Why 
shall we not act ? Bounds of decency are observed by us. 
He would not have acted thus, otherwise. 

Brahma said : — 

23. Then the Ganas of Siva went to Siva who was stand- 
ing at the distance of a Krosa from Kailasa and spoke to him. 

24. Siva ridiculed them all. The trident-armed great 
lord of fierce temperament spoke to his Ganas who professed 
to be heroes. 

Siva said : — 

25. “Hello, Ganas, impotent wretches, you profess to 
be heroic but are never so. You are unfit to stand before me 
and speak. If he is only taunted he will speak in similar tone 
again. 

26. Go and beat him. Some one among you may be 
competent to do so. Why should I speak more? He must 
be driven away.” 

Brahmd said : — 

27. O great sage, when rebuked thus by lord Siva, the 
excellent Ganas went back and spoke to him. 



Siva's Ganas said : — 

28. Hello you boy there, listen. Why do you speak 
so arrogantly ? You go away from here. If not, your death is 
certain. 

Brahmd said : — 

29. On hearing the words of Siva’s servants the son of 
Parvati became unhappy and thought “What shall I do?” 

30. In the meantime, the goddess heard the noise of this 
wrangle between the Ganas and the doorkeeper, then looked 
at her friend and spoke. “Go and see.” 

31. The friend came to the door and saw them for a 
moment. She understood the whole matter. She was delighted 
and returned to Parvati. 

32. O sage, coming back she reported the matter to 
Parvati as it had occurred. 

The friend said : — 

33. O great Goddess, the heroic Ganas of Siva arc 
taunting and rebuking our own Gana who is standing at the 
door. 

34. How do these Ganas and Siva enter your apart- 
ment suddenly without looking to your convenience? This is 
not good for you. 

35. Even after undergoing the misery of rebuke etc. 
he, our Gana, has done well in not allowing anyone in. 

36. What is more ? They are arguing too. When the 
argument has started, they cannot come in happily. 

37. Now that they have started the argument let them 
conquer him and enter victoriously. Not otherwise,, my dear 
friend. 

38. When this man belonging to us is taunted, it 
amounts to our being taunted. Hence, O gentle lady, you shall 
not abandon your prestige of high order. 

39. Siva always squeezes you like a crab, O Sati. What 
will he do now ? His pride will take a favourable turn for us. 

Brahma said : — 

40. Alas, being subservient to Siva’s wish, Parvati stood 
there for a moment. 



Rudtasartihitd 773 

41. Then taking up a haughty mood she spoke to her- 
self. 


Pdrvati said : — 

42. “Alas, he did not wait for a moment. Why should 
he force his way in ? What shall be done now ? Or shall I 
adopt a humble attitude. 

43. What is to happen happens. What is done cannot 
be altered ?” After saying this, Parvati sent her again lov- 
ingly. 

44. The friend came to the door and told Gane£a what 
Parvati had said with affection. 

The friend said : — 

45. O gentle sir, well done. Let them not enter forc- 
ibly. What are these Ganas before you ? Gan they win a 
person like you ? 

46. Whether good or bad let your duty be done. If 

you are conquered there will be no further enmity at all. 

Brahma said : — 

47. On hearing the words of the friend and his mother 
Ganesvara became highly delighted, strengthened and lifted 

up- 

48. Girting up his loins, tying his turban firmly and 
clapping his calves and thighs, he spoke fearlessly to all the 
Ganas. 

GaneSa said : — 

49. I am the son of Parvati. You are the Ganas of 
Siva. Both of us are thus equal. Let your duty be done, 
now. 

50. You are all doorkeepers. How is it that I am not ? 
You are standing there and I am standing here. This is 
certain. 

51. When it is certain that you are standing here, you 
must carry out the directions of Siva, 

52. O heroes, now I have to carry out the orders of 
Parvati faithfully. I have decided what is proper. 

53 . Hence, O Ganas of Siva, you shall listen with at- 



774 


tention. You shall not enter the apartment either forcibly or 
humbly. 

BrahmS said:— 

54. The Ganas when decisively told by GaQe£a became 
ashamed. They went to Siva. After bowing to him they 
stood in front of him. 

55. Then they acquainted him with that news of 
wonderful nature. They joined their palms, stooped their 
shoulders, eulogised Siva and stood in front of him. 

56. On hearing the detailed news mentioned by his 
Ganas, Siva replied following the worldly conventions. 

Siva said : — 

57. O Ganas, hear you all. A battle may not be a 
proper course. You are all my own. He is Parvatl’s Gana. 

58. But if we are going to be humble, there is likely 
to be a rumour: “Siva is subservient to his wife.” O Ganas, 
this is certainly derogatory to me. 

59. The policy of meeting an action with another (Tit 
for tat) is a weighty one. That single-handed Gana is a mere 
boy. What valour can be expected of him ? 

60. O Ganas, you are all experts in warfare and reputed 
to be so in the world. You are my own men. How can you 
forsake war and demean yourselves ? 

61. How can a woman be obdurate especially with her 
husband ? Parvatl will certainly derive the fruit of what she 
has done. 

62. Hence, my heroic men, listen to my words with 
attention. This war has to be fought by all means. Let What 
is in store happen.” 

Brahma said : — 

63. O excellent sage, O brahmin, after saying thus, 
Siva an adept in various divine sports became silent observing 
the ways of the world, 



Rudrasarhhitti 


775 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

(Ganefa's battle) 

Brahma said : — 

1. When Siva told them thus, they came to a decisive 
resolution. They got ready and went to Siva’s palace. 

2. On seeing the excellent Ganas, fully equipped for 
war, coming, Ganesa spoke thus to them. 

Ganefa said: — 

3. Welcome to the leaders of Ganas, carrying out the 
behests of Siva. I am only one and that too a mere boy 
carrying out the directions of Parvatl. 

4. Yet let the goddess see the strength of her son. Let 
Siva see the strength of his Ganas too. 

5. The fight between the parties of Parvatl and Siva is 
the one between a strong army and a boy. You are all 
experts in warfare and have fought in many a battle. 

6. I have never fought in a battle before. I am a 
mere boy. I am going to fight now. Still if you are put 
to shame, it will be shameful to Siva and Parvatl. 

7. But that will not happen to me. If I am put to 
shame, the contrary will happen to me. Parvatl and Siva will 
be put to shame but not I. 

8. O leader of the Ganas, the war shall be fought after 
realising this. You shall look up to your lord and I to my 
mother. 

9. What sort of a fight shall be fought ? Let what is 
destined to occur, occur. No one in the three worlds can 
ward it off. 

Brahma said : — 

10. When thus taunted and rebuked they rushed to- 
wards him with big batons, decorating their arms and taking 
up different kinds of weapons. 

11. Gnashing their teeth, grunting and bellowing and 
calling out “See, See”, the Ganas rushed at him. 

12. Nandin came first and caught hold of his leg. He 



776 


pulled at it. Bh|hgin then rushed at him and caught hold 
of his other leg. 

13. Before the Ganas of Siva had time to pull his legs 
Gane£a struck a blow at their hands and got his legs free. 

14. Then seizing a big iron club and standing at the 
doorway he smashed the ganas. 

15. Some got their hands broken, others got their backs 
smothered. The heads of others were shattered and the fore- 
heads of some were crushed. 

16. The knees of some were fractured, the shoulders 
of others were blasted. Those who came in front were hit 
in the chest. 

17. Some fell on the ground, some fled in various 
directions, some got their legs broken and some fled to Siva. 

18-19* Now none among them stood face to face. Just 
as deer flee to any direction on seeing a lion, the Ganas, who 
were thousands in number fled in that manner. Then Ganesa 
returned to doorway and stood there. 

20. He was seen as the annihilator of all in the manner 
of Yama, the terrible god of death at the end of a Kalpa. 

21. At this time, urged by Narada, all the gods inclu- 
ding Visnu and Indra came there. 

22. Standing in front of Siva and bowing to him with 
a desire to secure good for him they said — “O lord, be 
pleased to command us. 

23. You are the great Brahman, the lord of ail, the 
creator, the sustainer and the annihilator of all created things. 
All are your servants. 

24. You are intrinsically devoid of attributes but by 
means of your sports you assume Rajasika, Sattvika and 
Tamasika forms. O lord, what sort of sport you are indulg- 
ing in, now ?” 

Brahmd said : — 

25. O excellent sage, on hearing their words and seeing 
the Ganas completely shattered, lord Siva told them every- 
thing. 

26. O excellent sage, Siva, the lord of all, the consort 
of Parvati, then laughingly told me, Brahma. 



RudrasartihitS 777 

Siva said : — 

27. O Brahma, listen. A boy is standing at the en- 
trance to my house. He is very strong. He has a staff in 
his hand. He prevents me from entering the house. 

28. He strikes very dexterously. He has destroyed 
many of my Parsadas. He has forcefully defeated my Ganas. 

29. O Brahma, you alone should go there. This strong 
boy shall be propitiated. O Brahma, you shall do everything 
to bring him under control. 

Brahma said : — 

30. On hearing the words of the lord and unable to 
know the reality, being deluded by ignorance, O dear, I went 
near Ganesa accompanied by the sages. 

31. On seeing me approaching, the powerful Gane&a 
came to me very furiously and plucked my moustache and 
beard. 

32. “Forgive me. Forgive me, O lord. I have not 
come for fighting. I am a brahmin and shall be blessed. I 
have come to make peace and I will cause no harm.’ 6 

33. While I said thus, O brahmin, the heroic Gane€a, 
the boy of great valour uncommon to the boys took up the 
iron club. 

34. On seeing the powerful Gane£a seizing the iron 
club I began to run away immediately. 

35. The others too who were shouting “Go, Go” were 
struck down with the iron club. Some fell themselves and 
some were felled by him. 

36. Some of them fled to Siva in a trice and inti- 
mated to him the details of the incident. 

37. On seeing them in that plight and on hearing the 
news, Siva, an adept in sports became very angry. 

38. He issued directives to Indra and other gods, to 
the Ganas led by the six-faced Kumara and to goblins, ghosts 
and spirits. 

39. At the bidding of Siva they all desired to kill 
Gane£a. Lifting up their weapons in a suitable manner they 
came there from all directions. 

40. Whatever weapon they had was hurled on Gane£a 
with force. 



41. There was a great hue and cry in all the three 
worlds consisting of the mobile and immobile. The inhabitants 
of the worlds were in a great fix and uncertainty. 

42. “Brahma’s life span is not over, but the whole uni- 
verse is undergoing untimely destruction. Certainly it is due 
to Siva’s wish. 

43. The sixfaced deity and the other gods who came 
there failed to use their weapons effectively. They were very 
much surprised. 

44. In the meantime, goddess, the mother of the uni- 
verse, of special knowledge, came to know of the entire in- 
cident and was very furious. 

45. O great sage, the goddess created two Saktis 166 then 
and there for the assistance of her own Gana. 

46. O great sage, one Sakti assumed a very fierce form 
and stood there opening her mouth as wide as the cavern of 
a dark mountain. 

47. The other assumed the form of lightning. She 
wore many arms. She was a huge and terrible goddess ready 
to punish the wicked. 

48. The weapons hurled by the gods and the Ganas 
were caught in the mouth and hurled back at them. 

49. None of the weapons of the gods was seen any- 
where around the iron club of Gane£a. This wonderful feat 
was performed by them. 

50. A single boy stirred and churned the vast impass- 
able army in the same manner as great mountain 167 churned 
the ocean of milk formerly. 

51. Indra and other gods were struck by him, single- 
handed. The Ganas of Siva became agitated and distressed 
then. 

52. Gasping frequently for their breath, being utterly 


■66. One is the terrible aspect of the Goddess personified as Kail, 
Canqll and Bhairavi, the other a beautiful yellow form named Durga 
with several hands and riding on a tiger in a fierce and minacing 
attitude. 

167. The term ‘girivara 1 the best of the mountain refers to the 
fabulous mountain Meru that was used for churning the ocean. 



Rudrasarhhitd 779 

shaken by his blows they gathered together and spoke to one 
another. 

The gods and Ganas said : — 

53. “What shall be done? Where should we go ? The 
ten directions have become visible. He is whirling the iron 
club right and left.” 

Brahmd said : — 

54-55. In the meantime the excellent nymphs came 
there with flowers and sandal paste in their hands. You and 
other gods who were eager to witness the fight came there. 
O excellent sage, the excellent pathway of the firmament 
was entirely filled by them. 

56. Seeing the battle they were much surprised. Such 
a battle had never been witnessed by them before. 

57. The earth with all the oceans quaked. As a result 
of the violent battle even mountains fell down. 

58. The sky whirled with the planets and the stars. 
Everything was agitated. The gods fled. The Ganas too did 
likewise. 

59. The valorous sixfaced deity alone did not flee. 
The great warrior stopped everyone and stood in front. 

60. But the Ganas fought in vain with the two Saktis. 
The weapons of the gods and the Ganas were broken and 
hence withdrawn by them. 

61. Those that tarried went to Siva. All the gods and 
Ganas fled. 

62. Those who went in a body to Siva bowed to him 
again and again and asked Siva immediately “O lord who is 
that excellent Gana ?” 

63. We have heard that battles used to be fought 
formerly. Even now many battles are being fought. But 
never was such a battle seen or heard. 

64. O lord, let this be pondered over a little. Other- 
wise no victory is possible. O lord, you alone are the 
saviour of the universe. There is no doubt about it.” 

Brahmd said : — 

65. On hearing their words, the furious Rudra became 



more furious and went there along with his Ganas. 

66. The entire army of the gods along with the discus- 
bearing Visnu shouted in jubilation and followed Siva. 

67. In the meantime, bowing to Siva, the lord of the 
gods with palms joined in reverence, O Narada, you spoke as 
follows. 

Narada said : — 

68. “O lord of the gods, please listen to my words. You 
are the all-pervading lord and expert in various sports. 

69. By indulging in a great sport, the arrogance of the 
Ganas has been removed by you. O Sankara, the impudence 
of the gods too has been removed by giving this (Ganesa) 
much strength. 

70. O lord Siva, your own wonderful strength has been 
known to the worlds, you who independently remove the 
haughtiness of everyone. 

71. O lord who are favourably disposed to your devo- 
tees, do not indulge in that sport. Please honour your own 
Ganas and the gods suitably and make them flourish. 

72. O bes tower of the region of Brahman, please do 
not treat him leisurely but kill him in your play now.” O 
Narada, after saying this, you vanished from the place. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

(The head of Ganeia is chopped off during the battle) 
Brahma said : — 

1 . O Narada, on hearing your words, the great lord 
who grants benediction to his devotees became desirous of 
fighting with the boy. 

2. He called Visnu and consulted him. Then with a 
great army and the gods, He, the three-eyed lord, stood face to 
face with him. 

3. After remembering the lotuslike feet of Siva, the 



Rudrasartihitd 781 

gods possessing great strength, kindly glanced at by Siva and 
highly jubilant, fought with him. 

4. Visnu of great strength, valour and skill and pos- 
sessing great divine weapons and Siva’s form fought with him. 

5. Ganesa hit all the chief gods with his staff. He hit 
Visnu too, all of a sudden. The hero had been conferred 
great strength by the Saktis. 

6. O sage, all the gods including Visnu were hit by 
him with the stick. They were turned back with their strength 
sapped. 

7. O sage, after fighting for a long time along with 
the army and seeing him terrific, even Siva was greatly surprised. 

8. Thinking within himself “He has to be killed only 
by deception and not otherwise” he stayed in the midst of the 
army. 

9-10. When lord Siva who though devoid of attributes 
had assumed the attributive form was seen in the battle, when 
Visnu too had come thither, the gods and Ganas of Siva were 
highly delighted. They joined together and became jubilant. 

1 1 . Then Ganesa the heroic son of Sakti following the 
course of heroes, at first worshipped (i.e struck) Visnu with 
his staff, Visnu who confers happiness to all. 

12-13. “I shall cause him delusion. Then let him be 
killed by you, O lord. Without deception he cannot be 
killed. He is of Tamasika nature and inaccessible.” Thinking 
thus and consulting Siva, Vi$nu secured Siva’s permission and 
was engaged in the activities of delusion. 

14. O sage, on seeing Vi^nu in that manner, the two 
Saktis handed over their power to Ganesa and became sub- 
merged. 

15. When the two Saktis became submerged, Gane£a 
with more strength infused in him hurled the iroo club in 
the place where Visnu stood. 

16. Vi$nu strenuously dodged the same after remem- 
bering Siva, the great lord, favourably disposed towards His 
devotees. 

17. Seeing his face on a side* the infuriated Siva took 
up his trident with a desire to fight and came there. 

18. Parvati’s son of great strength and heroism, saw 



782 SivapurSQg 

Siva arrived there with desire to fight him to a finish, the 
great lord with the trident in his hand. 

19. Ganesa, the great hero, who had been rendered 
more powerful by Parvati and the Saktis remembered the 
lotuslike feet of his mother and struck him in his hand with 
his Sakti. 

20. Thereupon the trident fell from the hand of Siva of 
supreme soul. Seeing this, Siva the source of great enjoyment 
and protection took up his bow Pinaka. 

21. Ganesa felled that to the ground by means of his 
iron club. Five of his hands too were struck. He took up 
the trident with the other five hands. 

22. ‘‘Alas, this has been more distressing even to me. 
What may not happen to the Ganas ? Siva who followed the 
worldly conventions cried out like this. 

23. In the meantime the heroic GaneSa endowed with 
the surplus power bestowed by the Saktis struck the gods and 
the Ganas with his iron club. 

24. The gods and the Ganas smothered by that wonder- 
ful striker with the iron club went away to the ten directions. 
None of them remained in the battlefield. 

25-27. On seeing Ganesa, Visnu said —“He is blessed. 
He is a great hero of great strength. He is valorous and fond 
of battle. Many gods, Danavas, Daityas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, 
and Raksasas I have seen. In the entire extent of the 
three worlds, none of them can equal Ganesa in regard to 
brilliance, form, features, valour and other qualities.’* 

28. Ganesa, son of the Saktis whirled the iron club 

and hurled it at Visnu even as he was saying so. 

29. After remembering the lotus-like feet of Siva, Vi$i>u 

took up his discus and split the iron club by means of discus. 

30. Ganesa hurled the piece of iron club at Visnu 

which was caught by the bird Garutja and rendered futile. 

31. Thus for a long time the two heroes Visnu and 
Gane£a fought with each other. 

32. Again the foremost among heroes, the son of 
Parvati took up his staff of unrivalled power remembering 
Siva and struck Visnu with it. 

33. Struck with that unbearable blow he fell on the 
ground. But he got up, quickly and fought with Parvati’s son. 



RudfMsarhkitd 783 

34. Securing this opportunity, 'the Trident-bearing deity 
came there and cut off his head with his trident. 

35. O Narada, when the head of Gane£a was cut off, 
the armies of the gods and the Ganas stood still. 

36. You, Narada, then came and acquainted Parvati 
with the matter— “O proud woman, listen. You shall not 
cast off your pride and prestige.” 

37. O Narada, saying this, you, fond of quarrels, vanis- 
hed from there. You are the unchanging sage and a follower 
of the inclinations of Siva. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

(The Resuscitation of Ganeia) 


Narada said : — 

1 . O Brahma, of great intellect, please narrate. When 
the entire news was heard what did the great goddess 
Parvati do? I wish to hear all in fact. 

Brahma said : — 

2. O foremost among sages, listen. I shall mention 
the story of the mother of the universe in the manner that 
it happened afterwards. 

3. When Ganesa was killed, the Ganas were very 
jubilant. They played on Mrdangas and Pafahas. 

4. After cutting off the head of Gane€a even as Siva 
became sorry, goddess Parvati became furious, O great 
sage. 

5. “O what shall I do ? Where shall I go ? Alas, 
great misery has befallen me. How can this misery, this 
great misery be dispelled now? 

6. ‘‘My son has been killed by all the gods and the 
Ganas. I shall destroy them all or create a deluge.” 

7. Lamenting thus, the great goddess of all the 
worlds angrily created in a moment hundreds and thousands 
of Saktis. 

8. Saktis who were thus created, bowed to Parvati, 



784 fivapurfija 

the mother of the universe and blazing brilliantly spoke — 
“O mother, be pleased to command.* * 

9. O great sage, on hearing that, Parvati, the Sakti of 
Siva, the Prakrti. the great Maya, spoke to them all in great 
fury. 

The goddess said : — 

10. O Saktis, O goddesses, now a great deluge shall 
be created by you at my bidding. You need not hesitate 
in this regard. 

11. “O friends, devour forcibly all these sages, gods, 
Yak$as, Raksasas belonging to us and others.” 

Brahma said : — 

12. On being commanded by her, the infuriated 
Saktis got ready to destroy the gods and others. 

13. Just as the fire consumes dry grass so also these 
Saktis attempted to destroy. 

14-15. Leaders of Ganas or Visnu, Brahma or Siva, 
Indra or Kubera, Skanda or the Sun — Saktis began to 
destroy them. Wherever one looked, Saktis were present. 

16. Karalis (the Terrific), Kubjakas (the hump- 
backed), Khaftjas (the lame), Lambasirsas (the tall-headed) 
the innumerable Saktis took up the gods with their hands 
and threw them in their own mouths. 

17-18. On seeing that Siva, Brahma, Visnu, Indra, 
the other gods, Ganas and the sages began to doubt what 
the Goddess Parvati would be doing, whether she would 
create an untimely dissolution. Their hopes and aspirations 
for life were quelled. 

19. They all gathered together and discussed — “What 
shall be done now? Let us ponder.” Discussing thus they 
rpoke to one another. 

20. “Only when the goddess Parvati is pleased can 
there be a relief; not otherwise, even with our maximum 
efforts. 

21. Even Siva who is an expert in different sports 
and is deluding us all, seems distressed like an ordinary 


man. 



Rudrasarhhita 


785 


22. When the hips of all the gods are broken and 
Parvati is fiery in rage, none of them dare stand before her. 

23-24. Whether a person belonging to her or to 
others, whether a god, a demon, a Gana, a guardian of the 
quarters, a Yak$a, a Kinnara, a Sage, Brahma, Vi?nu or 
even lord Siva himself, none could stand before Siva. 

25. On seeing her dazzling brilliance, burning all 
round, all of them were frightened and they stayed far 
away. 

26. In the meantime, O sage Narada, you of divine 
vision came there for the happiness of the gods and Ga^as. 

27. After bowing to me, Brahma, Vi$nu and Siva 
and discussing jointly, he said — ‘‘Let us think and act 
together.” 

28. The gods then discussed with you of noble soul 
“How could our misery be quelled.” They then said. 

29. As long as the goddess Parvati does not favour 
us there will be no happiness. No suspicion need be enter- 
tained in this matter. 

30. You and other sages went to Parvati in order to 
appease her anger. They then propitiated her. 

31. They bowed to her again and again. They 
eulogised her with many hymns. They tried to please her 
with devotion and at the behest of the gods and Ganas 
spoke thus. 

The celestial sages said : — 

32. O Mother of the universe, obeisance to you. 
Obeisance to you, O Siva. Obeisance to you. O Canqlika. 
Obeisance to you, Kalyanl. 

33. O mother, you alone are the primordial Sakti. 
You are the eternal cause of creation. You alone are the 
sustaining power. You alone are the cause of dissolution. 

34. O goddess, be pleased. Spread peace. Obeisance 
be to you. O goddess, the three worlds are agitated by 
your fury. 

Brahma said : — 

35. The great goddess Parvati thus eulogised by you 



786 SfoaparSna 

and other sages glanced at them furiously. She did not 
say anything. 

36. Then the sages bowed at her lotus like feet and 
spoke to her in low voice with devotion joining their palms 
in reverence. 

The sages said : — 

37. O goddess, forgive, forgive. The final dissolution 
seems near at hand. Your lord is standing here. O mother, 
you see him. 

38. What are we, the gods, Visnu, Brahma and others? 
We are only your subjects. We stand here with palms 
joined in reverence. 

39. O great goddess, our guilts shall be forgiven. 
We are agitated and distressed. O Parvati give us peace. 

Brahma said : — 

40. After saying this, the agitated and distressed sages 
stood in front of her with palms joined in reverence. 

41. On hearing their words Parvati was pleased and 
she replied to the sages with her mind full of compassion. 

The goddess said : — 

42-43. If my son regains life there may not be further 
annihilation. If you can arrange for him an honourable 
status and position among you as the chief presiding officer, 
there may be peace in the world. Otherwise you will never 
be happy. 

Brahma said : — 

44. Thus warned, you and other sages returned and 
intimated to all the gods everything in detail. 

45. On hearing that, Indra and other gods joined 
their palms in reverence and piteously intimated to Siva 
what had transpired there. 

46. On hearing what the gods said, Siva spoke thus — 
“It shall be done accordingly so that there may be peace 
over all the worlds.* 1 

47. “You shall go to the northern direction and what- 



RudrasarhhitS 787 

ever person you meet at first you cut off his head and fit 
it to this body.” 

Brahma said : — 

48. Then they carried out Siva's behests and acted 
accordingly. They brought the headless body of Ganeia and 
washed it well. 

49. They paid homage to it and started towards the 
north. It was a single-tusked elephant that they met. 

50-51. They took the head and fitted it to the body. 
After joining it, the gods bowed to Siva, Vi?nu and Brahma 
and spoke — “What has been ordered by you has been 
carried out by us. Let the task left incomplete be perform^ 
ed now.” 

52. Then the Par?adas shone happily. After hearing 
those words they awaited eagerly what Siva would say. 

53. Then Brahma, Visnu and other gods spoke after 
bowing to lord Siva who is free from the ill effects of the 
attributes. 

54. They said : — “Since we all are bom out of your 
brilliant Energy let that Energy come into it by the recita- 
tion of the Vedic mantras. 

55. Saying so, they jointly sprinkled the holy water, 
invoked by the mantras on that body after remembering 
Siva. 

56. Immediately after the contact of the holy water 
the boy was resuscitated to life and joined with conscious- 
ness. As Siva willed, the boy woke up as from a sleep. 

57. He was handsome, extremely comely. He had 
the face of an elephant. He was red-complexioned. He 
was delighted with face beaming. He was brilliant and had 
fine features. 

58. O great sage, on seeing the son of Parvati resusci- 
tated to life, they all rejoiced and their miseries came to 
an end. 

59. They showed him delightfully to the goddess. On 
seeing her restored to life, the goddess was greatly delighted. 



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

( Ganeia crowned as the chief of Ganas) 

Narada said : — 

1. O lord of subjects, when the son of PaiVati was 
resuscitated and seen by the goddess, what happened then? 
Please narrate to me now. 

Brahmd said : — 

2. O great sage, when the son of Parvati was 
resuscitated and seen by the goddess, listen to what happened 
there. I shall narrate the jubilation that ensued. 

3. O sage, that son of Parvati was resuscitated. He 
was free from distress and perturbation. Then he was 
crowned by the gods and the leaders of Ganas. 

4. On seeing her son, Parvati was highly delighted. 
Taking him up with both her hands she embraced him 
joyously. 

5. She then lovingly gave him different clothes and 
ornaments. 

6. He was honoured by the goddess who bestowed all 
Siddhis on him and touched him with her hand that removes 
all distress. 

7. After worshipping her son, and kissing his face, 
she granted him boons with affection and said — “You have 
had great distress since your very birth. 

8. You are blessed and contented now. You will 
receive worship before all the gods. You will be free from 
distress. 

9. Vermillion is visible on your face now. Hence you 
will be worshipped with vermillion by all men always. 

10-12. All achievements certainly accrue to him who 
performs your worship with flowers, sandal paste, scents, 
auspicious food offerings Nirajana rites, betel leaves, 
charitable gifts, circumambulations and obeisance. All kinds 
of obstacles will certainly perish. 

13. After sayihg this, she worshipped her good son 
with various articles, once again. 

14. O Brahmin, then with the graceful blessings of 



Rudrasarhhxta. 789 

Parvati, instantly peace reigned upon gods and particularly 
on the Ganas. 

15. In the meantime, Indra and other gods eulogised 
and propitiated Siva joyously and brought him devoutly near 
Parvati. 

16. After pleasing her they placed the boy in her lap 
for the happiness of the three worlds. 

17. Placing his lotus-like hand on his head, Siva told 
the gods. “This is another son of mine.” 

18-19. Getting up and bowing to Siva, Parvati, Vi$nu 
and me, Ganesa stood in front of Narada and other sages 
and said — “My guilt shall be forgiven. Arrogance is the 
characteristic of Man’s nature.” 

20. We three Siva, Visnu and I said to the gods 
simultaneously with pleasure, after granting him excellent 
boons 

21. “O great gods, just as we three are worshipped in 
all the three worlds, so also he shall be worshipped by all 
of you.” 

22. We are the offsprings of primordial nature. He 
is also the same and hence worthy of worship. He is the 
remover of all obstacles and the bestower of the fruits of 
all rites. 

23. He shall be worshipped first and we shall be 
worshipped afterwards. If he is not worshipped, we too are 
not worshipped. 

24. If the other deities are worshipped when he is 
not worshipped, the fruit of that rite will be lost. There is 
no doubt in this matter. 

25-26. After saying this we worshipped him. Siva 
worshipped Ganesa with various articles of worship. Vi$nu 
worshipped him afterwards. I, Brahma, and Parvati too 
worshipped him. He was then worshipped by all the gods 
and Ganas with great joy. 

27. In order to gratify Parvati, Ganesa was proclaimed 
as the presiding officer by all, Brahma, Vi?pu, Siva and 
others. 

28. Again, with a joyful mind, several boons were 
granted by Parvati to him, always favourable to all in the 
world. 



Stvapurina 


790 

Siva said : — 

29. “O son of Parvati, I am pleased, there is no doubt 
about it. When I am pleased the entire universe is pleased. 
None will be against the same. 

30. Since, even as a boy you showed great valour as 
Parvatl’s son, you will remain brilliant and happy always. 

31. Let your name be the most auspicious in the 
matter of quelling obstacles. Be the presiding officer of all 
my Ganas and worthy of worship now.” 

32. After saying this, Siva laid down several modes 
of worship and granted benedictions instantaneously. 

33. The gods, the Ganas and the celestial damsels 
sang songs joyously, danced and played on instruments. 

34. Another boon was granted to GaneSa by the 
delighted Siva of great soul. 

35-37. O Gane€a, you are born in the first Prahara 
on the fourth day in the dark half of the Bhadra mouth at 
the auspicious hour of the moonrise. Since your form mani- 
fested itself from the good mind of Parvati, your excellent 
Vrata shall be performed on that Tithi itself or beginning 
from that day. It will be very auspicious and conducive to 
the achievement of all Siddhis. 

38. At the bidding of us both the Vrata shall be 
performed till the fourth day at the end of a year. 

39. Let those who yearn for unequalled happiness in 
the world worship you devoutly in various ways on the fourth 
day in accordance with the rules. 

40. On the fourth day of Lak§ml in the month of 
Marga£ir$a he shall perform early morning ablution and 
entrust the Vrata to the brahmins. 

41. He shall perform worship with the Durva grass 
and observe fast. After a Prahara has elapsed in the night 
the devotee shall take bath and worship. 

42-43. The idol shall be made of metal, coral, white 
Arka flowers or clay. It shall be installed and worshipped 
by the devotee with all purity, with scents of various kinds, 
divine sandal paste an<j flowers. 

44-45. A handful of Durva grass having three knots 
and without roots shall be used for worship. The shoots 
shall be hundred and one in number. With twentyone the 



RudrasartiMta 791 

idol shall be worshipped. GaneSa shall be adored with 
incense, lamps and different kinds of food-offerings. 

46. After worshipping you with various articles of 
worship like betel etc. and eulogising you with hymns, the 
devotee shall worship the crescent moon. 

47. Afterwards, he shall feed the brahmins joyously 
with sweets with due honour. He himself shall take sweets 
and avoid salt. 

48. Then the rites shall formally be dismissed. Then 
he shall remember Gane£a. Thus the Vrata shall be conclu- 
ded auspiciously. 

49. When thus the Vrata is duly completed in a year, 
the devotee shall perform the rite of formal dismissal for the 
completion of the Vrata. 

50. At my bidding twelve brahmins shall be fed. 
After placing a jar your image shall be worshipped. 

51. After making the eight-petalled lotus diagram on 
the ground in accordance with Vedic injunctions a sacrifice 
shall be performed by the liberal people who have iio disin- 
clination to spend money. 

52. Two women and two students shall be worshipped 
and fed in front of the idol duly. 

53. The devotee shall keep awake at night and per- 
form worship in the morning. After that the rites of formal 
dismissal with the mantra “Ksemaya Punaragamanaya Ca. M 
(For welfare and return again) shall be performed. 

54. The benediction as well as good wishes shall be 
received from the boy. In order to make the Vrata complete, 
handfuls of flowers shall be offered. 

55. After prostrations, various routines shall be carried 
on. He who performs Vratas like this can secure the 
desired fruits. 

56. O Ganesa, he who performs your worship upto 
his ability, with faith, shall derive the fruit of all desires. 

57. The devotee shall worship you, the lord of Ganas 
with Vermillion, sanded paste, raw rice grains and Ketaka 
flowers as well as with other services. 

58. They who devoutly worship you with acts of service 
will achieve success. Their obstacles will be quelled. 

59. These Vratas shall be performed by the people 



792 


of all castes, particularly by women as well as kings aiming 
and beginning to be prosperous and flourishing. 

60. He will certainly derive whatever he desires. 
Hence you shall always be served by him whoever he is who 
desires fruits. 

Brahma said : — 

61-62. When this was mentioned by Siva to Gane£a 
of great soul, O sage, the gods, the sages and the Ganas, 
favourites of Siva said ‘‘So be it” and worshipped Ga$e£a 
according to prescribed rules. 

63. All the Ganas, particularly bowed to GaneSa and 
adored him respectfully with various articles. 

64. O great sage, how can I describe even with my 
four mouths the indescribable delight of Parvatl. 

65. The divine drums were sounded. The celestial 
damsels danced. The Gandharva chiefs sang. Flowers were 
showered upon him. 

66. When Ganesa was installed, the whole universe 
attained peace and normalcy. There was great jubilation. 
All miseries ended. 

67. O Narada, Parvatl and Siva rejoiced in particular. 
Good and plentiful auspiciousness was conducive to happi- 
ness everywhere. 

68-69. The gods and the sages, who had come there, 
returned at the bidding of Siva praising Parvatl and Gane§a 
again and again, eulogising Siva and saying “O what a 
battle !** 4 

70. When Parvatl became free from fury, Siva and 
Parvatl behaved as before. 

71. With a desire for the welfare of the worlds, the 
great deity relaxing in his own soul and engaged in the 
activities of the devotees conferred different kinds of 
happiness. 

72. Both Vi$nu and I took leave of Siva and after 
paying homage to both Parvatl and Siva returned to our 
abodes. 

73. O holy sage Narada, after singing the glory of 
Parvatl and Siva and taking leave of them you too returned 
to your abode. 



RudrasarhhitS 


793 


74. Thus requested by you, * I have narrated the 
glorious story of Parvatl and Siva along with that of Ganega 
with great reverence. 

75. Whoever hears this narrative auspiciously with pure 
mind shall have everything auspicious and be the abode of 
auspiciousness. 

76. The childless will get a son, the indigent wealth; 
the seeker of a wife will get a wife and the seeker of issues 
will get children. 

77. The sick will regain health; the miserable will 
have good fortune. The sonless, impoverished, banished wife 
will be reunited with her husband. 

78-79. The sorrowing will be relieved of sorrow, 
undoubtedly. The house that contains this story shall 
certainly be auspicious. He who listens to this narrative at 
the time of travel or on holy occasions, with a pure mind 
shall get all desires, thanks to the grace of lord Ga^ega. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

(Ganapati's marriage ) 


Narada said : — 

1.0 dear father, the excellent story of the nativity 
and the divine conduct embellished by valour, of Ganega 
hag been heard well. 

2. O dear father, O lord of gods, what happened 
thereafter ? Please narrate it. The great glory of Parvatl and 
Siva confers great delight. 

Brahms said : — 

3. O excellent sage, you have asked well with a sym- 
pathetic mind. Listen attentively, O excellent Sage, I shall 
narrate. 

4. O excellent brahmin, seeing frequently the divine 
sports of both the sons, Parvatl and Siva had their love 
increased. 



794 Sivapurdna 

5. The happiness of the parents knew no bounds. 
The son too used to sport in joy and love. 

6. O great sage, the sons rendered great service to 
their parents with great devotion. 

7. The love and affection of the parents towards the 
six-faced lord and Ganesa increased to a great extent like 
the moon in the bright half of the month. 

8. O celestial sage, once the loving parents Parvati 
and Siva held a secret talk and discussion. 

9. They thought that the two sons had attained to 
marriageable age and how best their marriage should be 
celebrated now. 

10. The sixfaced lord Karttikeya was their great 
beloved son. GaneSa too was likewise. Thinking thus they 
were worried as well as delighted. 

11. O sage, coming to know of their parents* opinion, 
the sons too were eager to get married. 

12. “I shall marry, I shall marry** saying thus to 
each other they always quarrelled with each other. 

13. The couple, the rulers of the worlds, on hearing 
their words, were very much surprised, following the worldly 
conventions. 

14. A wonderful expedient was devised by them after 
thinking about the course to be followed in the celebration 
of their marriage. 

15. Once they called the sons to them and spoke as 
follows. 

Siva and Parvati said : — 

16. O good sons, we have framed the rules conducive 
to your happiness. Listen lovingly. We shall tell you the 
truth. 

17. Both of you are good sons and equal in our eyes. 
There is no difference. Hence a condition that is beneficial to 
both of you has been made. 

18. The auspicious marriage will be celebrated of that 
boy who comes here first after going round the entire earth. 

Brahmd said : — 

19. On hearing their words, the powerful Kumara 



Rudrasarhhitd 


795 


started immediately from the fixed point in order to go round 
the earth. 

20 . Ganega of excellent intellect stood there itself 
after pondering in his mind frequently with his keen 
intellect. 

2 1 . “What shall be done ? Where am I to go ? I 
cannot cross the earth. At best it may be possible to go a 
Kroga. I cannot go beyond it. 

22. What avails that happiness which is achieved after 
going round the earth ?” Please listen to what Ganega did 
after thinking thus. 

23. He performed the ceremonial ablution and returned 
home. He then spoke to his father and mother. 

GaneSa said: — 

24. For your worship two seats have I placed here. 
Please be seated, dear parents. Let my desire be fulfilled. 

Brahma said: — 

25. On hearing his words, Parvatl and Siva sat on the 
seats for receiving worship. 

26. They were worshipped by him and circumambu- 
lated seven times and bowed too seven times. 

27. Joining his palms in reverence and eulogising his 
parents agitated by love and affection, many times, Ganega 
the ocean of intelligence, spoke thus. 

Ganeia said : — 

28. “O mother, O father, you please listen to my 
weighty words. My auspicious marriage shall be celebrated 
quickly.” 

Brahma said : — 

29. On hearing the words of the noble-minded Ganega, 
the parents spoke to him, the storehouse of great intellect. 

Siva and Parvati said : — 

30. You shall circumambulate the earth with all its 
forests. Kumara has already gone. You too start and 
return first. 



796 Sivapurdrjta 

Bfahmd said : — 

31. On hearing the words of his parents, Ganesa 

spoke immediately &nd furiously but with some restraint. 

Ganeia said : — 

32. O mother, O father, you two are intelligent and 
embodied virtue. Hence O excellent ones, you may be 
pleased to hear my virtuous words. 

33. The earth has been circumambulated by me 

frequently, for seven times. Why then, my parents should 

say thus? 

BrahmS said: — 

34. On hearing his words, the sportively inclined 

parents, following the worldly conventions spoke to him 
thus — 

The parents said : — 

35. “O son, when was the great earth circumambulated 
by you, the earth consisting of seven continents 168 extending 
to the oceans and consisting of vast jungles? 

Brahma said : — 

36. O sage, on hearing the words of Parvatl and Siva, 
Gane£a, the storehouse of great intellect spoke thus. 

Ganeia said : — 

37. By worshipping you, Parvatl and Siva, I have 
intelligently circumambulated the earth extending to the 
oceans. 

38. Is it not the verdict of the Vedas or the Sastras 
of any other sacred code ? Is it true or otherwise ? 

39. “He who worships his parents and circumambu- 
lates them, will certainly derive the fruit and merit of 
circumambulating the earth. 

40. He who leaves his parents at home and goes on a 
pilgrimage incurs the sin of their murder. 

168. On the seven continents, sec S. M. Ali, Geography of the 
Pur&pas, Ch. II. 



Rudrasa tfihiMl 


797 


41. The holy centre of a son consists of the lotus-like 
feet of his parents. The other holy centres can be reached 
only after going a long distance. 

42. This holy centre is near at halid, easily accessible 
and a means of virtue. For a son and wife, the ^auspicious 
holy centre is in the house itself.” 

43. These things are mentioned frequently in the Sastras 
and the Vedas. Now, are they going to be falsified by you? 

44. If so, your very forms will come false. Even the 
Vedas will become false. There is no doubt about it. 

45. Let my auspicious marriage be celebrated and that 
too very quickly. Otherwise let the Vedas and Sastras be 
declared false. 

46. Of the two alternatives whatever is excellent shall 
be followed, O parents, embodied virtues! 

Brahma said: — 

47. Saying thus, Ganesa of excellent intellect, of great 
wisdom and foremost among intelligent persons assumed silence. 

48. On hearing his words, Parvati and Siva, the rulers 
of the universe, were very much surprised. 

49. Then, Siva and Parvati praised their son who was 
clever and intelligent and spoke to him who had spoken the 
truth. 

Siva and Parvati said : — 

50. O son, you are a supreme soul and your thoughts 
are pure. What ycru have said is true and not otherwise. 

51. When misfortune comes, if a person is keenly in- 
telligent, his misfortunes perish even as darkness perishes 
when the sun rises. 

52. He who has intelligence possesses strength as well. 
How can he who is devoid of intellect have strength ? The 
proud lion was drowned in a well with a trick by a little 
hare. 169 

53. Whatever has been mentioned in the Vedas, Sastras 
and Puranas for a boy, all that has been performed by you, 
namely, the observance of virtue. 

169. This verse introduces the story of the lion and the hare in the 
Paftcatantra 



798 / 


Sivapurdna 

54. What has been executed by you shall be done by 
anyone. We have honoured it. It will not be altered now. 

Brahmd said : — 

55. After saying this and appeasing GaneSa, the ocean 
of intelligence, they resolved to perform his marriage. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

(Th celebration of Ganefa’s marriage) 

Brahmd said : — 

1. In the meantime Prajapati Visvarupa became delight- 
ed and happy on knowing their intention. 

2. Prajapati Vifvarupa had two daughters of divine 
features. They were famous as Siddhi and Buddhi. 170 They 
were exquisite in every part of their body. 

3. The lord Siva and Parvati, jubilantly celebrated 
the marriage of Ganesa with them. 

4. The delighted gods attended their marriage as desired 
by Siva and Parvati. 

5. ViSvakarman made all arrangements for the marriage. 
The sages and the gods were full of great joy. 

6. The happiness that Ganesa derived by virtue of this 
marriage, O sage, cannot be adequately described. 

7. After some time, the noble Ganesa begot two sons, 
one each of his wives. They were endowed with divine features. 

8. The son Ksema was born to Siddhi. The highly 
brilliant son Labha was born to Buddhi. 

9. While Ganesa was enjoying the inconceivable 
happiness, the second son returned after circumambulating 
the earth. 

10. Thereupon he was addressed by Narada, the great 
soul. “I am speaking the truth, no lies. I am not actuated 
by deception or rivalry. 

11. What has been done by Siva and Parvati your 

170. Siddhi and Buddhi were the two daughters of the progenitor 
Viivarupa and these were married to Ganesa. Siddhi gave birth to 
Kfema and Labha was born of Buddhi. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


799 


parents, no other person in the world will ever do. Truth. 
It is the truth I am speaking. 

12. After driving you out under the pretext of circum- 
ambulating the earth, they have celebrated the excellent and 
auspicious marriage of GaneSa. 

13. By this marriage that was celebrated, Ganesa has 
obtained two wives joyously. They are the excellent daughters 
of Prajapati Visvarupa. 

14. He has begot of his two wives of auspicious body 
two sons, Ksema of Siddhi and Labha of Buddhi. They 
bestow happiness on every one. 

15. Begetting two sons of auspicious features of his wives 
Ganesa is continuously enjoying happiness as conceived by 
your parents. 

16. The entire earth consisting ol oceans and jungles 
has been traversed by you due to their deceptive behest. O 
dear, this is the result of that. 

17. O dear, consider. If parents begin to deceive or 
particularly if our masters begin to deceive, won’t others also 
begin to deceive. 

18. Your parents have not done well. Just ponder over 
it. I don’t think their action has been good. 

19. If mother were to poison her son, if father were to 
sell; his son, if the king were to confiscate the assets of his sub- 
jects what can be said and to whom ? 

20. O dear, an intelligent peace-loving person shall 
never look at the face of the person who has committed this 
harmful deed. 

21. This policy has been mentioned in the Vedas, 
Smrtis and sacred texts. It has been intimated to you now. 
Do as you wish.” 

Brahma said : — 

22. O Narada, following the mental process of lord 
§iva ; you spoke these words to Kumara and then kept quiet. 

23. After bowing to his father, the infuriated Skanda went 
to the Kraufica mountain 171 though forbidden by his parents. 

171. This famous hill represents part of the Kailasa on which the 
Manasarovara is situated. See Note 78 r. 629. 



'V* 

24. “Even when forbidden by us why do you go V 
Although he \^s prevented by saying this, he went away 
saying “No”. 

25. “O parents, I shall not stay here even a moment 
when deception has been practised on me eschewing affection 
towards me.” 

26. O sage, he went away saying so. Even today he 
is staying there removing the sin of all by his very vision. 

27. Ever since that day, O celestial sage, the son of 
Siva, Karttikeya remains a bachelor. 

28. His name bestows auspiciousness in the world. It is 
famous in the three worlds. It dispels all sins, is meritorious 
and confers the sanctity of celibacy. 

29. In the month of Karttika, the gods, the holy sages 
and great ascetics go there to see Kumara. 

30. He who has the vision of the lord in the Kfttika 
Nak$atra in the month of Karttika is divested of all sins. He 
derives all desired fruits. 

31. Parvati became grief-stricken by separation from 
Skanda. She piteously told her lord. “O lord, let us go 
there.” 

32. Siva went to that mountain partially for her hap- 
piness. He assumed the pleasing form of Jyotirlinga named 
Mallikarj una. 172 

33. Even now Siva is seen there with Parvati satisfying 
the desires of his devotees. He is the goal of the good. 

34. On coming to know that Siva had come there with 
Parvati, Kumara became unattached and was eager to go 
elsewhere. 

35. On being requested by the gods and sages he stay- 
ed in a place three Yojanas away. 

36. O Narada, on the full and new moon days, Parvati 
and Siva are excited by love towards their son and they go 
there to see him. 

37. On new moon days, Siva himself goes there. On 
full moon days, Parvati goes there certainly. 

172. According to the present context the Mallikarjuna Jyotirlihga 
was established on the Kraufica mountain. It is difficult to know how it 
came to be identified with the one on Srisaila overhanging the Krgna river 
in the south. 



RudrasarhhitS 801 

38. O great sage, whatever you had asked in regard to 
Karttikeya and GaijeSa has been narrated by me. 

39. On hearing this, an intelligent man becomes free 
from all sins. He achieves all desired fruits of auspicious 
nature. 

40. Whoever reads, teaches, listens or narrates this 
story derives all desires. No doubt need be entertained in 
this respect. 

41. A brahmin derives brahminical splendour, a 
Ksatriya becomes victorious, a VaiSya prosperous and a Sudra 
attains equality with the good. 

42. A sick man becomes free from sickness; a frightened 
man becomes free from fear; no man is harassed by the 
visitation of goblins, ghosts etc. 

43. This narrative is sinless, conducive to glory and 
enhancer of happiness. It is conducive to longevity and 
attainment of heaven. It is unequalled and bestows sons and 
grandsons. 

44. It confers salvation and reveals Siva’s principles. 
It is pleasing to Parvati and Siva and increases devotion to 
Siva. 

45. This shall always be heard by devotees and by 
those who seek liberation and are free from worldly desires. 
It confers identity with Siva. It is conducive to welfare and 
is identical with Siva himself. 



RUDRA-S AMHIT A 


SECTION V 

Yuddha Khanda 

CHAPTER ONE 

Description of the Tripur as 173 


Narada said : — 

1. The excellent story of the householder Siva, includ- 
ing that of GaneSa, Skanda and others which confers bliss has 
been heard by us. 

2. Now please narrate lovingly the story of how Siva 
killed wicked persons playfully. 

3. How did the lord burn off three cities of the 
Asuras with a single arrow simultaneously? What sort of an 
arrow was it? 

4. Please narrate the story of the moon-crested lord 
conducive to the happiness of the gods and sages and a play 
of the magic of Siva. 

Brahma, said : — 

5. When he was asked by Vyasa formerly, the excellent 

17$. According to the present version, three Asuras Taraka, 
Vidyunmili and Kamaliksa pei formed penances and obtained a boon 
from Brahmi to build three castles, the one of copper on earth, another 
of silver in the sky and the third of gold Brahma asked the Asura Maya 
to build these castles for the Asuras which we»-e destroyed by Siva later on. 
According to another Version, the Asura Bina received in gift thice cities 
from Siva, Brahma and Vi?nu. 

The Chedis adopted the name Tripurl for their capital on the banks 
of the Narmada. It is now traceable in the insignificant village Tewar, 
thirteen miles from Jabalpur. 

The legend of the three cities is as old as the Brahmana literature. It 
is said that the Asuras built the city of copper on the earth, of silver in 
the sky and of gold in* the heavenly region : 

W»Pfl*T??rfw fefr I 6B. 3. 4. 4.3. 



RudrasarhhUd 803 

sage Sanatkumara narrated the story. I will repeat the 
same. 


Sanatkumara said : — 

6. O Vyasa of great intellect, listen to the story of the 
moon-crested lord, how the annihilator of the universe burnt 
the three cities with a single arrow. 

7. O great sage, when the Asura Taraka was killed 
by Skanda, the son of Siva, his three sons performed 
austerities. 

8. The eldest of them was Tarakaksa, the middle 
one Vidyunmall and the youngest Kamalaksa. All of them 
were of equal strength. 

9. They were self-controlled, well prepared, disciplined, 
truthful, of steady mind, heroic and inimical to the gods. 

10. Eschewing all enjoyments captivating the mind, 
they went to the cavern of the mountain Meru 174 and per- 
formed a wonderful penance. 

11. The three sons of Taraka eschewed all desires in 
the season of spring. They disdained music, the sound of 
instruments as well as jubilation and performed penances. 

12. In the summer season they mastered sunshine. 
They lighted fires in all directions. Standing in their midst 
they performed sacrifice with great devotion for the attain- 
ment of success. 

13. They lay unconscious in the blazing sunshine. 
During the rainy season, they fearlessly bore all the showers 
on their heads. 

14-15. In the autumn they controlled their hunger 
and thirst. All good foodstuffs, steady, wholesome, and viscid, 
fruits, roots and beverages they distributed among the hungry. 
They themselves remained like stones. 

16. In the early winter they remained on top of the 
mountain with fortitude, unsupported in any of the four 
quarters. 

17. In the late winter they stayed under water or wore 
wet dripping silken cloth or allowed themselves to be covered 
with dew drops. 

174. For the Mountain Meru, see Note 247 P. 310 and Note 64 
P. 623. 



18. They were not at all vexed or distressed thereby. 
They gradually increased the severity of their austerities. 
Thus the three excellent sons of Taraka performed penance 
with Brahma as the object of their worship. 

19. Maintaining strict severity in their austerities, the 
excellent Asuras made their bodies emaciated by their 
penance. 

20. Standing on the bare ground on a single foot, the 
strong Asuras performed the penance for a hundred years. 

21. Taking in only air and enduring excessive heat and 
distress, the terrible and wicked souls continued the penance 
for a thousand years. 

22. They remained standing on their heads for a 
thousand years. They remained standing with their arms 
lifted for hundred years. 

23. Thus they bore extreme distress in their tenacious 
evil intent. They remained alert day and night. 

24. O sage, thus many years elapsed even as they 
performed the penance. I think they had a virtuous dedica- 
tion of their souls in Brahma, these sons of Taraka. 

25. Satisfied by their penance, Brahma the supreme 
lord of the gods and Asuras, of great glory, appeared in 
front of them in order to grant them boons. 

26. He was accompanied by sages, gods and Asuras. 
The grandfather of all living beings spoke to them thus, 
appeasing them. 

Brahma said : — 

27. O great Asuras, I am now pleased with your 
penance. I shall grant you everything. Speak out the boons 
you wish to have. 

28. O enemies of the gods, tell me why you have 
been performing this penance. I am the bestower of the 
fruits of all sorts of penance. I am the creator of everything 
for ever. 

Sanatkumdra said: — 

29. On hearing' his words they bowed to the grand- 
father, with their palms joined in reverence and spoke to him 
revealing their mind's desire slowly. 



Rudrasartihitti 


805 


The Asuras said : — 

30. O lord of gods, if you are pleased, if boons are to 
be given to us, please grant us indestructibility at the hands 
of everyone, every living being. 

31. O lord of the universe, make us steady. Protect 
us from enemies. Let not old age, sickness and death 
befall us at any time. 

32. We wish to become free from old age and death. 
In the three worlds we shall subject all others to death. 

33. Of what avail are riches, vast earth, excellent 
cities, other sorts of vast enjoyments or big positions and 
power ? 

34. If one is to be swallowed by death in five days, 
O Brahma, everything else belonging to him is futile. This 
is our decisive thought. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

35. On hearing the words of those ascetic Asuras, 
Brahma replied to them after remembering Siva, his lord. 

Brahmd said : — 

36. O Asuras, there cannot be invariable indestructi- 
bility. Please desist from asking for it. Seek some other 
boon whatever you wish. 

37. O Asuras, a creature is born, dies and will be 
bom surely. But no one will be free from old age or death 
in this world. 

38. Except Siva the destroyer of Death, and Vi$nu 
all else are mortals. These two are the supervisee of virtue 
and evil and have manifest and unmanifest forms. 

39. If penance is performed for the harassment of the 
world, it shall be understood as gone. It is only a well- 
performed penance that can be fruitful. 

40. Ponder over this keenly, O faultless ones, desist 
from seeking immortality. Immortality is impossible for the 
gods and the Asuras. It is inaccessible. It cannot be 
warded off. 

41. Hence choose* a boon whereby you shall do some- 
thing equal to your own strength. 175 

175. The original of this translation is defective. 



806 


Sivapurdna 


Sanatkumara said : — 

42. On hearing the words of Brahma, they thought 
for a while and then replied to the grandfather of all the 
worlds. 

The Asui as said : — 

43. O lord, we have no mansion where we can stay 
happily although we are valorous and invincible to our 
enemies. 

44. Build and give us three wonderful cities richly 
endowed with wealth and unassailable even to the gods. 

45. O Preceptor of the universe, Lord of the worlds, 
by your grace we shall move about on the earth occupying 
these cities. 

46. Tarakaksa then said — “Let Visvakarma make a 
city which cannot be broken even by the gods. Let that 
golden city be mine”. 

47. Kamalaksa requested for a great silver city. 
The delighted Vidyunmali requested for a steel-set magnetic 
city. 

48-50. We will join together during midday at the 
time of Abhijit when the moon shall be in the constellation 
Pusya, when the dark clouds Puskara and Avarta 170 shower in 
plenty without being visible in the firmament with sporting 
clouds, at the end of a thousand years. These cities shall 
never join otherwise. 

51-53. O Brahma, when these cities are joined together, 
the lord who embodies all the gods sitting in a wonderful 
chariot containing all necessary adjuncts, may, in his dis- 
torted sport, discharge a wonderful single arrow and pierce 
our cities. Lord Siva is free from enmity with us. He is 
worthy of our worship and respect. How can he burn us ? 
This is what we think in our minds. A person like him is 
difficult to get in the world. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

54. On hearing their words, Brahma, the grandfather 

176. Puskara and Avarta : A class o clouds that rain in torrents at 
the dissolution of the world. 



Rudrasarhhitd 807 

and creator of the worlds j-emembeired Siva and told them 
“Let it be so.” 

55. He ordered Maya 177 — “O Maya, build three cities, 
one of gold, another of silver and a third one of steel.” 

56. After ordering directly like this, Brahma returned 
to his abode in heaven even as the sons of Taraka were 
watching. 

57-58. Then the intelligent Maya built the cities by 
means of his penance : the golden one for Tarakak$a, the 
silver one for Kamalaksa and the steel one for Vidyunmali. 
The three fortlike excellent cities were in order in heaven, 
sky and on the earth. 

59. After building the three cities for the Asuras, Maya 
established them there desiring their welfare. 

60. Entering the three cities thus, the sons of Taraka, 
of great strength and valour experienced all enjoyments. 

61. They had many Kalpa trees 178 there. Elephants 
and horses were in plenty. There were many palaces set 
with gems. 

62. Aerial chariots shining like the solar sphere, set 
with Padmaraga stones, moving in all directions looking like 
moonshine illuminated the cities. 

63-64. There were many palaces, divine minarets re- 
sembling the summits of the mount Kailasa. Celestial dam- 
sels, Gandharvas, Siddhas, and Caranas were also there. 
There were temples of Rudra. In every house, people 
performed the rites of Agnihotra. There were excellent brah- 
mins wellversed in sacred texts aud devoted to Siva always. 

65-66. The cities were embellished with many trees in 
the well-laid out gardens and parks as if they had dropped from 
heaven. There were beautiful tanks, lakes, wells, rivers and 
huge ponds. They were very beautiful with plenty of fruit- 
bearing trees. 

67. The cities were decorated with camps and tents of 
various sizes and chariots with beautiful horses. There were 
herds of elephants in rut too. 

68. There were time-indicators, playgrounds and diff- 
erent halls for Vedic studies. 

177. Maya : an Asura artificer of the Daityas 
17U. Kalpadruma: It is one of the five trees oflndra’s Paradise fabled 
to fulfil all desires. 



69. There were ' persons of various type*— sinners, vir- 
tuous, pious, noble and those of good conduct too. 

70. The place was sanctified everywhere by chaste 
ladies engaged in serving their husbands and averse to evil 
practices. 

71. The cities contained heroic Asuras of great fortune 
accompanied by their wives, sons and brahmins well versed in 
the principles and practices of the Vedic and Smarta rites. 
They were strict adherents to their duties. 

72. People had broad chests and bull-like shoulders. 
Some were of peaceful nature and some of warlike tempera- 
ment. Some were calm and some furious. Some were hunch- 
backed. Some were dwarfish. 

73. They were protected by Maya. Some had the 
blue-lily petals. Their hair was curly and dark in hue. Maya 
had instructed them in the arts of warfare. 

74. The cities abounded in people engaged in terrific 
battles. There were many Asuras whose heroism was sancti- 
fied by the worship of Brahma and Siva. The Asuras resem- 
bled the sun, the Maruts and Mahendra. They were 
sturdy. 

75. Whatever sacred rites are mentioned in Sastras, 
Vedas and Puranas, as favourites of Siva, as also the deities, 
favourites of Siva, were found there. 

76. Thus the Asuras, sons of Taraka, after acquiring the 
boons, lived there subservient to Maya, a great devotee of 
Siva. 

77. Abandoning the other parts in the three worlds 
they entered the cities and ruled the kingdom following the 
principles of Siva. 

78. O sage, a long time elapsed even as they were eng- 
aged in meritorious activities and living happily ruling over 
the good kingdom. 



809 


CHAPTER TWO 

(The Prayer of the gods) 


Vy&sa said : — 

1. O son of Brahma, of great intellect, and most 
eloquent, please narrate. What happened after that ? How 
did the gods become happy ? 

Brahma said : — 

2. On hearing the words of Vyasa of immeasurable 
intellect, Sanatkumara spoke after remembering the lotus-like 
feet of Siva. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

3. Indra and other gods scorched by their brilliance 
and distressed consulted one another and sought refuge in 
Brahma. 

4. After bowing to and circumambulating Brahma, 
they narrated their grievances to him after awaiting the pro- 
per opportunity. 

The gods said : — 

5. O Brahma, the heaven-dwellers have been subjected 
to great distress by Maya the virtual ruler of the three cities, 
accompanied by the sons of Taraka. 

6. Hence, O Brahma, we are distressed and we seek 
refuge in you. Please plan out the way of their annihila- 
tion whereby we can be happy. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

7. Requested thus by the gods, BrahmS, the creator of 
the worlds laughed and replied to them all who were utterly 
frightened of Maya. 

Brahma said : — 

8. O gods, I tell you, do not be afraid at all of those 
Asuras. Siva will hit upon a good way of killing them. 



810 


Sxvapurdna 

9. The Asuras have flourished due to my favour. They 
do not deserve destruction at my hands. Their merit is bound 
to increase in the three cities 179 again. 

10. All of you gods including Indra pray to Siva. If 
the lord of all is pleased, he will carry out your task. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

1 1 . On hearing the words of Brahma, the distressed 
gods including Indra went to the place where the bull-ban- 
nered god Siva was staying. 

12. Devoutly bowing to Siva, the lord of the gods, with 
palms joined in reverence, all of them bent their shoulders 
and eulogised Siva, the benefactor of the worlds. 

The gods said : — 

13. Obeisance to the gold-wombed lord, the creator 
of everything. Obeisance to Thee, the sustainer, the omni- 
present and the omnipotent. 

14. Obeisance to Thee of destroyer’s form, the annihila- 
tor of living beings. Obeisance to Thee devoid of attributes, 
and of immeasurable splendour. 

15. Obeisance to Thee devoid of states, possessed of 
splendour and free from aberrations; obeisance to Thee of 
the soul of Great Elements; obeisance to the unsullied, the 
great Atman. 

16. Obeisance to Thee, the lord of all beings, the sus- 
tainer of great burden, the remover of thirst, to Thee whose 
form is devoid of enmity, to Thee of excessive splendour. 

1 7. Obeisance to Thee, the destroyer of the great forest 
in the form of great Asuras, like conflagration. Obeisance to 
the Trident-bearing lord who acts as the axe for the trees of 
Asuras. 

18. O great lord, obeisance to Thee, the destroyer of 
great Asuras; obeisance to Thee the lord of Parvati, O 
wielder of all weapons. 

19. O lord of Parvati, Obeisance to Thee, O great 
soul, O great lord. Obeisance to Thee, the blue-necked 
Rudra and of the form of Rudra. 


179. Tripura: See ^ote 173. P. 80a 



Rudrasarhhitd 


811 


20. Obeisance to Thee, knowable through Vedanta; 
Obeisance to Thee who art beyond the paths. Obeisance 
to Thee of the form of attributes, possessing attributes and 
also devoid of them. 

21. O great god, obeisance to Thee the delighter of 
the three worlds. Obeisance to Pradyumna, Aniruddha and 
Vasudeva (these being your manifestations). Obeisance to 
Thee. 

22. Obeisance to Thee, the lord Samkarsana. Obeisance 
to Thee the destroyer of Karhsa. Obeisance to Thee O 
Damodara, the pounder of Canura, 180 the partaker of poison. 

23. Obeisance to Thee, O lord, Hr$ike£a, Acyuta, 
Mr<Ja, Sankara, Adhoksaja, enemy of the Asuras, Gaja and 
Kama. Obeisance to you, O partaker of poison. 

24. Obeisance to Thee, O lord Narayana, devoted 
to Narayana, of the form of Narayana, oh ! one born of 
Narayana’s body. 

25. Obeisance to Thee of all forms, the destroyer 
of great hells, destroyer of sins. Obeisance to you, O bull- 
vehicled god. 

26. Obeisance to Thee of the form of time, moment etc. 
Obeisance to Thee who bestows strength on his devotees; 
obeisance to the multiformed; obeisance to the annihilator 
of the hosts of Asuras. 

27. Obeisance to the lord, conducive to the welfare of 
brahmins and cows. Obeisance to the thousand-formed, obei- 
sance to Thee of thousand organs. 

28. O Siva, obeisance to Thee of the form of virtue, to 
the Sattva, to the Atman of Sattva. Obeisance to thee whose 
form is knowable through the Vedas. Obeisance to thee, the 
beloved of the Vedas. 

29. Obeisance to Thee whose form is the Veda, obeisa- 
nce to the reciter of the Vedas. Obeisance to Thee who traver- 
sest the path of good conduct and who art approachable 
through the path of good conduct. 

30. Obeisance to Thee the glory-seated; to the Truth- 

180. CfiQura was a wrestler in Kamsa’s service. He was slain by 

Kn*a. 



812 Sivapwrdna 

ful t beloved of truth, to the truth. Obeisance to Thee know- 
able through the truth. 

31. Obeisance to Thee possessed of magic-power, obei- 
sance to the lord of magic; Obeisance to Thee (knowable 
through the Vedas), to Brahman, to the one born of Brahma. 

32. Obeisance to Thee, O lord, the penance, the bestower 
of the fruits of penance, obeisance to thee, worthy of eulogy, 
the eulogy, and to Thee whose mind is pleased with eulogy 
always. 

33. Obeisance to Thee delighted with vedic conduct, 
to the one fond of praiseworthy conduct; to the one who has 
fourfold forms and the forms of aquatic and terrestrial beings. 

34. O lord, the gods and all others, being excellent, 
are your excellences. Among the gods you are Indra; among 
the planets you are the sun. 

35. Among the worlds you are Satyaloka. Among the 
rivers you are the celestial river Gariga. Among the colours 
you are the white colour. Among the lakes you are the 
Manasa lake. 

36. Among the mountains you are the Himalaya moun- 
tain. Among the cows you are the Kamadhenu 181 . Among 
the oceans you are the milk ocean. Among the metals you 
are gold. 

37. Among the four castes you are the brahmin. O 
Siva, among men you are the king. Among holy centres of 
salvation you are Kasi. Among the sacred rivers you are the 
supreme sacred river. 

38. Among all stones, you are the crystal, O great god, 
among the flowers you are the lotus; among mountains you 
are Himavat. 

39. Among all activities you are the speech; among 
poets you are Bhargava. Among birds you are the eight-legged 
Sarabha. Among beasts of prey you are the lion. 

40. O bull-bannered deity, among rocks you are 
Salagrama; among the forms of worship you are Narmada 
Linga. 

41. Among animals, you are the bull NandiSvara, O 

1 8 1 . Kamadhenu, a mythical cow produced at the churning of the 
ocean, was appropriated by the sage Vasi?(ha. Her worship is said to ful- 
fil desires. 



RuJrasarhhitS 


813 


lord Siva. Among Vedic texts you are in the form of 
Upanisads; Among the sacrificers you are the cool-rayed moon. 

42. Among the burning ones, you are the fire, among 
the devotees of Siva, you are Visnu, among Puranas you are 
Bharata; among the letters of the alphabet you are the letter 
Ma 182 . 

43. Among the Bijamantras you are the Pranava; among 
the terrible ones you are poison; among the pervading ones 
you are the firmament; among the Atmans you are the 
supreme Atman. 

44. Among the sense-organs you are the mind; among 
the charitable gifts you are the gift of freedom from fear; 
among the sanctifying and life-giving agents you are consider- 
ed the waters. 

45. Among all acquisitions you are the acquisition of 
Sons; among those with velocity you are the wind; among 
the routine sacred rites you are the Sandhya worship. 

46. Among sacrifices you are the horse-sacrifice. Among 
the Yugas you are the Krta yuga; among the asterisms you 
are Pusya ; among the Tithis you are Amavasya. 

47. Among the seasons you are the spring; among holy 
occasions you are the Samkrama; among grasses you are the 
Ku£a grass; among gross trees you are the Banyan tree. 

48. Among the Yogas you are the Vyatipata; among 
creepers you are the Soma creeper; among intellectual 
activities you are the virtuous inclination, among intimate 
ones you are the wife. 

49. Among the pure activities of the aspirant, O 
great lord, you are Pranayama; among all Jyotirlirigas you 
are ViSveSvara. 

50. Among all kindred beings you are Dharma. In all 
stages of life you are Sannyasa. You are the supreme Liber- 
ation in all Vargas. Among Rudras you are NUalohita. 

51. Among all Adityas you are Vasudeva; among the 
monkeys you are Hanumat; among the sacrifices you are 
Japayajfta; among the weapon-bearers you are Rama: 

182. The letter ‘M’ is considered the best among the letters, as it 
represents the five requisites for Tantra worship viz: Madya(wine), m&ihsa 
(flesh) Matsya (fish) Mudra (mystical gesticulations) and Maithuna 
(sexual intercourse). These arc variously interpreted by the right and left 
hand worshippers of Sakti. 



52. Among the Gandharvas you are Gitraratha; among 
the Vasus you are certainly the fire; among the months you 
are the intercalary month ; among the holy rites you are the 
Caturdasi rite. 

53. Among all lordly elephants you are Airavata 188 ; 
among all Siddhas you are Kapila; among all serpents you are 
Ananta, among all Pitj-s you are Aryaman. 

54-55. You are Kala (Time) among those who calculate; 
among Asuras you are Bali. O lord of gods, of what avail 
is a detailed narration ? You preside over the entire universe 
and remain partially stationed within and partially without. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

56-57. Eulogising thus the bull-bannered, the trident- 
bearing lord Siva with various kinds of divine hymns, the 
gods replied thus relevant to the context. O sage, all of 
them including Indra and others were very much distressed. 
They were very shrewd in managing their selfish interests and 
so mentioned them to Siva with stooping shoulders and 
palms joined in reverence. 

The gods said : — 

58. O lord Siva, the gods including Indra have been 
defeated by the Asura accompanied by his brothers. O lord, 
all the gods have been defeated by the sons of Taraka. 

59. The three worlds have been brought under their 
sway. The excellent sages and the Siddhas have been 
destroyed. The entire universe has been exterminated by 
them. 

60. The terrible Asuras take the entire share of the 
sacrificial benefits to themselves. They have initiated evil 
activities. They have prevented the sages from performing 
their virtuous rites. 

61. Definitely the sons of Taraka cannot be killed by 
any living being. Hence, O Siva, they perform everything 
as they please. 

183. Air&vata: He is the elephant produced at the churning of the 
ocean and appropriated by the God Indra. He is the guardian deity who 
presides over the east and takes part in the defence and protection of the 
quarter. 



Rudrasarhhita 


815 


62. Let some policy be laid down for the protection 
of the universe lest the terrible Asuras, the denizens of the 
three cities, should destroy the world. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

63. On hearing these words of Indra and other 
heaven-dwellers who were expatiating on their distress, 
Siva spoke in return. 


CHAPTER THREE 

(The virtues of the Tripuras) 

Siva said : — 

1. A meritorious person is the presiding ruler of the 
Tripuras now. He who practises meritorious deeds should not 
be killed by sensible persons. 

2. O gods, I know the misery of the gods completely. 
It is great. Those Asuras are very strong. They cannot 
be killed by the gods or demons. 

3. The sons of Taraka and Maya are equally meri- 
torious. O sensible ones, they are invincible to all the 
citizens. 

4. How can I knowingly commit malicious deeds to 
my friends though I am hardy and powerful in battles? 
Even Brahma has said that there is a great sin attending 
on even casual malicious actions. 

5. There are ways of atonement and amends for a 
brahmin slayer, a wine addict, a thief or a person who 
violates sacred rites. But there is no expiation for ungrate- 
ful men 

6. Those Asuras are my devotees. O Gods, how can 
they be slain by us ? Let this aspect be thought over by you 
who know what is virtue. You must consider this virtuously. 

7. They should not be slain as long as they continue 
their devotion to me. Yet, this reason may very well be 
intimated to Visnu. 



Sanatkumdra said : — 

8. O sage, thus when they heard these words Indra 
and other gods immediately intimated this to Brahma in the 
first instance. 

9. Then, with Brahma at their head, the gods including 
Indra quickly went to Vaikuntha in all glory. 

10. On going there and seeing Vi§nu, the gods bowed 
to him in agitation, and with their palms joined in reverence 
they eulogised him with great devotion. 

11. They intimated to Visnu the powerful, the reasons 
for their misery, the earlier ones as well as the later. 

12. On hearing the distress of the gods as well as the 
vows observed by the Tripuras, Visnu spoke as follows. 

Visnu said : — 

13. This is true that where the eternal virtue reigns 
supreme, no misery raises its head like darkness when the 
sun is seen. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

14. On hearing these words the gods became misera- 
ble and dejected. They spoke to Visnu with their lotus-like 
faces depressed. 

The gods said : — 

15. How arc we to go about our activities. How can 
our misery be dispelled ? How can we be happy ? How are 
we to remain firm? 

16. As long as the Tripuras are alive, how can we 
observe virtuous activities? All the residents of the three 
cities give troubles to us. 

17. What else can we say to you? Either the anni- 
hilation of the Tripuras shall be made or the untimely des- 
truction of the gods shall be proceeded with. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

18. After saying this and lamenting frequently, the gods 
were in a fix and could neither stay nor leave the proximity 
of Visnu. 

19-21. On seeing them in that plight, distressed and 



Rudrasarhhitd 


817 


humiliated, Visnu thought within himself, “I am the bene- 
factor of the gods. But what can I do in this affair? 
The sons of Taraka are the devotees of Siva.” After 
thinking like this, he thought upon the Supreme Vi§nu, the 
lord of sacrifices, the primordial Purusa. 

22. Immediately on being thought upon by Vi?nu all 
the sacrifices came where Visnu was stationed. 

23. With palms joined in reverence they bowed to and 
eulogised Visnu, the lord of sacrifices and the primordial 
Purusa. 

24. The eternal lord Visnu saw the eternal sacrifices 
and told them looking at the gods too including Indra. 

Visnu said : — 

25. In order to destroy the three cities and to bring 
about prosperity in the three worlds, O gods perform the 
worship of lord Siva along with the lord of sacrifices. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

26. On hearing the words of Visnu, the intelligent 
lord of the gods and bowing to him lovingly, the gods eulogised 
the lord of sacrifices. 

27. O sage, eulogising thus, the gods worshipped the 
Sacrificial Being in accordance with the rules governing the 
same with the complete rites. 

28. Then from the sacrificial pit rose up thousands 
of Bhutas of huge size and armed with tridents, spears, iron 
clubs and other weapons. 

29-31. The gods saw thousands of Bhutasanghas armed 
with tridents and spears and possessing various weapons such 
as staffs, bows, stones, etc. They had various missiles to 
strike with. They were in different guises. They resembled 
the destructive fire and Rudra. They were on a par with 
the destructive Sun. When they bowed to him, and stood 
waiting in front, Visnu saw them. The glorious lord of 
sacrifices who carried out the behests of Rudra, spoke to 
them. 

32. Visnu said— “O Bhutas, listen to my statement. 
You are all very powerful and have risen up for fulfilling 



the task of the gods. All of you go immediately to the 
three cities. 

33. Go there, strike at, break and burn the three cities 
of the Asuras. O Bhutas, thereafter you can go away as 
you please for prosperity. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

34. On hearing the words of the lord, the hosts of 
Bhutas bowed to the lord of the gods and went to the three 
cities of the Asuras. 

35. Immediately after their entry into the cities they 
were reduced to ashes like moths in the fire. 

36. Those who escaped fled out of the cities and came 
grief-stricken to Visnu. 

37. On seeing them and hearing the incidents in detail, 
lord Visnu pondered over this. 

38. On realising that all the gods were distressed and 
dejected in the mind, he too was extremely grieved. 

39. He became much worried at the thought “How 
can I destroy the three cities of the Asuras, with force and 
carry out the task of the gods ?” 

40. The lord who had authoritatively laid down the 
rules of conduct according to the Vedas, said “There is no 
doubt in this that the virtuous ones cannot be destroyed by 
black magic. 

41. O good gods, these Asuras and the other residents 
of the three cities are virtuous. Hence they have become 
invincible. Not in any other manner. 

42. After perpetrating great sins they worship Siva 
and so they are freed of all sins even as the leaves of the 
lotus from water. 

43. O gods, thanks to the worship of Siva, their 
cherished desires are realised. Different means of enjoyment 
in the world are brought under their control. 

44. Hence these Asuras who are devoted to the phallic 
worship enjoy different kinds of pleasures and prosperity and 
salvation hereafter. 

45. Then putting obstacles in their activities of virtuous 
rites, by means of magic art I shall destroy the three cities 



Rudwathkitti 8 19 

of the Asuras quickly for accomplishing the task of the 
Asuras.” 

46. After thinking thus, lord Vi?pu set himself to the 
task of interfering with the sacred rites of the Asuras. 

47. As long as the worship of Siva is continued and 
as long as the pure activities are strictly adhered to, there 
is no question of their ruin at all. 

48. Hence such means shall be followed as will make 
Vedic Dharma disappear thence. Undoubtedly the Asuras 
will foresake their worship of the phallic emblem of Siva. 

49. Deciding thus, Visnu started ridiculing the Vedas 
for putting up obstacles in the virtuous activities of the 
Asuras. 

50. At the bidding of Siva, Visnu who was com- 
manded to protect the three worlds, and who renders help 
to the gods spoke to them. 

Vifnu said:— 

51. O gods, you go to your own abodes. Undoubtedly 
I shall carry on the task of the gods to the extent of my 
intellect. 

52. Strenuously I shall make them averse to Siva. 
Coming to know that they are devoid of devotion to him 
he will reduce them to ashes. 

Sanatkumara said: — 

53. O sage, accepting his behest with bent head, the 
gods and Brahma felt satisfied and with faith in their hearts 
returned to their abodes. 

54. Thereafter Visnu performed deeds conducive to 
the welfare of the gods. Listen to those excellent deeds 
destructive of all sins. 



CHAPTER FOUR 


(The Tripuras are initiated) 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

1. For causing obstacles in their virtuous activities, 
Vi?nu of great brilliance, created a Puru$a 184 born of 
himself. 

2. He had a shaven head, wore dirty clothes, held a 
woven wicker vessel in his hand and a roll of cotton in his 
hand which he shook at every step. 

3. His hands tucking at the cloth were weak. His face 
was pale and weak. In a faltering voice he was muttering 
“Dharma, Dharma.” 

4. He bowed to Vi?nu and stood in front of him. 
He spoke to Visnu with hands joined in reverence. 

5. “O laudable, revered one, please tell me what my 
names are and what my place shall be.** 

6. On hearing these auspicious words, Lord Visnu 
became delighted and spoke these words. 

Vi^nu said : — 

7. O intelligent one, born of me, you are certainly 
identical with me in form. Know why you have been 
created. I shall tell you. 

8. You are born of me. You can perform my task. 
You are my own. Certainly you will be worthy of worship 
always. 

9. Let your name be Arihat. You will have other 
auspicious names too. I shall assign to you a place after- 


184. According to the present context Visgu created a delusive teacher 
called Mayamohawho created a Mayasastra of sixteen lakhs of £lokas in 
Apabhramsa, preaching Jina Dharma for misguiding the Asuras. MSyamoha 
created four sorts of preachers for the propagation of Jina Dharma. He 
preached non-violence, forbade Srauta and Sm&rta rituals, discarded 
Variia&rama system, created an order for women that resulted in leaving 
their home and leading .the life of nuns. In some versions, the role is 
assigned to Bfhaspati, the pYeccptor of the Gods who in the guise of their 
preceptor £ukra deludes the Asuras. For details, see MSyamohaprakarana 
in Padma, Visnu, Linga, Matsya etc. 



Rudrasarhhitd 82 1 

wards. Now hear with reverence what is relevant to the 
context. 

10-11. O you who wield Maya, ceate a deceptive 
sacred text of sixteen hundred thousand verses, 186 contrary to 
Srutis and Smrtis wherein Vardas and A£ramas shall be 
eschewed. Let that holy text be in Apabhraxh£a lauguage. Let 
there be emphasis on actions. You shall strain yourself to 
extend it further. 

12. I shall bestow on you the ability to create it. 
Different kinds of magic arts shall be subservient to you.” 

13. On hearing the words of Visnu, the great soul, 
the Maya Puru$a bowed to and replied to Visnu. 

The shaven-head said : — 

14. O lord, command me quickly what I shall do. 
At your bidding, all activities shall be fruitful. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

15. Saying this he recited the main tenet in the decep- 
tive philosophy. “Heaven and hell are functioning here 
itself.” 

16. Remembering the lotus-like feet of Siva, Vi$nu 
told him again. “These Asuras, the residents of the three 
cities, shall be deluded. 

17. O intellegent one, they shall be initiated by you. 
They shall be taught strenuously. At my bidding you will 
incur no sin on that account. 

18. O ascetic, no doubt, Vedic and Smarta rites 
flourish and shine there. But these shall certainly be ex- 
ploded through this Vidya. 

19. O you with shaven head, you shall go there for 
destroying the residents of the three cities. Revealing the 
Tamasika rites, destroy the three cities. 

20. After that, O great one, you shall go to the desert 

185. The reading found in the printed editions of 

Sivapur&iia is incorrect. On the authority of Matsyapurfiija (Ch. 24) we 
have adopted the reading and translated accordingly. 



822 Siua/nir&na 

region and stay there carrying on your own duties and 
activities till the advent of the Kali age. 

21. When the Kali age begins let your Dharma be 
revealed. You shall then continue to do so by means of 
disciples and disciples’ disciples. 

22. At my bidding your cult shall certainly expand. 
Depending upon my permission and direction you will attain 
me as your goal.” 

23. At the bidding of the lord Siva transmitted 
through the thought process, Visnu, the powerful, com- 
manded him thus and vanished. 

24. Then the ascetic of shaven head acting in accor- 
dance with Visnu’s behest created four disciples of the like 
form as himself and taught them the deceptive cult. 

25. The four disciples had shaven heads and were of 
auspicious features. They bowed to Visnu, the great soul 
and stood waiting. 

26. O sage, the delighted Visnu too, who carries out 
the behests of Siva spoke to those four disciples. 

27. “Just as your preceptor you too will become 
blessed at my bidding. There is no doubt in this that you 
will attain good goal. 

28. The four disciples with shaven heads followed the 
heretic cult. They had the wicker vessel in their hands. 
They covered their mouths with a piece of cloth. 

29. They habitually wore dirty clothes. They did not 
talk much. Delightedly they used to speak “Dharma is the 
great gain, the true essence” and some similar words. 

30. They held a besom broom made of pieces of cloths. 
They used to walk step by step very slowly because they 
were afraid of injuring living beings. 

31. O sage, with great joy they bowed to the lord 
and stood in front of him. 

32. They were grasped by the hand by Vi?nu and 
formally entrusted to the preceptor. Their names too were 
announced by him particularly and lovingly. 

33. “Just as you, these too also belong to me. The 
initial prefix to their names shall be the word “Pujya” 
because they are worthy of respect. 



Rudrtisarfihitd 823 

34. Let the names Ft?i, Yati, Acarya, and Up&dhyaya 
also be well known appendages to you all. 

35. My names shall also be assumed by you. The 
auspicious name “Arihat” shall be considered destructive of 
sins. 

36. All activities conducive to the happiness of the 
worlds shall be performed by you. The goal of those who 
carry on activities favourable to the worlds shall become 
excellent.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

37. Then, bowing to Vi?nu who carried out the wishes 
of Siva, the deceptive sage went joyously to the three cities 
accompanied by his disciples. 

38. Urged by Visnu of great magic, that sage of 
great self-control entered the three cities and created illusion. 

39. Stationing himself in a garden at the outskirts of 
the city, accompanied by his disciples he set his magic in 
motion. That was powerful enough to fascinate even the 
expert magicians. 

40. O sage, his magic was ineffective in the three cities 
by virtue of Siva’s worship. Then the heretic sage became 
distressed. 

41. He mentally remembered and eulogised Viftiu 
many times, with an aching heart. He had been so dis- 
pirited and listless. 

42. On being remembered by him Vi$nu mentally 
thought of Siva. Receiving his behest by the process of 
thought forms he remembered Narada. 

43. Immediately after, Narada approached Vijnu. 
After bowing to him and eulogising him, he stood before 
Visnu with palms joined in reverence. 

44. Vi?nu, the foremost among the intelligent and who 
always carried out the tasks of the gods and who was 
engaged in rendering help to the worlds spoke to Narada 
then. 

45. “O dear, this is being mentioned to you at the 
bidding of Siva. Go to the three cities immediately. The 



sage has gone there already for deluding the residents of 
the cities.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

46. On hearing his words, Narada, the excellent sage 
went there quickly where the ascetic expert in magic was 
stationed. 

47. Narada, an expert in magic, at the bidding of 
the lord, an expert in the art of illusion, entered the three 
cities along with the deceptive sage, and got himself 
initiated. 

48. Then Narada approached the lord of the three 
cities. After the preliminary enquiries about his health and 
welfare he spoke to the king. 

Narada said : — 

49. A certain sage, very virtuous and excellent master 
of lores has arrived here. He possesses complete knowledge 
of the Vedic lore. 

50. Many cults have been observed by me but none 
of them is like his. Seeing the eternal virtue in this cult we 
have got ourselves initiated into it. 

51. O great king, O excellent Asuras, if you have any 
interest in that cult, you shall get yourself initiated into it. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

52. On hearing his words full of significance, the lord 
of the Asuras was deluded and exclaimed with surprise in 
his heart. 

53. “Since Narada has been initiated we too shall be 
initiated.” Resolving thus, the Asura approached the sage. 

54. On seeing his features, the Asura was deluded by 
his magic. After bowing to him be spoke thus. 

The Tripura ruler said : — 

55. O sage of pure mind, you shall perform my 
initiation. I shall become your disciple. True. It is un- 
doubtedly true. 

56. On hearing the frank words of the ruler of the 



Rudrasarhhitd 825 

Asuras the heretic sage, professing to be eternal, spoke 
emphatically. 

57. O excellent Asura, if you are prepared to act 
according to my behests, I shall initiate you, otherwise not, 
even if you strive for a number of times. 

58. On hearing these words the king was deluded by 
magic. With palms joined in reverence he immediately 
replied to the sage. 

The Asura said:— 

59. I shall carry out whatever command you are 
pleased to give. I will not transgress your orders. True. 
It is certainly true. 

Sanatkumara said:— 

60. On hearing the words of the Tripura-ruler, the 
excellent sage removed the cloth from his mouth and said. 

61. ‘‘0 lord of Asuras, take initiation in this most 
excellent of all cults. By this initiation you will become 
contented.” 

Sanatkumara said:— 

62. Saying thus, the deceptive sage immediately per* 
formed the initiation of the ruler of the Asuras, in accordance 
with his cult observing all rules. 

63. O sage, when the ruler of the Asuras was initiated 
along with his brothers, the residents of the three cities too 
got themselves initiated*. 

64. 0 sage, the entire Tripuras were filled with the 
line of disciples of the sage, an expert in great art of 
illusion. 



826 


Sivapurdria 


CHAPTER FIVE 

( The Tripur as an fascinated) 


Vydsa said : — 

1. When the ruler of the Asuras was initiated after 
being deluded by the deceptive sage expert in the magic 
art what did the sage say? What did the ruler of the 
Asuras do? 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

2. After offering him initiation, the ascetic Arihan 
served by his disciples, Narada and others, spoke to the ruler 
of the Asuras. 

Arihan said : — 

3. O ruler of the Asuras, listen to my statement, 
pregnant with wisdom. It is the essence of the Vedanta 
and bears high esoteric importance. 

4. The entire universe is eternal. It has no creator 
nor it is an object of creation. It evolves itself and gets 
annihilated by itself. 

5. There are many bodies from Brahma down to a 
blade of grass. They themselves are the gods for them. 
There is no other God. 

6. What we mean by Brahma, Visnu and Rudra are 
only the names of embodied beings just like my name 
Arihan etc. 

7. Just as our bodies perish when their time arrives, 
so also the bodies of all beings from Brahma to a mosquito 
perish when their time arrives. 

8. When we consider, none of these bodies is superior 
to any other since in respect of taking food, copulation, sleep 
and fear these are invariably the same everywhere. 

9. Taking in water and foodstuffs to the required 
quantity, all living beings derive a kindred satisfaction, neither 
more nor less. 

10. After drinking water we are gladly relieved of thirst. 
Others too are equally relieved. There is no deviation this 
way or that. 



Rudrasartihitd 


827 


11. There may be a thousand damsels of exquisite 
beauty and comely features. But only one of them can be 
used at a time for the sexual intercourse. 

12. Let there be hundreds of horses, of different varieties. 
But for the purpose of riding only one can be used on one 
occasion. 

13. The pleasure that one derives in that sleep on a 
cushioned couch is the same that one derives by sleeping on 
the bare ground. 

14. Just as we, the embodied beings, are afraid of 
death so also the bodies from Brahma to the worm are afraid 
of death. 

15. If we analyse with a keen intellect, all the embodied 
being are equal. After coming to this conclusion it does not 
behove anyone to injure anyone else. 

16. There is no other virtue equal to the mercy shown 
to living beings. Hence all men shall strenuously practise acts 
of mercy to living beings. 

17. If a single living being is protected it amounts to 
the protection of the three worlds. If that is killed it amounts 
to the killing of all others. Hence it is our duty to protect 
and abstain from killing others. 

18. Non-violence is the greatest virtue. Affliction of 
others is a great sin. Salvation is defined as non-dependence 
on others. Eating the food of our choice is heavenly bliss. 

19. This has been mentioned by the earlier sages with 
good justification to be sure. Hence no violence should be 
indulged in by men who are afraid of hell. 

20. There is no sin equal to violence in the three 
worlds, consisting of the mobile and immobile. A person who 
afflicts others violently goes to hell. A non-violent man goes 
to heaven. 

21. There are many kinds of charitable gifts. Of what 
avail are these which give very insignificant results. There 
is no other gift equal to that of protection. 

22. Four types of gifts have been mentioned by the 
great sages for the welfare of the people here and hereafter 
as a result of discussions and deliberations of various sacred 
texts. 

23. Protection shall be granted to the frightened, 



828 Sivapurlfya 

medicine to the sick, learning to the student and food to the 
hungry. 

24. All sorts of charitable gifts recommended by the 
sages do not merit even a sixteenth part of the gift of protect- 
ion to a living being. 

25. The strength that one derives by the use of gems 
mantras, and herbs is of inconceivable influence. But it is 
practised strenuously only for earning money. 

26. The hoarding and amassing of vast wealth is useful 
only for the propitiation of twelve organs of senses. Of what 
avail is the propitiation of other things ? 

27. The twelve organs of senses are the five organs of 
activity and the five organs of knowledge together with the 
mind and intellect. 

28. Living beings have heaven and bell here itself and 
not anywhere else. Happiness is heaven and misery is hell. 

29. If the body is cast off in the midst of enjoyment 
thatis the greatest liberation conceived by the philosophers, 

30. When pain comes to an end along with its imp- 
ressions, If ignorance too dies away, it is conceived as the 
greatest salvation by the philosophers. 

31. Supporters and exponents of the Vedas accept this 
as an authoritative Vedic text that no living being shall be 
injured. Violence is not justifiable. 

32. The Vedic text encouraging slaughter of animals can- 
not be held authoritative by the learned. To say that violence 
is allowed in Agni stoma is an erroneous view of the wicked. 

33. It is surprising that heaven is sought by cutting 
off trees, slaughtering animals, making a muddy mess with 
blood and by burning gingelly seeds and ghee. 

34. Narrating his opinions to the leader of the 
Tripuras, the ascetic addressed the citizens with great zeal. 

35. He referred to things which gave credence, being 
visible, which brought happiness to the body, which are in- 
dicated in Buddhistic theology and which are consistent with 
the Vedic passages. 

36. It is said in the Vedas that Bliss is an aspect of 
the Brahman. That shall be taken as it is. It is false to 
bring in various alternatives. 

37. One shall seek and enjoy happiness as long as the 



Rudrasarhhitd 829 

body is hale and hearty, as long as the sense-organs are not 
impaired and as long as the old age is far off. 

38. When there is sickness, impairment of the sense- 
organs and old age how can one derive happiness ? Hence 
those who seek happiness shall be prepared to give away even 
the body. 

39. The Earth is burdened by those who are not ready 
to please and satisfy the suppliant. It is not burdened by 
oceans, mountains and trees. 

40. The body is ready to go in a trice, and hoarded 
things are attended with the risk of dwindling down. Realis- 
ing this a sensible man shall see to the pleasure of his body. 

41. It is mentioned in the Vedas that this body is 
going to constitute the breakfast for dogs, crows and worms. 
The body has its ultimate end in being reduced to ashes. 

42. It is unnecessary to divide the people into differ- 
ent castes. When all are men who is superior and who is 
inferior ? 

43. Old men say that creation began with Brahma. He 
begot two sons the famous Daksa and Marlci. 

44. Kasyapa, the son of Marlci married thirteen of 
the sweet-eyed daughters of Daksa, they say, in accordance 
with righteous path. 

45. But people of modern times whose intelligence and 
valour are but a modicum unnecessarily wrangle over the 
fact whether this is proper or improper. 

46. Some of the ancestors thought that the four castes 
are born of mouth, arms, thighs etc. of Brahma. 186 But when 
we consider, this does not fit in properly. 

47. How can sons born of the same body or from the 
same body be of four different castes ? 

48. Hence the divisions of castes and outcastes do not 
appear to be sound. Hence no difference between man and 
man should be entertained. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

49. O sage, addressing the lord of the Asuras and the 

1 86. It refers to the Vedic and Puranic classification of society 
into four Varnas, viz. Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya and Siidra, said to have 
emanated from the mouth, arms, thighs and feet of thy creator. 



citizens thus, the sage with his disciples spoiled the Vedic rites 
in a determined manner. 

50. He then criticised the womanly virtues of chastity 
and manly virtues of continence etc. 

51. Similarly he attacked and repudiated the divine 
rites, Sraddhika rites, sacrificial rites and holy observances 
and festivals, pilgrimages and anniversaries. 

52. Worship of Siva, propitiation of his phallic form, 
adoration of Visnu, Sun, GaneSa and other deities in accor- 
dance with the sacred texts were repudiated by him. 

53. The heretic sage, an expert in wielding magic art, 
foremost among the deceptive, criticised the ceremonial ablu- 
tions and charitable gifts that are made on auspicious 
occasions. 

54. O foremost among brahmins, why shall I dilate 
upon this topic ? Suffice it to say that in the three cities 
every type of Vedic rites was completely stopped by that 
deceptive heretic sage. 

55. The women of^ the three cities who were hitherto 
devotedly attached to their husbands were deluded and mis- 
guided and they abandoned their noble inclinations to serve 
their husbands. 

56. The fascinated men practised rites of seduction and 
winning over and made their artifices fruitful in gaining 
other men’s wives. 

57. The attendant maids in the harems, the princes, 
the citizens and the ladies were perfectly enchanted by him. 

58. Thus when the citizens became averse to virtuous 
rites and actions, evil reigned supreme. 

59. At the bidding of lord Visnu, his magic art and 
evil fortune visited the three cities. 

60. The glory that they had acquired by the boon of 
Brahma, the lord of the gods, went out forsaking them, at the 
behest of Brahma. 

61. Blessing them with the utter delusion of their 
intellect, perpetrated by the illusion of Vi$nu, Narada ^be- 
came contented. 

62. Though Narada and the heretic sage had been in 
that guise for long, they were not defiled, thanks to the 
benediction of lord Siva. 



Rudrasatkhitd 


831 


63. As Siva willed, O sage, the capacity of the ruler of 
the Asuras became stunted and thwarted as also of his bro- 
thers and Maya. 


CHAPTER SIX 

( Prayer to Siva) 


Vyasa said : — 

1. When the ruler of the Asuras, his brothers and the 
citizens were thus deluded, O lord Sanatkumara, what hap- 
pened ? Please mention everything. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

2-3. When the Asuras had become so, when they had 
abandoned the worship of Siva, when the virtuous rites of 
chaste women came to an end and evil conduct came to 
stay, Visnu was apparently contented. Accompanied by the 
gods, Visnu went to Kailasa in order to intimate their activities 
to Siva. 

4-5. Visnu, the gods, Brahma and others stood near 
him and with great concentration they meditated on him, 
Visnu and Brahma eulogised the omniscient Siva with pleas- 
ing words. 

Visnu said : — 

6. “Obeisance to you, great lord, the great soul, 
Narayana, Rudra and Brahma, obeisance to you in the form 
of Brahman.” 

7. After eulogising lord Siva thus and prostrating at 
length, he repeated the mantra of Daksinamurti Rudra. 

8-9. He repeated the mantra fifteen million times 
standing in water and concentrating his mind on him. Lord 
Visnu meditated on the great lord Siva. In the meantime, 
the gods too eulogised him with devotion. 

The gods said : — 

10. Obeisance to you, the soul of all, obeisance to Siva 



832 Sivapur&pa 

the remover of distress, obeisance to the blue- necked Rudra, 
obeisance to the knowledge-formed Siva of great mind. 

11. You are our ultimate goal for ever. You are the 
remover of all adversities. O destroyer of the enemies of the 
gods, you alone are to be respected by us always. 

12. You are the beginning. You are the primordial 
being. You are self-bliss. You are the everlasting lord. You 
are the lord of the universe, the direct creator of Prakrti and 
Purusa. 

13. You alone are the creator, sustainer and the anni- 
hilator of the worlds. Assuming the Gunas of Rajas, Sattva, 
and Tamas you are Brahma, Visnu and Siva. 

14. In this universe, you enable people to cross the 
ocean of Existence. You are the undecaying lord of all. You 
are the granter of boons. You are the subject and not the 
object of speech and contents. 

15. You shall be requested for salvation by the Yogins, 
the formost among those who know the theory of Yoga. You 
are stationed inside the lotus like heart of the Yogins. 

16. The Vedas and the saintly men speak of you as 
the supreme Brahman. You are a heaped mass of splendour 
and greater than the greatest. They call you the great prin- 
ciple. 

17. What they call the great soul in the universe, O 
lord, are you yourself, O Siva soul of all, ruler of the three 
worlds. 

18. Whatever is seen, heard or eulogised, whatever is 
being realised, O preceptor of the universe, are you alone. 
They call you minuter than the atom and greater than the 
greatest. 

19. I bow to you everywhere, you who have hands, 
legs, eyes, heads, mouths, ears and noses everywhere. 

20. I bow to you everywhere, you who are omniscient 
who pervade everything, you who are unveiled as the lord of 
all, you who are omniformed and odd-eyed. 

21. I bow to you everywhere who are the lord of all, 
who preside over the worlds, who are the excellent Satya and 
Siva and who have the refulgence of innumerable suns. 

22. I bow to you everywhere, you the lord of the uni- 



RudrasarhhttS 833 

verse devoid of beginning and end, the lord of the twenty six 
Tattvas 187 and the activiser of everything. 

23. I bow to you everywhere you the activiser of the 
Prakrti, the great grandfather of everyone, the lord, the 
body of everyone. 

24. The Srutis and those who know the essence of 
Srutis speak of you thus. You are the abode of all, the self- 
born and the knower of the essence of Srutis. 

25. The various living beings created by you and to be 
created in future are invisible to us. The gods, the Asuras, 
the brahmins, nay, the mobile and immobile beings eulogise 
you alone. 

26. O Siva, dear to the gods, save us, the gods who 
have no other go, by killing all the Asuras instantaneously. 
We are practically destroyed by the Tripuras. 

27. O lord Siva, they are now deluded by your magic. 
O lord, they have gone astray from the virtuous path thro- 
ugh the expedient taught by Visnu. 

28. O lord, favourably disposed towards your devotees, 
those Asuras have resorted to Buddha’s religion and philoso- 
phy, thanks to our good fortune and hence they have esche- 
wed all Vedic sacred rites. 

29. You have always been the only one carrying out 
the task of the gods and the bestower of refuge. We have 
sought refuge in you. Please do as you desire. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

30. After eulogising lord Siva thus, the distressed gods 
stood in front of him with palms joined in reverence and kneel- 
ing low. 


187. Substitute for I The latter 

reading which is found in most of the printed editions of Sivapurana is in- 
correct. Cf. Lingapurana : x. 71. 109. 

According to the present text, the intellect, ego, mind, 10 sensei 
5 gross and 5 subtle elements, the invisible primordial nature (Pradh&na) 
the individual soul (Jlva).the transcendent God (Isvara) constitute a 
group of twenty-six categories wherein JIva is the enjoyer of the fruits 
and I & vara is the spectator of the working of Prakrti. But there is another 
twentyseventh category named Siva or Sadasiva, the highest divine being 

(TTRTOTT:) who alone is capable of bestowing grace upon his devotees. 



834 


31. Eulogised thus by Indra and others and by the 
repetition of Japas by Vi$nu, the delighted lord came there 
seated on his bull. 

32. Getting down from Nandi£a and embracing Vi?nu, 
lord Siva delighted in his mind cast his benign look on all 
with his hand resting on Nandin. 

33. Casting a sympathetic glance on the gods, the 
delighted Siva, lord of Parvatl, spoke to Visnu in a majestic 
tone. 

Siva said : — 

34. “O lord of gods, all the intentions of the gods have 
been understood by me now. The power of Visnu*s magic 
and that of the intelligent Narada has been known. 

35. O most excellent of the gods, there is no doubt in 
this that I will destroy the three cities of the Asuras if they 
persist in indulging in evil activities. 

36. But the great Asuras are my firm devotees. They 
shall be killed only by me, for they have been forced to aban- 
don their excellent virtue under false persuasion. 

37. Let Visnu or any one else slay them now that they 
have' been made to abandon their Dharma. The Asuras of 
the three cities have become devoid of devotion to me.” 

38. O great sage, on hearing these words of Siva, all 
the heaven-dwellers and Visnu became dispirited. 

39. On seeing the gods and Visnu sitting cheerless, 
Brahma, the creator of the worlds spoke to Siva with palms 
joined in reverence. 

Brahma said : — 

40. There is no sin in this, since you are the foremost 
among those who know the Yogic theory; you are the great 
lord, the great Brahman and the saviour of gods and sages 
always. 

41. It is at your own bidding that they have been 
deluded. You induced them to be deluded. Although the 
Asuras have forsaken their duties and your worship, they can- 
not be killed by others. 

42. Hence, O great lord, the saviour of the lives of 



Rudrasarhhita 835 

the gods and the sages, the Mlecchas 188 shall be killed by 
you for the protection of the good. 

43. As it is the duty of a king, you will not be sinning 
by their destruction. Hence, the good people, brahmins etc 
shall be saved and the thorns uprooted. 

44. Even an ordinary king would do so if he cares to 
maintain his sway. You have the suzerainty of all the worlds. 
Hence, tarry not to protect us. 

45. Great sages, Indra, sacrifices, Vedas, all the Sastras, 
Visnu and even I — all these depend on you, O lord of gods. 

46. O lord, you are the emperor of all deities, the 
lord of all. Visnu and the entire universe constitute your 
retinue. 

47. Visnu is your heir-apparent, O unborn one, I, 
Brahma, am your priest and Sukra who carries out your 
behests is the Royal officer. 

48. The other gods too, O lord, are subjects to your 
control. They continue to perform their own duties. True. 
It is undoubtedly true. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

49. On hearing the words of Brahma, Siva, the 
delighted lord of the gods replied to Brahma. 

Siva said : — 

50. O Brahma, if I am to be proclaimed the emperor 
of the gods, I do not have the paraphernalia characteristic of 
my lordship. 

51. I do not have a divine chariot and a divine chario- 
teer. I do not possess bows and arrows which accord victory 
in a battle. 

52. If there had been a chariot I could have sat in it 
and with bow and arrows I could have killed even powerful 
Asuras, with a resolute determination. 

Sanatakumara said : — 

53. On hearing these words of the lord, the gods 


i lj(l. Mlecchas arc represented as violent, carnivorous, torturous, non- 
Aryan wild tiibcs who caused lerroi in the social life of the country. 



836 Sioapur&Qa 

including Brahma, Indra and Visnu were delighted. After 
bowing to him they spoke to lord Siva. 

The gods said : — 

54. O lord of the gods, O great god, we shall con- 
stitute those paraphernalia — chariot etc. O lord, we are ready 
for the battle. 

55. After saying so jointly after realising Siva’s wish 
they, the delighted gods, severally told him so, with palms 
joined in reverence. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

( The gods pray) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1 . On hearing the words of the gods and others, Siva 
accepted the proposal. The lord is worthy of being sought re- 
fuge and is also favourably disposed to his devotees. 

2. O sage, in the meantime the goddess Parvatl arrived 
there with the two sons where Siva was in conversation with 
the gods. 

3. On seeing Parvatl come there, Visnu and others 
were surprised but without agitation they bowed to her in 
great humility. 

4. O sage, they shouted cries of “Victory”. But un- 
able to know the cause of her arrival, they remained silent. 

5. On being eulogised by the gods, the goddess Parvatl 
full of wonderful enthusiasm spoke lovingly to her lord, an 
expert in different kinds of sports. 

The goddess said : — 

6. “O lord, see the sportive six-faced 189 Karttikeya, 

189. Karttikeya is called a six-faced deity f° r according 

to the legend K&rttikeya when born was fostered by the six Krttik&s who 
offered their six breasts to him, so he became six-headed. 



Rudrasarhhitd 837 

refulgent like the sun our excellent son embellished by excel* 
lent ornaments.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

7. Thus addressed by the mother of the worlds with 
pleasing words, Lord Siva was never satiated in drinking 
nectar of the beauty of Skanda’s face. 

8. He recollected the Asuras who had come (to fight 
and) pounded by his splendrous valour. Embracing and 
kissing Skanda on the head lord Siva rejoiced much. 

9. Then the mother of the universe stayed there for a 
while and held conversation with the lord. Afterwards the 
goddess, an expert in different kinds of sports stood up. 

10. Then Siva of good sports entered his apartment 
accompanied by Nandin and Parvati. He was then saluted 
by all the gods. 

11. O sage, all the gods dispirited and worried stood 
on either side of the doorway of mansion of Siva, the 
intelligent lord of the gods. 

12. They began to mutter "What shall we do ? Where 
shall we go? Who will make us happy? Everything has 
happened with a "but.” We are doomed.” 

13. Indra and others looked at one another’s face. 
They were much agitated. They spoke in faltering words. 
They cursed their fate. 

14. Some gods said "We are sinners.” Others said 
"We are unfortunate.” Still others said "The great Asuras 
are very fortunate.” 

15. In the meantime on hearing their multifarious 
voices, Kumbhodara 190 of excessive refulgence beat the gods 
with a baton. 

16. The terrified gods shouting "Ha Ha” fled from 
there. The sages faltered and fell on the ground. There 
was excitement and great confusion. 

17. Unnerved and languid, Indra crawlfed on his 
knees. The celestial sages dropped to the ground. 

18. The excessively agitated sages and gods gathered 

190. Kilid&sa mentions Kumbhodara as an attendant of Siva. Of. 
Raghu. ii. 35. 



838 Sioapur&na 

together and approached Brahma and Vignu of friendly 
tamperament. 

19. The sages Kasyapa and others said to Vi§nu who 
removes the fear of all the worlds “O this is due to our 
ill luck.” 

20. The other brahmins said — “Our task is not com- 
pleted due to our ill luck.” Still others who were greatly 
surprised said — “How did this obstacle happen ?” 

21. O sage, on hearing these words of Katyapa and 
others, Visnu consoled the sages and the gods and spoke thus. 

Visnu said : — 

22. O gods, O sages, you listen to my words with 
attention. Why are you distressed ? Eschew your sorrows. 

23. O gods ponder over this. This propitiation of 
the great is not an easy task. It is heard that there is great 
difficulty at first in propitiating the great. The lord will 
certainly be pleased after coming to know of your resolute 
nature. 

24. Let this be pondered over well by all of you, how 
can lord Siva, the presiding deity of the Ganas be made 
favourable immediately. 

25-26. O scholars, the following mantra shall be re- 
peated — Utter the syllable Omkara first, then repeat the word 
Namah (obeisance) . Then say Sivaya ( to Siva) . Then 
repeat Subham” twice and “Kuru” twice. Afterwards say 
“Sivaya Namah Om.” 191 

27. If you repeat this mantra a crore times thinking of 
Siva, Siva will carry out the task. 

28. O sage, when this was mentioned by Visnu the 
powerful, the gods began to propitiate Siva. 

29. For the fulfilment of the task of the gods and the 
sages, Visnu and Brahma, with minds fixed in Siva performed 
the Japa. 

30. O excellent sage, they stood there steady and re- 
peated the mantra a crore times uttering the name “Siva” 
several times. 

igi. The formula runs as follows : aff 5^: 

ftrera TO 3ff 1 



Rudra&arhhitd 839 

31. In the meantime Siva came into direct view assu- 
ming his real form and spoke. 

Lord Siva said : — 

32. O Visnu, O Brahma, O gods and O sages of aus- 
picious rites, I am delighted by your Japa. Speak out the 
desired boon. 

The gods said : — 

33. O Siva, lord of the gods, lord of the universe, if 
you are pleased, realising that the gods are unnerved, let the 
Tripuras be destroyed. 

34. O lord Siva, O merciful one, O kinsman of the 
distressed, save us. We, gods, have always been saved from 
adversities by you alone. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

35. O brahmin, on hearing these words uttered by 
them including Visnu and Brahma, lord Siva laughed to him- 
self and spoke again. 

Lord Siva said : — 

36. Visnu, O Brahma, O gods. O sages all of you 
listen to my words with attention considering that the three 
cities have been already destroyed. 

37. Hence make arrangements for the chariot, chario- 
teer, divine bow and excellent arrows as agreed to by you all. 
Do not delay. 

38. O Brahma, O Visnu, you are the lord of the three 
worlds, to be sure. Hence provide me with the parapher- 
nalia of an emperor. 

39. You too had been entrusted with the tasks of 
creation and sustenance. You shall make ail efforts, consider- 
ing the destruction of the three cities an act of help to the 
gods. 

40. This mantra is highly meritorious and 7 auspicious. 
It generates the pleasure of the gods. It yields both worlds 
by enjoyment and salvation, confers cherished desires and 
brings about the happiness of the devotees of Siva. 

41. It is conducive to blessedness, fame, longevity to 



Sivapur&Qa 

those who seek heaven. Those who are free from desires 
derive the benefit of salvation. 

42. The man who repeats this mantra in purity, hears 
or narrates this to anyone, shall attain all desires. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

43. On hearing these words of Siva, the great Atman, 
the gods derived more pleasure than Visnu and Brahma. 

44. At his bidding, ViSvakarman made a splendid 
chariot of good features, consisting of all the gods, for the 
welfare of the people. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

{The detailed description of the chariot etc) 

Vy&sa said : — 

1. O Sanatkumara, of good intellect, O omniscient 
one, O foremost among the devotees of Siva, this wonderful 
story of lord Siva has been narrated to us. 

2. Now please mention the structure of the chariot 192 
which consisted of all the gods and which had been made by 
the intelligent Visvakarman. 

SUt a said : — 

3. On hearing these words of Vyasa, Sanatkumara the 
great sage remembered the lotus-like feet of Siva and spoke 
thus. 


Sanatkumdra said : — 

4. O sage Vyasa, of great intellect, listen to the des- 
cription of the structure of the chariot etc which I shall give 
to the extent of my intellect after remembering the lotus-like 
feet of Siva. 

5. The divine chariot of lord Siva consisting of all the 
worlds was built by Visvakarman with devoted effort. 

192. The present account of the cosmic chariot made for Siva tallies 
with that in the Matsya Purina (chapter 133). 



Rudrasathhitd 


841 


6. It was appreciated by all. It was golden in colour 
and all the elements had gone into its making. The right 
wheel was the sun and the left wheel was the moon. 

7-8. The right wheel had twelve spokes. O great brah- 
min, the twelve Adityas presided over them. The left wheel 
had sixteen spokes. O you of excellent rites, the sixteen 
spokes of the left side wheel consisted of the sixteen digits of 
the moon. All the astcrism? embellished the left side. 

9. The six seasons constituted the rims of the wheels 
of the chariot, O great Brahmin. The Puskara of the chariot 
was the sky. The inner side of the chariot was Mandara. 

10. The rising and the setting mountains constituted 
the poleshafts. Mahameru was the support and the Ke$ara 
mountains the sharp sides. 

11. The year constituted its velocity. The two Ayanas 
northern and southern constituted the junctions of the wheels 
and axles. The Muhurtas constituted the joints and the Kalas 
the pins of the yoke. 

12. The division of time Kastha constituted the nose 
of the chariot and the Ksanas the axle-shaft. The Nimesas 
constituted the bottom of the carriage and the minutest divi- 
sions of time constituted the poles. 

13. The firmament constituted the fender of the chariot; 
Heaven and salvation the flag staffs; Abhramu and Kamadh- 
enu constituted its harrows at the end of the shafts. 

14. The unmanifest principle formed their shaft and 
cosmic intellect the chariot’s reeds. The cosmic Ego cosmic 
corners and elements its strength. 

15. O excellent sage, the cosmic sense-organs constituted 
the embellishments of this chariot on all sides. Faith was 
its movements. 

16. The six Vedangas were its ornaments. O great 
ones of good rites, the Puranas, Nyaya, Mimamsa and Dharma 
Sastras constituted the side trinkets. 

17. The forceful and excellent mantras with their 
syllables and feet, of all characteristic features and the Stages 
in life constituted the tinkling bells. 

18. Ananta embellished with thousand hoods constituted 
its fittings and the main and subsidiary quarters, the pedestals 
of the chariot. 



842 


19. The clouds Pu§kara and others constituted the gem- 
studded banners of glowing colours. The four oceans are 
remembered as the bullocks of the chariot. 

20. Ganga and other rivers shining in excellent female 
forms and decorated in all ornaments held the Camaras in 
their hands. 

21. Taking up their places in the different parts of the 
chariot, they brightened it up. The seven courses of the 
wind Avaha 19 * 1 etc. constituted the excellent steps of gold 
leading the chariot. 

22. The Lokaloka mountain 184 formed its side steps. The 
lake manasa etc. constituted its brilliant outer and oblique 
steps. 

23. The Varsa mountains constituted the cords and 
chains all round the chariot. All the residents of the region 
Tala constituted the bottem surface of the chariot. 

24. Lord Brahma was the charioteer, the gods were 
holders of the bridle. Pranava the Vedic divinity constituted 
the long whip of Brahma. 

25. The syllable A constituted the great umbrella, 
Mandara the side staff. The lord of mountains became his 
bow and the lord of serpents the bowstring. 

26. Goddess Sarasvatl in the form of the Vedas con- 
stituted the bells of the bow. The brilliant Visnu became the 
arrow and Agni the spear-head. 

27. O sage, the four Vedas are said to be his horses. 
The remaining placets became their embellishments. 

28. His army came up from water. The winds were 
his feathers, wings etc. Vyasa and other sages were the 
drivers of the vehicle. 

29. O great sage, why should I dilate. I shall succin- 
ctly say. Everything in the world found a place in the 
chariot. 

>93- w*?, sraf, gar?, fa*?, *fa*?, to*? arc 

the seven bands of air assigned to the atmospheric region between 
wsffai and | 

194. It is a fabulous belt of mountains bounding the outermost of 
the seven seas and dividing the visible world from the regions of darkness. 
H. M. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


843 


30. At the bidding of Brahma and Visnu the chariot 
and its adjuncts were created bythe intelligent ViSvakarman.* 

CHAPTER NINE 

( Siva's campaign) 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

1. Brahma handed over that divine chariot of various 
wonderful features to Siva after yoking the Vedas as the 
horses. 

2. After dedicating the same to Siva, he requested 
Siva the lord of the gods, approved by Visnu and other &ods 
to mount the chariot. 

3. The great lord Siva identifying himself with all the 
gods got into that chariot that had various scaffoldings attac- 
hed to it. 

4. He was then eulogised by the gods, Gandharvas, 
serpents, sages, Visnu, Brahma and the guardians of the 
quarters. 

5-6. Siva, the granter of boons, surrounded by the 
groups of damsels, experts in music, shone well. Glancing 
at the charioteer when he mounted the chariot concocted 
with everything in the world, the horses constituted by the 
Vedas fell headlong to the ground. 

7. The earth quaked. The mountains became tremu- 
lous. Sesa, unable to bear his weight, became distressed and 
soon began to tremble. 

8. Lord Visnu assumed the form of a lordly bull and 
went under the chariot. He lifted it up and steadied it for a 
short while. 

9. But in another instant, unable to bear the weighty 
splendour of lord Siva seated in the chariot, the lordly bull 
had to kneel down and crawl on the ground. 

10-12. But the lord touched the bridle and steadied the 
horses. Then Brahma seated in the excellent chariot drove 
the excellent chariot with the velocity of mind and wind, at 
the bidding of the lord towards the three cities of the valiant 

♦On the construction of the Cosmic Chariot compare Matsya P. Ch. 133 



844 Sivapur&Qa 

Asuras. The cities were then in the sky. Lord Siva was 
seated inside. 

13. Then lord Siva looked at the gods and said — 
"Give me the lordship of the animals. Then 1 shall kill the 
Asuras. 

14. O excellent gods, the excellent Asuras can be killed 
only after assigning separate animalhood to the gods and 
others. Not otherwise.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

1 5. On hearing these words of the intelligent lord of 
the gods, they became dispirited growing suspicious of animal 
hood. 

16. On knowing what was passing through their minds, 
Siva, the lord of the gods, the consort of Parvati sympathised 
with the gods and laughingly said. 

Siva said : — 

17. “O excellent gods, you will not fall even in your 
animalhood. Let it be heard, and let the process of release 
from animalhood be practised. 

18. He who performs the divine rite of Pasupata will 
be released from animalhood. I promise this to you. Be 
attentive. 

19. O excellent gods, there is no doubt about it that 
those who perform my Pasupata rite will become liberated. 

20. He who renders service perpetually or for twelve 
years, becomes relieved of animalhood. 

21. Hence O excellent gods, perform this divine rite. 
You will be released from animalhood. There is no doubt 
about this.” 

195. Siva is named Pasupati, the loid of animals. Accoiding to the 
legend, recorded in the present chapter, every deity was asked by Siva to 
declare himself a mere Pasu or animal btfore 1 ripuras could be slain in 
the battle The Gorls accepted the proposal, declared themselves as animals 
and fought brutally. Lord Siva won them the battle but Gods were still 
distressed. The lord then enjoined the observance of Pasupata Vrata for 
the attainment of release from their animal nature. 

This legend forms the basis for the formulation of Pasupata sect which 
aims at the release of a Pa.Mi (the individual soulj from the bondage of re- 
birth. 



kudrasarhhitd 


845 


Santakumara said : — 

22. On hearing these words of lord Siva, the great 
soul, Vi§nu, Brahma and other gods said. “So be it.” 

23. Hence all the gods and Asuras became the animals 
of the lord. Siva became the lord of animals. He is the 
person who unties the nooses of the animals. 

24. Then the name Pasupati, that bestows welfare, 
spread in all the worlds and became renowned. 

25. Then the celestial sage, Indra, Brahma, Vi$nu and 
others rejoiced shouting “Victory.” 

26. Even in hundreds of years it is impossible to des- 
cribe adequately the form of the great soul which he 
assumed then. 

27. Siva the lord of Parvatl and everyone, the bestower 
of happiness to all, went ahead to destroy the three cities. 

28. Then all the gods, resplendent like the sun, under 
the lord of the gods and others went on elephants, horses, 
lions, bulls and chariots to kill Tripuras, leaders of the 
Asuras. 

29. The leading gods as huge as mountains went 
ahead delighted and well-armed with all sorts of missiles, 
plough-shares, mortars, iron clubs and uprooted trees as huge 
as mountains. 

30. Then Indra, Brahma, Visnu and others went 
ahead of lord Siva jubilantly shouting cries of victory to 
Siva, well-armed with various weapons and shining 
brilliantly. 

31. Sages with matted hair and staffs in the hands 
rejoiced. Siddhas and Caranas moving about in the sky 
showered flowers. 

32. O great brahmins, all the Ganesvaras went to the 
three cities. Who can enumerate them fully ? I shall 
mention a few. 

33. Bhrrigin, the chief of all Ganesas, surrounded by 
lord of Ganas and gods went speedily to destroy the three 
cities like Mahcndra seated in an aerial chariot. 

34-39. These were the important ones who were there — 
Kesa, Vigatavasa, Mahakcsa, Mahajvara, Somavallisavarna, 
Somapa, Sanaka, Somadhrk, Suryavarcas, Suryapresanaka, 
Suryuksa, Suriuainan, Sura, Sundara, Praskanda, Kundara, 



Canda, Kampana, Atikampana, Indra, Indrajava, Yantp, 
Himakara, Sataksa, Pancaksa, Sahasraksa, Mahodara, 
Satijahru, Satasya, Ranka, Karpuraputaija, DviSikha, 
Trisikha, Ahariikarakaraka, Ajavaktra, Astavaktra, Hayaka- 
raka and Ardhavaktraka. These and other innumerable 
lords of Gan as who cannot be characterised and classified 
surrounded Siva and went ahead. 

40. They were capable of burning the entire world 
including the mobile and immobile beings, within a trice 
by their very thought. Surrounding Siva, the great lord, 
they went ahead. 

41. Siva is capable of burning the entire world. Of 
what avail are the Ganas, gods, chariot, and arrows to Siva 
in order to burn the three cities? 

42. O Vyasa, that trident-bearing lord, of wonderful 
power of causing enjoyment and protection, himself went 
there with his own Ganas and the gods to burn the three 
cities of the enemies of gods. 

43. What the reason was, I shall tell you, O excellent 
sage. It was to make his glory known to all the worlds, 
the glory that dispels all sins and dirt. 

44. Another reason was to convince the wicked, since 
there is none to excel him among the gods. 


CHAPTER TEN 

( The burning of the Tripur as) 

Sanatkumdra said: — 

1. Then Siva, the great lord, seated in the chariot 
and equipped with everything, got ready to burn the three 
cities completely, the cities of the enemies of the gods. 


196. The PurSnas lecord different vrrsirns of the burning of Tripurt, 
The present version is a regular legend based on an ancient tradition. r l here 
is however another version which describes graphically the devastation, 
oppression and barbarities practised by the Ganas which remind us of those 
perpetrated by the Huna-chief Mihirakula in his invasions Thcie is a veiled 
allusion to this event, for Agni is addressed as a Mleccha (Mats) a p. ltitt. 
51 ). There is no such anacbionism in the &P account of Tripuradfiha. 



Rudrasarhhita 


847 


2-3. The lord stood in the wonderful posture of 
Pratyalidha for a hundred thousand years. The bow was 
well strung and kept near the head. The arrow was 
fixed. The fingers clenched at the bow firmly. The eyes 
were fixed. 

4. Ganeta was stationed on the thumb. During 
this time the three cities did not come within the target path 
of the trident-bearing lord. 

5. Then from the firmament, the odd-eyed Siva who was 
standing there holding the bow and the arrow heard an aus- 
picious voice. 

6. “O lord of the master of the universe, you will 
not kill the Tripuras as long as the lord Ganesa is not adored’*. 

7. On hearing these words, Siva the destroyer of 
Andhaka called Bhadrakall and worshipped the elephant-faced 
god Ganesa. 

8-9. When Ganesa was worshipped, when he standing 
ahead was pleased, lord Siva saw the three cities of the 
powerful Asuras, sons of Taraka, joined together. 

10. It is said that when the great lord Siva, the lord 
of the Gods, the supreme Brahman, worshipped by all 
is there, it is not proper to say that he achieved success 
by another God’s grace. 

11. He is independent, the great Brahman, both possessed 
and devoid of attributes. He is invisible, the supreme soul 
and unsullied. 

12. He is the soul of five divinities. He is worshipped 
by the five deities 197 . He is the great lord. There is none else 
worthy of worship. He is the ultimate abode of all. 

13. Or, O sage, the activities of Siva, the lord of the 
Gods, the granter of boons are but proper inasmuch as 
they constitute his divine sports. 

14. When the great God stood up after woeshipping 
Siva, the three cities joined together into one unit. 

15. O sage, when the three cities came to a unified 

iq 7 . The five gods Brahma, Vi?nu, Rudra, Skanda and Indra (See 
$P. VS 14 48) are in essence indeniical with Siva but they have also their 
distinct forms in which they remain subservient to him. 

According to another version, the five deities aro the son, Ganesa, 
Durga, Rudia and Visnu. See note 174 P. 168. 



848 tiivapurdna 

whole, a tumultuous shout of joy rose up among the noble 
Gods and others. 

16. Then all the Gods, Siddhas and the sages shouted 
out “Victory” and eulogised Siva who has eight cosmic 
bodies 1 * 8 , 

17-18. Then Brahma and Visnu, the lord of the worlds 
said — “The time for killing the Asuras has arrived, O great 
God. The three cities of the sons of Taraka have come into 
one unified whole. O lord, please perform the task of the 
Gods. 

19. C) lord of the gods please discharge the arrow 
and reduce the three cities to ashes lest they should be sep- 
arated again.” 

20. Then stringing the bow tight and fixing the arrow 
Pasupata worthy of worship, he thought of the Tripuras. 

21. Then lord Siva, an expert in excellent divine sports 
for some reason looked at it with contempt. 

22. Siva is capable of reducing the three cities to ashes 
in a trice, Still lord Siva, the goal of the good bides his time. 

23. The lord of gods is capable of burning the three 
worlds by a single glance. O lord, for the flourish of our 
fame you shall discharge the arrow. 

24. On being eulogised by Visnu, Brahma and other 
gods, lord Siva desired to reduce the three cities to ashes 
with his arrow. 

25-26. In the auspicious moment called Abhilasa he 
drew the bow and made a wonderful and unbearable 
twanging sound. He addressed the great Asuras and pro- 
claimed his own name. Siva discharged an arrow that 
had the refulgence of countless suns. 

27. The arrow which was constituted by Visnu and 
whose steel head was fire god blazed forth and burnt the 
three Asuras who lived in the three cities. It thereby 
removed their sins. 

28. The three cities reduced to ashes fell on the earth 
girt by the four oceans 199 . 

198. See Note 89 P. 132. 

19Q. In ancient Indian literature, the four oceans arc said to be 
surrounding the earth on four sides. Most probably they represent the 
Arabian sea in the West, the Indian ocean in the south, the Bay of Bengal 
in the East and the sea oi Japan in the North. 



Rudrasamhitd 


849 


29. Since they had refrained from the worship of Siva, 
hundreds of Asuras were burnt by the fire generated by the 
arrow. They cried “Ha Ha” in distress. 

30. Tarakaksa was burnt along with his two brothers. 
He remembered his lord Siva who is favourably disposed to 
his devotees. 

31. Lamenting in diverse ways and looking up to lord 
Siva, he mentally appealed to him. 

Tarakaksa said : — 

32. “O Siva, you are known to be pleased with us, if 
at any future hour you burn us, you will do so along with 
our kinsfolk. Let it be in accordance with this truth. 

33. What is difficult and inaccessible to the gods and 
Asuras has been secured by us. Let our intellect be 
purified by our thoughts on you in every birth.” 

34. O sage, at the bidding of Siva, those Asuras were 
burnt and reduced to ashes by the fire 200 even as they were 
muttering thus. 

35. Other Asuras too, children and old * men were 
completely burnt out, O Vyasa, at the bidding' of Siva and 
speedily reduced to ashes. 

36. Just as the universe is burnt at the end of a Kalpa 
so also every thing and every one there, whether woman or 
man or vehicles, was reduced to ashes by that fire. 

37. Some women were forced to leave, their husbands 
necking them and were burnt by the fire. Some were 
sleeping, some were intoxicated and some 'were exhausted 
after their sexual dalliance. All were burnt. 

38-39. Some who were partially burnt woke up and 
rushed here and there. They fell unconscious and fainted. 
There was not 'even a minute particle whether mobile or 
immobile which escaped unscathed by that terrible Tripura 
fire excepting Maya, the imperishable Visvakarman of the 
Asuras. 


200 For the detailed description of the burning of Tripuri compare 
Matsya P. Ch. « 8 U. 



850 Sivapurdpa 

40. Those who were not opposed to the Gods were 
saved by Siva’s brilliance, those who devoutly sought refuge 
in lord Siva at the time of adversity. 

41. Whether Asuras or other beings those whose 
collective activities were not destructive were saved; others of 
contrary activities were burnt in fire. 

42. Hence, all possible efforts shall be made by good 
men to avoid despicable activities whereby people waste 
away themselves. 

43. Let there be no predicament to any as it happened 
in regard to the residents of the three cities. This is the 
opinion of all. By chance if it happens, let it. 

44. Those who worshipped Siva along with their family 
attained Ganapati’s region, thanks to the worship of Siva. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

[The Gods' prayer) 


Vydsa said : — 

1. O son of Brahma, of great intellect, O most exce- 
llent among the devotees of Siva, you are blessed. When 
the three cities were burnt what did the gods do ? 

2. Where did Maya who was spared go ? Where did 
the ascetics go ? Please narrate all, if it relates to Siva’s story. 

Suta said : — 

3. On hearing the words of Vyasa, Sanatkumara the 
holy son of the creator remembered the feet of Siva and 
spoke. 

Sanatkumara said : - 

4. Listen O Vyasa, son of ParaSara, and of great inte- 
llect, to the sin-destroying story of the great lord, who 
follows worldly conventions. 

5. When the three cities of Asuras were utterly burnt, 
the Gods became surprised. 

6. The gods including Indra, Vi?nu and others became 
silent and bewildered on seeing the excessively brilliant Siva. 



kudraSathhiid 


851 


7-8. On merely seeing the terrible form of Siva, dazzling 
the ten quarters, resembling countless suns in refulgence and 
on a par with the fire at the hour of dissolution, and also 
the goddess Parvati, the daughter of Himavat, the illustrious 
gods stood humbly in their fright. 

9. On seeing the army of the gods terrified, the exce- 
llent sages did not say anything. They stood all round and 
bowed. 

10-11. Then Brahma too who was excessively afraid 
on seeing Siva’s terrible form, was delighted at heart and 
fervently prayed along with the gods. Visnu who was also 
afraid prayed to Siva the lord of the Gods, the slayer of the 
Tripuras, who was accompanied by his consort Parvati, the 
lord who is subservient to his devotees. 

Brahma said : — 

12. “O lord of the gods, O supreme lord, bestower of 
blessings to the devotees, be pleased, O bestower of wholesome 
blessings to all the gods. 

13. Be pleased, O lord of the worlds, be pleased. O 
bestower of bliss. Be pleased, O lord Siva. Be pleased, O 
supreme lord. 

14. Obeisance to you, of the form of Omkara, O 
great lord who enable the devotees to cross the ocean of exis- 
tence by your very form. Be pleased, O lord of gods, O 
destroyer of the Tripuras, O supreme lord. 

15. O Siva, O favourite of your devotees. Obeisance 
to you, the lord of many names. Obeisance to you, free 
from attributes, O you who are greater than Prakrti and 
Purusa. 

16. Obeisance to you, free from aberrations, the eternal, 
the ever satiated, the resplendent, the unsullied, the divine 
one of three attributes. 

17. Obeisance to you, possessed of attributes. Obeisance 
to you, the lord of heaven. Obeisance to the calm, trident- 
bearing Siva. 

18. Obeisance to the omniscient, to one who is the 
refuge of all. Obeisance to you born in a trice. Obeisance 
to Vamadeva, Rudra, the Purusa, accessible to the good. 

19. Obeisance to Aghora, to one easily served. 



Obeisance to you, subservient to the devotees. Obeisance to 
I£ana, the most excellent, the bestower of bliss to his 
devotees. 

20. O great lord, save, save us all the frightened gods. 
By burning the three cities, the gods have been satisfied and 
contented.” 

21. After eulogising thus, the gods severally bowed to 
him. The delighted gods, Brahma and others, bowed to lord 
Siva. 

22. Then Brahma himself eulogised lord Siva the des- 
troyer of the Tripuras after bowing to him with stooping 
shoulders and palms joined in reverence. 

Brahma said : — 

23. “O holy lord, lord of the gods, O slayer of the 
Tripuras, O Siva, O great lord, let my devotion to you remain 
eternal. 

24. O Siva, let me always remain your charioteer. O 
lord of the gods, O supreme lord, be favourable to me 
always.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

25. After thus eulogising Siva who is favourably disposed 
to his devotees, with humility, the liberal hearted Brahma 
stopped and stood there with stooping shoulders and palms 
joined in reverence. 

26. Lord Visnu too bowed to lord Siva. With palms 
joined in reverence, he eulogised lord Siva. 

Visnu said : — 

27. O overlord of the Gods, O great lord, O merciful 
one, O kinsman of the distressed. Be pleased, O supreme lord. 
Be merciful, O favourite of those who bow to you. 

28. Obeisance to you devoid of the attributes. Again 
obeisance to you possessed of attributes. Again obeisance to 
you of the form of Prakrti and Purusa. 

29. Obeisance to you of the form of attributes. Obe- 
isance to the soul of the universe. Obeisance to you who 
love devotion. Obeisance to Siva the calm one, the great 
soul. 



Rudrasarfihitd 


853 


30. Obeisance to Sadasiva. Obeisance to Siva, the 
lord of the worlds. Let my devotion to you steadily increase. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

31. After saying this, lord Visnu the most excellent of 
the great devotees of Siva stopped. Then all the Gods 
bowed to him and spoke to lord Siva. 

The gods said : — 

32. O lord of gods, O great god, O Siva, the merciful. 
Be pleased O lord of the worlds. Be pleased O supreme 
lord. 

33. Be pleased. You are the creator of every thing. 
We bow to you joyously. Let our devotion to you be steady 
and endless. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

34. Thus eulogised by Brahma, Visnu and the Gods, 
Siva the benefactor of the worlds, the delighted lord of the 
gods, replied. 

Siva said : — 

35. O Brahma, O Visnu, O gods, I am very much 
pleased with you all. All of you consider carefully and then 
let me know the boon you desire. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

36. On hearing these words mentioned by Siva, O 
excellent sage, all the Gods replied delightedly. 

The gods said : — 

37-38. O lord, if you are pleased, if the boon is 
to be granted by you to us, O lord of the master of gods, 
after knowing that we the gods are your slaves, then O 
most excellent deity, be pleased to appear always whenever 
misery befalls us and destroy the misery. 

Sanatkumara mid : — 

39. Thus requested simultaneously by Brahma, Vi$iiu 
and the gods, Rudra was pleased in his mind and he said 
“Let it be ever so. 



40. I am delighted by these hymns. O gods, I shall 
confer on those who read, recite and hear these hymns what- 
ever they crave for”. 

41. Saying this, the delighted Siva the remover of the 
distress of gods, gave them every thing that was highly 
delightful to all the gods. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

{The Gods go back to their abodes) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. In the meantime the Asura Maya who was not 
burnt due to the strength of grace, came there on seeing 
Siva delighted. 

2. With great delight he bowed to Siva and other 
gods. With palms joined in reverence and with stooping 
shoulders he bowed to Siva again. 

3. Then he got up. Maya the foremost among the 
Asuras, with his mind full of devotion and voice choked 
with emotions of love he eulogised facing Siva. 

Maya said : — 

4. O great lord, lord of the Gods and favourably 
disposed to your devotees, O Siva, you are in the form of 
the wish-yielding Kalpa tree and devoid of special leaning 
to any side. 

5. Obeisance to you O splendour-formed, obeisance to 
you omniformed; obeisance to you, O sanctified soul; obeis- 
ance to you, O holy one. 

6. Obeisance to you of variegated forms; to you, the 
eternal one; obeisance to you who extend beyond all forms. 
Obeisance to you of divine forms, shapes, and features. 

7. Obeisance to the destroyer of the distress of those 
who bow to you; obeisance to the welfare-hearted; to the 
creator, sustainer and annihilator of the three worlds. 

8. O Siva, O consort of Parvatl, obeisance to you 
who are accessible through devotion of the devotees; obeisance 



Rudrasarhhitd 


855 


to the compassionate and the bestower of the good fruits of 
penance. 

9. O great lord, fond of eulogy, I know not how to 
eulogise you. O lord of all, be pleased. Save me who have 
sought refuge in you.’* 

Sanatkumara said : — 

10. On hearing this eulogy of Maya, O excellent 
brahmin, lord Siva, was delighted and he spoke to Maya 
eagerly. 

Siva said : — 

11. O Maya, I am delighted. O excellent Asura 
speak out the boon you wish to have. There is no doubt. 

I shall grant you what you desire. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

12. On hearing the auspicious words of Siva, Maya 
the foremost among the Asuras spoke after bowing to the 
lord with stooping shoulders and palms joined in reverence. 

Maya said : — 

13. ‘‘O great lord, lord of the Gods, if you are deligh- 
ted and if I deserve the grant of a boon please grant me 
parmanent devotion to you. 

14. O supreme lord, grant me comradeship with your 
devotees for ever, compassion towards the distressed and in- 
difference towards the wicked living beings. 

15. O lord Siva, let there be no demonaic instinct in 
me at any time. O lord, let me be fearless for ever engros- 
sed in your auspicious worship.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

16. On being thus requested, Siva • the great lord, 
who is favourably disposed to his devotees and was in a 
delightful mood replied to Maya. 

Lord Siva said : — 

17. O excellent Asuras you are my devotees and are 



856 Sivapurdna 

blessed. You are free from aberrations. All the boons desired 
by you are granted now. 

18. At my bidding, you go to the region Vitala, 201 
more beautiful than heaven. Go in the company of your 
family and kinsmen. 

19. You stay there without fear. Be devout always. 
At my bidding you will never have demonaic instinct. 

Samtkumara said : — 

20. Receiving this behest of Siva, the great soul with 
bowing head and paying homage to him and to the gods he 
went to Vitala. 

21. In the meantime those heretics of tonsured heads 
came there, knelt before Visnu, Brahma and others and 
spoke. 

22. O gods, where shall wc go ? What shall we do 
now ? We are ready to carry out your behests. Please 
command us quickly. 

23. O Visnu, O Brahma, O gods, wicked deeds have 
been performed by us. We have destroyed the devotion to 
Siva of all the Asuras who were great devotees of Siva. 

24. We will have to stay in hell for a countless Kalpas. 
Certainly there is no redemption for us that have offended 
devotees of Siva. 

25. But it was in accordance with your desire that 
this wicked deed was perpetrated. Please tell us the mode 
of atoning for the same. We have sought refuge in you. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

26. On hearing their words Visnu, Brahma and other 
gods spoke to the tonsured-heads' who stood in front with 
joined palms. 

Visnu and others said : — 

27. “O tonsured ones, you need not be afraid at all. 
These excellent activities have taken place at the bidding of 
Siva. 

2oi. This is the second of the seven regions descending from the 
earth. Cf. Note aio P. 247. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


857 


28. Since you are the servants of Siva and have carried 
out the activities conducive to the welfare of the gods and 
the sages, no mishap shall ever befall you bringing you 
to distress. 

29. Siva performs deeds conducive to the welfare of 
the gods and the sages. He is pleased with those who work 
for the welfare of the gods and sages. No mishap befalls 
those who work for the welfare of the gods and sages. 

30. From now onwards in the Kali age those who 
follow this cult will be faced with disastrous results. We tell 
you the truth. There is no doubt about it. 

31. O brave tonsured heads, till the advent of the Kali 
age, you shall stay incognito in the desert region . 202 That is 
my behest. 

32. When the Kali age begins, you can propagate your 
cult. In the Kali age deluded fools will follow your cult. 

33. Thus bidden by the great gods, O great sage, the 
tonsured heads bowed to them and went to their allotted 
abode. 

34-35. Then lord Siva, the great Yogin after burning 
the residents of the three cities felt contented. He was duly 
worshipped by Brahma and others. Then the lord, after 
completing the task of the gods, vanished from the scene 
accompanied by his Ganas, goddess Parvati and the sons. 

36. When lord Siva had vanished with his followers, 
the fortress too vanished along with the bow, arrows, chariot 
and other things. 

37-38. Then Brahma, Vi?rm, the gods, sages, Gandhar- 
vas, Kinnaras, Nagas, serpents, celestial damsels and the deli- 
ghted men went to their abodes praising the glory of Siva. 
After reaching their abodes they were highly delighted. 

39. Thus the exalted narrative of the moon-crested 
lord indicative of the annihilation of Tripuras coupled with 
the great divine sports has been narrated to you. 

202. The desert (Maru) lying to the north -west of Gujarat and to 
the north of Dvarnka is also called the Thar or Rajaputana desert. It 
includes a portion of Mirwar and Jodhpur area also. It is said to be 
famous for its camels. See Sircar GAMI. Cf. 

SHUT *TFT sfaor I 

irs^sft ii 

ill. 7 . 19 . 



40. It is conducive to wealth, fame, and longevity. It 
increases prosperity and possession of food-grains. It yields 
heavenly pleasure and salvation. What else do you wish to 
hear ? 

41. He who reads and hears the exalted narrative 
will enjoy all pleasures here and attain salvation hereafter. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

( The Resuscitation of Indra in the context of the destruction of 
Jalandhar a) 

Vyasa said : — 

1. O holy lord, son of Brahma, it has been heard by 
me before that the lord Siva killed the great Asura Jalan- 
dhara. 

2. O intelligent one, please narrate the story of the 
moon-crested lord in detail. Who can be satiated with listen- 
ing to the spotless glory of the lord ? 

SUta said : — 

3. On being requested thus by Vyasa, the great sage 
and son of Brahma of eloquent speech spoke the following 
significant words without excitement. 

Sanatkumara said: — 

4. O sage, once Brhaspati and Indra went to Kailasa 
with great devotion, to see lord Siva. 

5-6. Coming to know of the arrival of Brhaspati and' 
Indra eager to see him, lord Siva wished to test their know- 
ledge. Accordingly, the lord, the excellent goal of the good, 
stood blocking their path in the naked form with matted hair 
and beaming face. 

7-9. Brhaspati and Indra were walking on gleefully. 
On their way they saw this wonderful person of huge size. 
He was quiet and composed and very refulgent with matted 
hair on his head. He was fair-complexioned with long arms 
and wide chest. He was terrible to look at. Without 
realising that the person who stood there blocking their path 



Rudrasarfihitd 


859 


was Siva himself, Indra who was proud of his authority said 
to him. 

Indra said : — 

10. O, who are you ? Where have you come from ? 
What is your name ? Tell me truly. Is the lord Siva in 
his apartment or has he gone anywhere ? 

Sanatkumava said : — 

11. O sage, on being asked by Indra thus, he did 
not say anything. Indra asked him again. But the naked 
person did not say anything. 

12. Indra, the supreme lord of the worlds, asked again. 
The lord the great Yagin who assumes forms variously kept 
quiet. 

13. The naked lord, though asked repeatedly by Indra, 
did not say anything, for he wanted to test the knowledge of 
Indra. 

14. Then the lord of Gods, proud of the wealth of the 
three worlds ? became enraged. Rebuking the lord with matted 
hair he spoke these words. 

Indra said : — 

15. “O evil-minded one, though asked you did not reply 
to me. Hence I am going to kill you with my thunderbolt. 
Who can save you ?” 

Sanatkumara sa id : — 

16. After saying this and looking at him ferociously 
Indra raised his thunderbolt in order to kill him. 

17. On seeing Indra lifting up his thunderbolt, Siva 
prevented the fall of the thunderbolt by making his hand 
benumbed. 

18. Then Siva became furious. His eyes became terrible. 
He blazed with his burning splendour. 

19. Then Indra burnt within himself by the benumbing 
of his arm like a serpent whose exploits had been curbed by 
pronouncing magical formulas. 203 

203. For the similarity of idea and verbal expression, compare 
K&lidasa’s Raghuvamsa II. 32. 



20. On seeing him resplendent, Brhaspati realised 
immediately that he was lord Siva himself and bowed to him. 

21. Then the noble-minded Brhaspati joined his palms 
in reverence. He prostrated before him on the ground and 
began to eulogise the lord. 

Brhaspati said : — 

22. Obeisance to Siva, the chief lord of the gods, 
the supreme soul, the three-eyed, possessed of matted hair. 

23. Obeisance to the succouring lord of the distressed, 
the destroyer of Andhaka 204 and the Tripuras, and identical 
with Brahma, the Paramesthin. 

24. Obeisance to Siva of odd eyes, of diverse, deform- 
ed and surpassing features, going beyond all forms. 

25. Obeisance to the destroyer of sacrifice of Daksa, 
to the bestower of fruits of sacrifice, identical with sacrifice 
and the initiator of the greatest rites. 

26. Obeisance to Siva the annihilator of Time, of the 
form of Time, the wearer of black serpents, the great lord 
and the omnipresent. 

27. Obeisance to the destroyer of Brahma’s head, 206 the 
one eulogised by Brahma and the moon. Obeisance to you 
favourably disposed to Brahmins. Obeisance to you the 
great soul. 

28. You are the fire, the wind, the ether, the waters, 
the earth, the sun, the moon, the stars, and the solar system. 

29. You alone are Visnu, Brahma, and eulogised by 
them; you are the great lord, the sages Sanaka etc. You 
are Narada the great saint. 

30. You alone are the lord of all the worlds, the 
soul of the universe. You are converging in everything and 
different from everything; you alone are greater than 
Prakrti. 


204- Andhaka was an Asura of great prowess who became so 
arrogant that he attempted to abduct both Siva and P&rvatl. A great 
battle was fought between the two in the Mah&kala forest of Avanti. Siva 
slew the Asura and obtained the appellation ‘the slayer of Andhaka* for 
himself. 

205. See Note 43 P. 58- 



Rudrasarhhitd 


861 


31. With the Rajas attribute you alone create the 
worlds assuming the name Brahma. You are identical with 
Vi?nu in Sattva attribute and you protect the entire universe. 

32. With the Tamas attribute you assume the form of 
Siva, O great God and you alone devour the universe com- 
posed of five elements. 

33. With the strength of meditating on you, O creator 

of the universe, the sun blazes, the moon exudes nectar and 

the wind blows. 

34. O Siva, with the strength of meditating on you, 
the clouds shower water. Indra protects the worlds like his 
sons. 

35. With the strength of meditating on you, the clouds, 

the gods and the great sages carry on their tasks. They are 

afraid of you. 

36. O Siva, by serving your lotus like feet, the people 
in the world do not honour the gods and they enjoy the 
prosperity of the world. 

37. By serving your lotus like feet the people attain the 
supreme goal inaccessible to every one and unattainable even 
to Yogins. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

38. After eulogising Siva, the benefactor of the worlds 
thus Brhaspati made Indra fall at the feet of Siva. 

39. After making Indra, lord of the gods, fall at his feet 
with bowed head, Brhaspati humbly spoke these words to 
Siva with bowed head. 

Brhaspati said : — 

40. O great lord, favourable to the distressed, please 
raise up Indra fallen at your feet. Please quieten the anger 
rising from your eyes. 

41. O great lord, be pleased. Protect Indra who has 
sought refuge in you. Let this fire rising from the eye in 
the forehead be rendered calm. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

42. On hearing these words of Brhaspati, Siva, the 



862 Stnapurina 

lord of Gods, the ocean of mercy, spoke in a thundering 
stentorian voice. 

Lord Siva said : — 

43. O Brhaspati, how can I take up the fury that 
has already come out of my eye? A serpent does not wear 
again the slough that has been cast off. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

44. On hearing these words of Siva, Brhaspati’s mind 
was agitated with fear and he spoke dejectedly. 

Bfhaspati said : — 

45. O holy lord, indeed the devotees should be pitied 
always. O Siva, thus please make your name Bhaktavatsala 
(favourably disposed towards the devotees) true. 

46. O lord of gods, you deserve to cast elsewhere the 
fierce brilliance. O uplifter of all devotees, raise up Indra. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

47. On being addressed thus by Brhaspati the delighted 
Siva, the destroyer of the distress of those who bow to him 
and the one named Bhaktavatsala replied thus to Brhaspati. 

Siva said : — 

48. O dear one, I am delighted by your eulogy. I 
shall grant you the excellent boon. Henceforth you shall 
be famous as Enlivener because you have conferred life on 
Indra. 

49. I shall cast off this fire born of my eye in the fore- 
head intended to kill Indra lest it should afflict him. 

50. On saying this he held that wonderful brilliance 
bom of the eye in the forehead 208 and cast it off in the briny 
ocean. 

51. Then the lord Rudra of great divine sports vanish- 

206. Siva is represented as (he three-eyed God. His third eye which 
stands in the middle of his forehead is very destructive. It reduced K&ma 
to ashes. 

This eye usually remains closed. But when it opens, its glance works 
havoc. Ai the periodical dissolution of the universe, it destroys all the gods 
and created beings. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


863 


ed from the scene. Brhaspati and Indra were relieved of 
their fright and they became happy. 

52. After having the immediate perception of Siva for 
which they had come here, Brhaspati and Indra became con- 
tented and went away to their abodes joyously. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


(The birth of Jalandhara and his marriage) 

Vyasa said : — 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumara, son of Brahma, obeisance 
be to you. This wonderful story of Siva, the great soul, has 
been heard. 

2. O sage, when the brilliance born of the eye in the 
forehead had been cast off into the briny ocean, O dear sir, 
what happened ? Please narrate it quickly. 


Sanatkumara said : — 

3. O dear one of great intellect, listen to the extre- 
mely wonderful sport of Siva, on hearing which with faith a 
devotee attains the goal of Yogins. 

4. The brilliance of Siva born of the eye in the fore- 
head and cast off into the briny sea 207 immediately assumed 
the form of a boy. 

5. At the confluence of the river Gariga and the 
ocean, the boy of terrific features cried loudly. 

6. At the sound of the crying boy, the earth quaked 
frequently. The heaven and the Satyaloka became deafened 
at the noise. 

7. All the worlds were frightened. The guardians of 
the quarters became agitated in the mind 

8. O dear holy one, O great brahmin, the entire world 
including the mobile and immobile quaked at the cries of 
the boy. 

9. Then the distressed gods and the sages immediately 


207 . The ocean of salt (lavai?&mbhodhi) stands to the *cst of 
Bh&ratavarsa and is identical with the Arabian sea. The confluence of 
the Indus* and this ocean (Sindhu-Sfigara-sahgama) is the plate where 
Jalandhara was born. 



864 SioapwrdQa 

sought refuge in Brahma the grandfather and preceptor of 
the worlds. 

10. After going there, those sages and the gods includ- 
ing Indra bowed to and eulogised Brahma and spoke these 
words. 

The gods said : — 

11. ‘‘This mysterious sound has arisen. O lord of 

worlds, O lord of gods, we are frightened. O great Yogin 

please quell it.’* 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

12. On hearing their words, Brahma the grandfather 

of the worlds wished to go there. He was perplexed as to 

what it was. 

13 Then Brahma descended from Satyaloka to the 
Earth along with the gods. Then he went to the ocean desi- 
rous of knowing what it was. 

14. When Brahma the grandfather of the worlds came 
there, he saw the boy in the lap of the ocean. 

15. On seeing Brahma coming, the ocean assuming 
the form of a god bowed to him and placed the boy in his 
lap. 

16. Then the surprised Brahma spoke these words to 
the ocean — “O ocean, tell me quickly about the parentage 
of this boy.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

17. On hearing the words of Brahma, the ocean was 
delighted. After bowing to and eulogising him with palms 
joined in reverence he replied to Prajapati Brahma. 

The ocean said : — 

18. “O Brahma, O lord of the worlds, this boy was 
suddenly seen in the confluence of the river Ganga. I do 
not know about the origin of this boy. 

19. O preceptor of the universe, you perform the post- 
natal rites for this boy. O creator, let me know your predi- 
ctions about his future according to his horoscope” 



Rudrasarhkitd 865 

Sanaikumdra said : — 

20. Even as the ocean said these words, the son of the 
ocean caught hold of the neck of Brahma and shook it several 
times. 

21. In due course tears came out of the eyes of Brahma, 
the creator of all the worlds, afflicted by the joggling and 
jolting. 

22. Brahma somehow extricated himself from the grip 
of the son of the ocean by means of his hands and spoke to 
the ocean. 

Brahmd said : — 

23. “O ocean, listen, I shall narrate the future as predi- 
cted from the horoscope, entirely. Be attentive please. 

24. Since he was able to make my eyes water let 
him be famous in the name of Jalandhara. 

25-26. He will become a youth now itself. He will 
become a master of all sacred lores, very valorous, courage- 
ous, heroic, invincible and majestic like you. Like Karttikeya 
he will be the conqueror of all in battles. He will shine 
with all sorts of prosperity. 

27. This boy will become the emperor of Asuras. 
He will conquer even Visnu. He will face defeat from no 
quarter. 

28. He cannot be slain by any one except Siva. He 
will return to the place from where he sprang up. 

29. His wife will be a chaste lady who will increase 
good fortune. She will be exquisitely beautiful in every limb. 
She will be an ocean of good conduct and will speak pleas- 
ing words. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

30. After saying so he called Sukra and performed 
his coronation. Brahma then took leave of the ocean and 
disappeared. 

31. Thereafter the ocean with blooming eyes saw the 
son, took him to his abode joyously. 

32. With a joyous heart he nurtured the boy with 
diverse great means. The boy grew into a beautiful youth of 
exquisite limbs and wonderful splendour. 



33. Then the ocean invited the great Asura Kalanemi 
and requested him to give his daughter named Vrnda in 
marriage to his son. 

34. O sage, the heroic Asura Kalanemi, 208 foremost 
among the Asuras, intelligent and efficient in his activities, 
welcomed the request of the ocean. 

35. He gave his beloved daughter to Jalandhara, the 
brave son of the ocean, in marriage performing the nuptial 
rites according to the Brahma style.* 

36. O sage, great festivities were held in the marriage. 
The rivers and Asuras were happy. 

37. The ocean too became extremely happy seeing his 
son united to a bride. In accordance with the rules he made 
charitable gifts to the brahmins and others. 

38. Those Asuras who had been formerly defeated by 
the gods and had sought shelter in Patala came fearlessly to 
the Earth and resorted to him. 

39. Kalanemi and other Asuras were pleased after 
giving the daughter in marriage to the son of the ocean. In 
order to defeat the gods they resorted to him. 

40. The heroic son of the ocean, Jalandhara, foremost 
among the Asura warriors, received a very beautiful lady as 
his wife and he ruled over the kingdom with the support of 
Sukra. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

{The fight between the gods and Jalandhara ) 

1. Once the son of the ocean, the noble-hearted hus- 
band of Vrnda, was seated along with his wife and the 
Asuras. 

2. The brilliant Bhargava came there joyously illumi- 
nating the ten quarters as the embodied brilliance. 

3. On seeing the preceptor coming, the Asuras were 

208. Kalanemi, the great Asura, was the son of Virocana and the 
great-grandson of HiranyakaSipu. His daughter Vrnda was married to 
Jalandhara. 

•Cp. MS. iii. 27. 



Rudrasarhhitd 867 

delighted in their minds and bowed to him. The son of the 
ocean too respectfully bowed to him. 

4. After bestowing his benediction on them, Bhargava, 
the storehouse of splendour, sat on a beautiful seat. They too 
resumed their seats as before. 

5. Then the heroic son of the ocean, Jalandhara, saw 
his Assembly and was delighted to observe that his sway was 
unmitigated. 

6. Seeing the headless Rahu 209 seated there, the son of 
the ocean, the emperor of the Asuras, immediately asked 
Bhargava. 

Jalandhara said: — 

7. O lord, by whom was this done to Rahu ? By 
whom was his head cut? Please tell me, O preceptor, every- 
thing in detail as it had happened. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

8. On hearing the words of the ocean’s son, Bhargava 
remembered the lotus-like feet of Siva and replied exactly as 
it had happened. 

Bhargava said : — 

9* O Jalandhara, O great hero, O benefactor of the 
Asuras, listen to the account. I shall relate everything exactly 
as it had happened. 

10. Once there was a strong hero Bali, the son of 
Virocana and great-grandson of HiranyakaSipu. He was fore- 
most among the virtuous. 

11. The gods including Indra being defeated by him 
sought refuge in Visnu. Eager to gain their ends they told 
him all details. 

12. O dear, at his bidding, the gods, very clever in 
deception, made an alliance with the Asuras, to further 
their own interest. 

13. All those gods, the assistants of Visnu churned 

aog. The Asura Rahu, son of Vipracifti and SiihhikS, is known 
as the guardian of the south-west quarter. It is said that when the gods 
produced the Amfta by churning the ocean, he disguised himself as a god 
and drank some of it. But he was detected by the gods and produced 
before VisQu who cut oft his head. 



868 Sivapuraga 

the ocean eagerly for the gain of nectar, along with the 
Asuras. 

14. The enemies of the Asuras extracted jewels from 
the ocean. The gods seized the nectarand drank it deceitfully. 

15. Then the gods including Indra increased in 
strength and prowess by the drinking of the nectar and harass- 
ed the Asuras with the assistance of Vi$nu. 

16. This Visnu who is always a partisan of Indra, 
cut off the head of Rahu as he was drinking the nectar along 
with the gods. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

17-18. Thus Bhargava narrated in detail the story of 
the headless Rahu, of the churning of the ocean pursued 
by the gods for the gain of nectar, of the removal of the 
jewels, of the drinking of the Amrta by the gods and of the 
harassment to the Asuras. 

19. Then on hearing about the churning of his father, 
the heroic son of the ocean, the valorous Jalandhara became 
furious and his eyes turned red with anger. 

20. Then he called his excellent emissary Ghasmara 
and told him everything what the wise preceptor had said to 
him. 

21. He then lovingly honoured the clever emissary in 
various ways, assured him of protection and sent him to 
Indra as his messenger. 

22. Ghasmara, the intelligent emissary of Jalandhara, 
hastened to heaven 210 where all the gods were present. 

23. After going there, the emissary entered the assem- 
bly of the gods. 211 With his head kept straight as a token of 
haughtiness he spoke to lord Indra. 

Ghasmara said : — 

24. Jalandhara, the son of the ocean, is the lord and 
emperor of all the Asuras. He is excessively heroic and valo- 
rous. He has the support and assistance of Bhargava. 

210. Trivi?tapa or Tripi?tapa is the city of Indra supposed to be 
situated on Mount Meru. 

2i i. Sudharmft is the hall of Indra. It is the unrivalled gem of 
princely courts. See H. M. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


869 


25. I am his emissary. I have been sent by him. I 
have come to you here. My name is Ghasmara but I am 
not a devourer. 

26. He is of exalted intellect. His behest has never 
been defied. He has defeated all the enemies of Asuras. 
Please listen to what he says. 

Jalandhar a said : — 

27. ‘ f O base god, why was my father, the ocean, 
churned by you with the mountain ? Why were all the 
jewels of my father taken away ? 

28. What you have done is not proper. Return all of 
them to me immediately. Pondering over this, come along 
with the gods and seek refuge in me. 

29. Otherwise, O base god, you will have a great 
cause to fear. You will run the risk of the annihilation of 
your kingdom.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

30. On hearing the words of the messenger, Indra, the 
the lord of the gods, was bewildered. Remembering the 
previous incidents he was frightened as well as angry. He 
spoke to him thus. 

31. Indra said. He gave shelter to the mountains who 
were terribly afraid of me. Others too, some of my enemies, 
the Asuras, were formerly saved by him. 

32 It was due to this that I took away his jewels. Those 
who oppose me can never remain happy. I am telling you 
the truth. 

33. Formerly the Asura Sarikha 212 the son of the ocean 
was stupid enough to be inimical to me. He was spared by 
me because he was associated with saintly men. 

34. But when his predilection became sinful and he 
became violent towards saintly men, he was killed in the 
interior of the ocean by Vi§nu, my younger brother. 


212. The Asura SaAkha was killed by Visou for his defiant and 
oppressive attitude. 



35. Hence O messenger, go immediately and explain 
to the Asura, son of the ocean, our purpose for churning the 


Sanatkumdra said : — 

36. Dismissed thus by Indra, the intelligent emissary 
Ghasmara hastened to the place where the heroic Jalandhara 
was present. 

37. All the words thus spoken by Indra were narrated 
to the king of Asuras by the intelligent emissary. 

38. On hearing it, the lips of the Asura throbbed with 
anger. Desirous of conquering the gods he exerted himself 
immediately. 

39. In that enterprise of the lord of the Asuras, count- 
less Asuras from all the quarters and the nether region took 
part and helped him. 

40. Then the extremely heroic and valorous son of the 
ocean set forth with countless generals, Sumbha, Nisumbha 
and others. 

41. Very soon, he reached the heaven along with his 
force. He blew his conch. All the heroic soldiers roared. 

42. After going to heaven he stationed himself in 
Nandana. In the midst of all his forces he roared like a 
lion. 

43. On seeing a vast army surrounding the city, the 
gods came out of Amaravatl fully equipped with armour 
for the battle. 

44-45. Then a battle between the armies of the gods 
and Asuras ensued. They rushed against one another with 
iron clubs, arrows, maces, axes and spears. They hit one 
another. Within a short time both the armies began to 
wade through streams of blood. 

46. In that battle, the ground shone like the dusk with 
clouds scattered all round, for it was strewn with elephants, 
horses, chariots and foot-soldiers. Some were killed and others 
were being killed. 

47. Bhargava resuscitated the Asuras killed in the battle 
with the Vidya of Amrtajivim and drops of water infused 
with mantras. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


871 


48. The sage Angiras 213 too resuscitated the gods in the 
battle with the divine herbs frequently brought from the 
mountain Drona. 214 

49. Jalandhara saw the gods restored to life again in 
the battle. He then spoke angrily to Bhargava. 

Jalandhara said : — 

50. “The gods have been killed by me. How do they 
rise up again? The Vidya of Sarijivinl* has not been heard 
by me to exist elsewhere.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

51. On hearing these words of the son of the ocean, 
the delighted Bhargava, the preceptor, replied to Jalandhara. 

Bhargava said : — 

52. “Angiras is bringing divine herbs from the 
mountain Drona and enlivening the gods. O dear, know 
my words to be true. 

53. O dear, if you wish for victory listen to my 
auspicious suggestion. Immediately you shall uproot the 
mountain Drona with your arms and hurl it into the 
ocean.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

54. Thus addressed by his preceptor Bhargava, the 
lord of the Asuras, hastened to the lofty mountain. 

55. With his powerful arms, the Asura brought the 
mountain Drona and hurled it immediately into the ocean. 
There is nothing wonderful and mysterious in regard to the 
splendour of Siva. 

56. The great hero, the son of the ocean, took a vast 


213. Brhaspati is called Angiras. In fart, Angiras, born of the coals 
from the semen of l’rajapati wa< the father of Bfha<pati 

214. It is a mythiral mountain, abounding in herbs efficacious for 
restoring the dead to life. It was thrown in the ocean by Jalandhara to 
prevent the gods using its herbs for the resuscitation of their dead. How- 
ever there is a mountain of this name in Kumaon, 16 miles from 
Ranikhet in the district of Almora. See Bajpai, G. E. 

♦Amftajlvinl was a secret lore that restored the dead to life. This 
was the exclusive possession of BhSrgava (Sukra), the preceptor of the 
Asuras. 



872 


SivapurdQa 

army with him, came to the battle ground and began to 
kill the gods with various weapons. 

57. On seeing the gods being killed Bfhaspati went 
to the mountain Drona. Then he, the object of praise and 
worship by the gods, did not see the mountain there. 

58. On realising that the mountain Drona had been 
removed by the Asuras, Bfhaspati was terrified. He returned 
and said dejectedly. 

Brhaspati said : — 

59. “O gods, run away, all of you. There is no 
trace of the great mountain Drona. Certainly it has been 
destroyed by the Asura, the son of the ocean. 

60. Jalandhara is a great Asura. He cannot be 
conquered since he is born of a part of Siva. He will 
pound all the gods. 

61. His power has been understood by me as he is 
self-bom. O gods, all of you remember the act of offence 
to Siva perpetrated by Indra. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

62. On hearing these words uttered by the preceptor 
of the gods, they abandoned all hopes of victory. They 
became excessively terrified. 

63. All the gods including Indra, struck by the king 
of the Asuras all round, lost courage and fled in all 
directions. 

64. On seeing the gods routed, the Asura, Jalandhara, 
the son of the ocean, entered Amaravatf 215 with sounds of 
victory from the conches and drums. 

65. When the Asura entered the city, Indra and 
other gods entered the cavern of the golden mountain Meru 
and remained there. They had been extremely harrassed by 
the Asuras. 

66. O sage, at the same time the Asura appointed 
Sumbha and other Asuras severally in the places of authority 
of Indra and others. He then went into the cavern of the 
golden mountain. 

215. It is the mythical capita] of Indra’s heaven, situated on the 
golden mount Meru. 



Rudrasathhitd 


873 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

( The battle of the gods) 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

1. On seeing the Asura coming again, the gods inclu- 
ding Indra trembled with fear. They fled together. 

2. With Brahma at the head they went to Vaikuntha. 
All of them including Prajapati eulogised Visnu after bowing 
down to him. 

The gods said : — 

3. O Hrslkesa of long arms, O lord, O slayer of 
Madhu, O lord of gods, Obeisance to you, O destroyer of 
all Asuras. 

4. O Visnu, of the form of fish 216 who redeemed the 
Vedas through king Satyavrata, obeisance to you who 
sport about in the ocean of Dissolution. 

5. Obeisance to you of the form of Tortoise who bore 
the mountain Mandara of the gods who were attempting 
to churn the ocean. 

6. Obeisance to you O holy lord, of the form of Boar. 
Obeisance to you who hold the earth, the support of people. 
Obeisance to Visnu. 

7. Obeisance to you, the Dwarf. Obeisance to Visnu 
the younger brother of Indra, the lord who deceived the king 
of Asuras in the guise of a Brahmin. 

8. Obeisance to ParaSurama who exterminated the 
K$attriyas, who rendered help to your mother. Obeisance 
to you who are angry and inimical to the evil beings. 

9. Obeisance to Rama who delighted the worlds and 
who set the limits of decent behaviour. Obeisance to you 
the destroyer of Ravana and the lord of Slta. 

10. Obeisance to you of hidden knowledge; to Krsna 
the great Atman; the sportive paramour of Radha; 
Obeisance to him of diverse divine sports. 

a 1 6 . The god’s eulogy to Visnu enumerates the various forms of 
Vi?i>u including his nine incarnations, viz Matsya, Kurma, V£r£ha, 
V am ana, Parasur&ma, Rama, Kj-sna, Buddha andtKalki. But it is not 
intelligible why it shall omit his Nrsiraha incarnation. Most probably 
some lines seem to be missing here. 



11. Obeisance to the preceptor of Yoga; Obeisance 
to you, O lord of Lak?ml, of the form of Jaina and 
Bauddha; to you of hidden body and features and the 
censurer of the Vedas. 

12. Obeisance to you of the form of Kalki; the 
destroyer of outcastes 217 . Obeisance to him of infinite power 
and who establishes good virtue. 

13. Obeisance to you of the form of Kapila of great 
soul and who expounded the doctrines of Samkhya and 
Yoga to DevahutI; O lord, obeisance to you the preceptor 
of Samkhya. 

14. Obeisance to great yogin and saint who 
expounds the great wisdom. Obeisance to the creator of 
the form of knowledge whereby the soul is delighted. 

15. Obeisance to you of the form of Vedavyasa who 
classified the Vedas and who wrote the Puranas for the 
welfare of the worlds. 

16. Obeisance to you who are ready to perform the 
task of the devotees through incarnations of Fish etc. O 
lord, obeisance, to you of the form of Brahman, the cause 
of creation, sustenance and annihilation. 

17. Obeisance to the destroyer of the distress of your 
servants; the bestower of auspicious happiness. Obeisance to 
you wearing yellow robes, having Garuda for your vehicle 218 . 
Obeisance to the performer of all rites. Obeisance to the 
sole doer. Obeisance to the one worthy of being resorted to. 

18. O thunderbolt for the destruction of misery etc. 
of the gods harassed by the Asuras. Obeisance to you lying 
on the Serpent-bed 219 . Obeisance to the one who has sun and 
the moon for his eyes. 

19. O lord of LaksmI, O ocean of mercy, save us 
who have sought refuge in you. All the gods have been 
driven out of heaven by Jalandhara. 

217. The reference to the Mlecchas indicates that the author of the 
Pur&na was aware of the barbarous tribes— Huns and others who perpet- 
rated heinous atrocities on Indian people. 

218. For details see Dange : the Garud&'legend in “the Legends in 
the MB.". 

219. Vi?pu is represented as reclining on Serpent Sesa. A vivid 
picture of £e?a£ayi Vi?nu is depicted on the outer wail of the Daslvat&ra 
temple at Deogarh. For this illustration ser Agrawal, Matsya Purapa — 
A Study P. 200. 



RudrasarhhiUl 


875 


20. The sun has been dislodged from his post. 
Similarly the moon and the fire too have been removed. 
The Serpent-king has been removed from Patala and 
Dharmaraja has been dispossessed. 

21. While men freely move about, the gods do not 
shine. We have sought refuge in you. Let measures for 
his annihilation be thought of. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

22. On hearing these piteous entreaties of the gods, 
Vi$nu the slayer of Madhu, the ocean of mercy, spoke in a 
thundering voice. 

Visnu said : — 

23. “O gods, cast off your fear. I shall come to the 
battle-ground. I shall show my valour to Jalandhara.” 

24. Having said this with distressed mind, Visnu the 
enemy of the Asuras got up quickly. The god Visnu who is 
favourably disposed to his devotees immediately mounted 
his vehicle Garuda. 

25 On seeing her lord departing along with the gods, 
LaksmI, the daughter of the ocean, spoke with palms joined 
in reverence and tears welling up in the eyes. 

26. “O lord, I am your beloved. If I am always 
devoted to you, O storehouse of mercy, how does my 
brother’s death be at your hands. 

Visnu said : — 

27-28. Since ( have been eulogised by the gods I 
shall go to the battle ground immediately. I can only 
show my valour to the Asura Jalandhara. He cannot be 
slain by me because he is a part of Siva. Moreover 
Brahma has said so. Further, you love him too.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

29. Having said this and seating himself on Garucjia 
with the conch, discus, mace and the sword held in his 
hands, Vi$nu hastened to the fight along with Indra and 
other gods. 

30. Roaring like a lion and accompanied by the gods 



who blazed with Visnu’s splendour, he reached the place 
where Jalandhara was waiting. 

31. Then the Daityas afflicted by the gusts of wind 
set in motion by the wings in the speedy flight of the 
younger brother of Aruna (i.e Garucja) 220 were blown here 
and there like the clouds in the sky tossed about in a stormy 
whirlwind. * 

32. Then on seeing the Asuras afflicted by the gusts 
of wind, Jalandhara rushed against Visnu shouting out cries 
of bravery angrily. 

33. In the meantime the delighted gods equipped with 
a vast army began to fight with their strength increased by 
the brilliance of Visnu. 

34. Seeing the army of the gods present there ready 
to fight Jalandhara commanded the invincible Asuras thus. 

Jalandhara said : — 

35. O Excellent Asuras, put up a stiff fight with 
Indra and other gods who are always cowardly though they 
have a huge army. 

36-37. At my bidding let all these come out with 
their entire army — the Maury as numbering a hundred 
thousand, the Dhumras in hundreds, the Asuras and the 
Kalakeyas in crores and the Kalakas, the Daurhrdas and 
the Kankas in lakhs. 

38. All of you come out readily equipped with many 
divisions of the army and different kinds of weapons. Be 
fearless and free from hesitations. 

39. O Sumbha, O NiSumbha, destroy in a trice the 
insignificant gods who feel nervous in the battle field. You 
are extremely valorous. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

40-41. Thus the Asuras clever and efficient in battle, 
commanded by Jalandhara on the one hand and gods 
equipped with the four sorts of fighting groups on the other 

220. Ganuja, the vehicle of Vi?nu, is called Arunanuja, i.e. the 
younger brother of Aruna the charioteer of the sun. 

♦The verse 31 and the first half of the verse 32 of this chapter are 
repeated in Ch- 17 after the verse No. 7. 



Rudrasarhhitd 877 

fought one another with maces, arrows, javelins, spears etc. 
They hit one another with axes and spears. 

42. The strong ones hit and struck with different 
weapons. The heroic gods supported and invigorated by 
Hrsike£a roared like lions and discharged sharp arrows. 

43. Some fought with arrows of very sharp points; 
some with pestles and iron clubs and some with axes and 
spears. 

44. Thus the fight between the gods and the Asuras 
was terrific. It was very fierce frightening the sages and the 
Siddhas. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

( The fight between Vifnu and Jalandhara) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. Then the heroic Asuras hit and struck the gods 
distressed and terrified, with the spears, axes and clubs. 

2. With their bodies cut and pierced by the weapons 
of the Asuras, the gods including Indra became distressed in 
mind by fear and they fled from the battle. 

3. On seeing the gods fleeing, Visnu hastened to the 
battle ground seated on his vehicle Garuda. 

4. By means of his discus Sudarsana he diffused his 
splendour all round. He shone with the brilliant lotus in 
his hand and offered fearlessness to his devotees. 

5. Holding the conch, sword, mace and the bow, the 
heroic deity was very furious. He was efficient in the battle 
using fierce weapons. 

6. He produced the twanging sound from his bow 
and roared aloud. O sage, all the three worlds were filled 
with its loud sound. 

7. The lord Visnu who was highly infuriated cut off 
the heads of countless Asuras by means of the arrows 
discharged from his bow. 

8. Then the Asuras afflicted by the gusts of wind set 
in motion by the wings of Garuda in his speedy flight 



were blown to and fro like the clouds in the sky tossed 
about in a stormy whirlwind. 

9. On seeing the Asuras afflicted by the gusts of 
wind Jalandhara the great Asura became furious and terrified 
all the gods. 

10. Seeing Visnu suppressing and pounding the Asuras, 
the lips of the heroic Asura throbbed and he rushed at 
Vi?nu to fight with him. 

11. The king of Asuras shouted and roared terrifying 
both the gods and the Asuras. On hearing it, the ears became 
pierced. 

12. The entire universe, filled with the terrible shouts 
of the Asura Jalandhara, quaked. 

13. Then a great battle ensued between Vi$nu and 
Jalandhara, the ruler of Asuras, both filling up the sky with 
their arrows. 

14. O sage, gods, Asuras, sages and the Siddhas were 
very much surprised at the terrible mutual clash between 
the two. 

15. Striking with a single arrow, Visnu smote the heart 
of the Asura. With innumerable arrows he cut off the 
umbrella, banner, bow and arrows of the demon. 

16. Seizing the mace with his hand, the Asura jumped 
up quickly, hit Garuda on his head and felled him to the 
ground. 

17. The infuriated Asura with throbbing lips hit 
Vi?nu in his heart with his sharp spear diffusing its 
splendour. 

18. Vi?nu laughingly split the mace with his sword. 
The destroyer of Asuras twanged his bow and split him with 
sharp arrows. 

19. Visnu the infuriated destroyer of the Asuras 
smote the Asura Jalandhara with a very sharp terrifying 
arrow. 

20. On seeing his arrow coming, the powerful Asura 
cut it off with another arrow and hit Vi$nu in the chest. 

21. The heroic Visnu of long arms split the arrow 
discharged by the Asura to the size of gingelly seeds and 
roared. 



Rudrasarhhiid 


879 


22. The infuriated great Asura fixed an arrow again 
to his bow and split the arrow of Visnu. 

23. Vasudeva fixed another arrow to his bow for the 
destruction of the enemy of the gods angrily and roared like 
a lion. 

24. Biting his lips with anger, Jalandhara the power- 
ful king of Asuras split the bow of Visnu with his arrow. 

25. The heroic Asura of fierce valour, terrible to the 
gods, hit Visnu again with very sharp arrows. 

26. With his bow split, the lord Visnu, protector of 
the worlds, hurled his great mace for the destruction of 
Jalandhara. 

27. That mace resembling a blazing flame when 
hurled by Visnu moved with unerring aim and dashed 
against his body. 

28. Though hit by it, the great haughty Jalandhara 
did not move even slightly as though he was hit by a 
flower-garland. 

29. Then the infuriated Jalandhara, invincible in war, 
terrifying to the Asuras hurled a trident, resembling fire, 
at Vi$nu. 

30. Immediately Visnu remembered the lotus-like 
feet of Siva and cut the trident with his sword Nandaka. 

31. When the trident was split, the lord of the 
Asuras leapt and rushed against Vi$nu and hit him in the 
chest with his fist. 

32. Without minding the pain in the least, the heroic 
Visnu hit Jalandhara in the chest with his firm fist. 

33. Then both of them equally powerful had a hand 
to hand fight hitting each other with arms, fists and knees. 
They filled the earth with reverberating sounds. 

34. Fighting with the Asura thus, for a long time, O 
excellent sage, Vi§nu was surprised. He felt dejected in the 
heart. 

35. Then he the foremost among the magic-wielders 
assumed a delightful aspect. He addressed the king of 
Asuras in a thundering voice. 

Vifnu said : — 

36. “O excellent Asura, you are blessed. You are 



880 Sivapur&na 

invincible in war. Since you are a great lord you are not 
at all afraid of even great weapons. 

37. Many Asuras have been killed by these very same 
weapons in great battles. The wicked and haughty people 
have been pierced through their bodies and killed. 

38. O great Asura, I am delighted by this fight with 
you. You are really great. A hero like you has not been 
seen in the three worlds including the mobile and immobile 
beings. 

39. O lord of Asuras, choose a boon. I am pleased 
at your valour. I shall give you anything even that which 
cannot be given, whatever is in your mind. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

40. On hearing these words of Visnu, skilled in 
magic, the intelligent king of the Asuras replied thus. 

Jalandhara said : — 

41. O Brother-in-law, if you are pleased give me this 
boon. You stay in my house with all your followers, my 
sister and myself. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

42. On hearing these words of the great Asura, lord 
Visnu, the lord of gods, said distressingly — “So be it.” 

43. Then Visnu came to the city called Jalandhara 221 
along with his followers, the gods and laksmi. 

44. Then the Asura Jalandhara returned to his abode 
and stayed very delightedly in the company of his sister 
and Visnu. 

45. Thereafter Jalandhara appointed Asuras in the 
authoritative posts of the gods. Joyously he returned to the 
Earth. 

46. The son of the ocean confiscated whatever gem 
or jewel the gods, Gandharvas or Siddhas had hoarded. 

47. After appointing the powerful Asura, Ni£umbha, 

22 1. The town of the Daitya Jalandhara can be identified with 
that of the same name in the East Punjab. It was the capital of Jfilan- 
dhara Desa in the Uttarapatha. For details see the Kumarik&khanda of 
Skandapur&na. 



Rudrasarhhita 881 

in the nether-worlds, the powerful ruler of the Asuras 
brought Sesa and others to the Earth. 

48. Making gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Serpents, 
Raksasas and human beings, the denizens of his capital, 
he ruled over the three worlds. 

49. After making the gods thus subservient to himself, 
Jalandhara protected them all virtuously, like his own sons. 

50. When he was ruling the kingdom virtuously, none 
in his realm was sick or miserable or lean and emaciated 
or indigent. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

( The conversation between Narada and Jalandhara ) 
Sanatkumdra said : — 

1. When the great Asura was ruling over the Earth 
virtuously, the gods were reduced to be mere slaves, O 
great sage. 

2. The distressed gods mentally sought refuge in 
Siva the benefactor, lord of gods and of everyone. 

3. They eulogised the great lord, the bestower of 
everything and favourably disposed to his devotees, by means 
of pleasant words. 

4. The great lord, the bestower of all desires to his 
devotees called Narada and commissioned him with a desire 
to carry out the task of the gods. 

5. Then the celestial sage, the wise devotee of Siva, 
the goal of the good, went to the gods in the city of the 
Asuras at the bidding of Siva. 

6. On seeing the sage Narada coming, the distressed 
gods, Indra and others, stood up. 

7. After bowing to the sage, Indra and other gods, 
their anxiety apparently manifest in their faces, offered a seat 
to Narada. 

8. After bowing to Narada the great sage who sat com- 
fortably, the distressed gods, Indra and others spoke 
to him again. 



Ths gods said : — 

9. O excellent sage, listen to our misery, O merciful 
one, after listening to it, destroy it quickly. You are power- 
ful and the favourite of Siva. 

10. The gods have been routed by the Asura 
Jalandhara from their abodes and positions of controlling 
authority. Hence we are miserable and distressed. 

1 1 . The hot-rayed sun and the moon have been ousted 
from their positions. The fire-god and the god of death and 
guardians of the quarters have been expelled. 

12. The gods have been harassed by that powerful 
Asura. We who have been subjected to great grief now 
seek refuge in you. 

13. The great Asura Jalandhara who has suppressed 
the gods and who is very powerful has made Visnu sub- 
servient to him in the battle. 

14. Becoming subservient because of helplessness occa- 
sioned by the boon granted to him, Vi?nu who carried out 
our tasks has now begun to stay in his palace along with 
Laksmi. 

15. O intelligent one, please exert yourself for the 
destruction of Jalandhara. You have fortunately come to 
us and you have always been the person who can achieve 
everything for us. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

16. On hearing these words of the gods, the great 
sage Narada, the merciful, consoled them and said. 

J Varada said : — 

17. O gods, I know that you have been defeated by 
the king of Asuras, that you are miserable and harassed and 
have been deposed. 

18. There is no doubt in this that I shall carry out 
your task according to my ability. O gods, since you are in 
misery I shall be favourable to you.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

19. After saying so and consoling the gods, the excel- 



kudrasaihkitd 883 

lent sage went to the assembly chamber of Jalandhara to see 
the favourite Asura. 

20. On seeing the excellent sage, the king Jalandhara 
stood up and offered him a splendid seat with great devotion. 

21. After worshipping him duly the surprised king of 
the Asuras laughed loudly and spoke to the excellent sage. 

Jalandhara said : — 

22. O brahmin, whence do you come from? What 
did you see here ? O sage, what is the aim of your 
present visit here ? 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

23. On hearing these words of king Jalandhara the 
delighted great sage Narada replied to him. 

Ndrada said : — 

24. O Jalandhara of great intellect, O lord of Danavas 
and Daityas, O lord of all the worlds, you are blessed. You 
alone are the enjoyer of all jewels. 

25. O excellent king of Daityas, listen to the purpose 
for which I have come here. I shall explain it to you. 

26. O lord of Daityas, I had been to the summit of 
ICailasa casually. It is ten thousand Yojanas wide. It has a 
grove of Kalpa trees. 

27. Hundreds of Kamadhenus are found there. It is 
illuminated by Cintamani gems. It abounds in gold. It is 
divine and wonderfully brilliant. 

28. There I saw Siva seated along with Parvati. He 
is fair-complexioned and exquisitely handsome. He has 
three eyes and the moon for his crest. 

29. On seeing this wonderfully great thing, a doubt 
arose in my mind. Can there be anywhere in the three 
worlds such a splendour as this ?” 

30. O lord of Daityas then the idea of your prosperity 
struck into my mind. Now I have come to you to see it 
personally. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

31. On hearing these words of Narada the lord of 



Daityas Jalandhara showed all his glory to Narada. 

32. On seeing it, the wise Narada, eager to realise the 
interests of the gods, spoke to the king of Daityas, Jalandhara, 
induced by the lord. 

Narada said : — 

33. O foremost among heroes, you have everything 
conducive to prosperity. You are the lord of the three worlds. 
What wonder that you possess this wealth. 

34. Big jewels, heaps of gems, elephants and other 
adjuncts to prosperity flourish in your mansion. Whatever 
valuable thing there is in the worlds finds a place here. 

35. O great hero, the most excellent of all elephants, 
Airavata of Indra has been brought by you. The most excel- 
lent of all horses, UccaihSravas 222 of the sun has been 
brought by you. 

36. The celestial Kalpa tree has been brought by you; 
the treasures of Kubera and the aerial chariot of Brahma 
yoked to swan have been brought by you. 

37. Thus all excellent things available in heaven, 
earth and nether worlds, O great Daitya, flourish in your 
mansion in their entirety. 

38. O great hero, I am highly delighted on seeing 
your great affluence consisting of diverse objects — elephant 
horse etc. 

39. But O Jalandhara, your mansion is deficient in 
the most excellent of all ladies. You deserve to bring that. 

40. O Jalandhara, one who possesses all excellent things 
but does not possess the most excellent of women does not 
shine. His life is rendered waste. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

41. On hearing these words of Narada the noble soul, 
the king of Daityas, with his mind excited by passion, spoke 
as follows — 


222. Uccai^Sravas, the horse of the sun, is distinct from that of the 
same name which was appropriated by Indra after it was produced at the 
churning of the ocean (Cp. V. u of the next chapter). 



Ruirasarhhitd 


885 


Jalandhar a said : — 

42. “O celestial sage, O Narada, obeisance be to you, 
O holy lord. Where is this most excellent of all ladies ? 
Please tell me now. 

43. Wherever it may be in the whole of this universe, 
if such a lady exists anywhere, I will bring her here. Truth, 
it is certainly the truth.** 

Narada said : — 

44. Kailasa is very beautiful and it possesses all sorts 
of things conducive to prosperity. Siva lives there assuming 
the form of a naked Yogin. 

45. His wife Parvatl is exquisitely beautiful in every 
limb. She is charming and has all the characteristics of a 
beautiful lady. 

46. Such an exquisite beauteous form has never been 
seen anywhere. It incites the enthusiasm of everybody. It is 
highly wonderful. It fascinates even the Yogins. It is worthy 
of being seen. It is conducive to great prosperity. 

47. This occurs to my mind, O valiant Jalandhara that 
there is none more prosperous in the three worlds than Siva 
who possesses the most excellent of all ladies. 

48. Even the four-faced 223 lord Brahma, immersed in her 
ocean of beauty, lost his mental steadiness formerly. 224 Who 
can be compared to such a beautiful lady? 

49. Even Siva reputed to be free from infatuation has 
been won over by her womanly sports. Siva who is 
independent has been subjugated by her. 

50. The prosperity that he enjoys inasmuch as he 
indulges in dalliance with the most excellent of all ladies 
has not come to you O lord of Daityas though you are 
the master of excellent gems and jewels. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

51. After saying this, the world-renowned celestial 


223- Brahma is called four-faced (caturanana or caturmukha) . 
Originally he had five heads but one was cut off by Siva for, telling lies. 
According to another version it was burnt off by the fire of Siva's central 
eye for speaking disrespectfully. 

224. Gp. §P. RS. P&rvatikhantfa 49. 8. 



886 Sivapurdya 

sage, Narada, pursuing his attempt to help the gods departed 
from there by the aerial path. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

( Jalandhar a? s emissary to Siva) 


Vydsa said : — 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumara, what did the king of 
Daityas do after the departure of Narada to heaven ? Please 
narrate to me in detail. 

Sanaikum&ra said : — 

2. When Narada departed to heaven after taking 
leave of the Daitya, the king of Daityas who had heard of 
the exquisite beauty of Parvati became harassed with pangs 
of love. 

3. The deluded Daitya, Jalandhara, who had lost 
clear thinking, being swayed by Time (the annihilator) called 
his messenger Rahu. 

4. The infatuated son of the ocean, Jalandhara, 
addressed him politely with these words. 

Jalandhara said : — 

5. O Rahu of great intellect, most excellent of my 
emissaries, go to the mountain Kailasa, O accomplisher of 
all activities. 

6. A sage and a Yogin named Siva lives there. He has 
matted locks of hair. He is detached. He has controlled 
his senses. His body is smeared with ashes. 

7. O messenger, you shall go there and tell the 
detached Yogin Siva with matted locks of hair, fearlessly. 

8. ‘O Yogin, ocean of mercy, of what avail is an 
exquisitely 4>eautiful wife to you who stay in the jungle 
attended by ghosts, goblins, spirits and other beings ? 

9. O Yogin, this state of affairs is no good in a world 
with me as the Ruler.' Hence you give up your wife, the 
most excellent lady, to me, the enjoyer of all excellent 
things. 



Rudrasarhkitd 


887 


10. Know that the whole universe including the 
mobile and immobile beings is under my suzerainty. All 
the excellent things of the three worlds have come into my 
possession. 

11. I have forcibly seized the most excellent elephant 
of Indra, the most excellent horse, Uccai^sravas and the 
celestial tree parijata. 

12. The wonderfully excellent and the most divine aer- 
ial chariot fitted with the swan, belonging to Brahma is now 
standing in my court-yard. 

13. The divine and excellent treasure Mahapadma etc. 
of Kubera is. in my custody. The umbrella of Varuna stands 
in my house shedding its golden brilliance. 

14. The great garland of never-fading lotuses of fine 
filaments belonging to my father is as good as mine. The 
noose of Varuna lord of waters is also mine. 

15. The excellent Javelin of Mrtyu has been seized by 
me with force. The god of fire has surrendered to me two 
clothes purified in fire. 

16. Thus, O great Yogin, all excellent things shine in 
my possession. Hence O ascetic (wearing matted hair) you 
too surrender your wife the most excellent of all ladies to me. 226 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

17. On hearing his words Rahu went to Kailasa and 
was allowed to enter by Nandin. With surprise and mystery 
manifest in his eyes, he went to the assembly chamber of 
Siva. 

18-20. On entering it, he saw Siva, the lord of the 
gods, the great lord, quelling darkness with his refulgence, 
shining with ashes smeared ( over his body) , adorned with 
all Royal paraphernalia, of wonderful features, exquisite in 
every limb and embellished with divine ornaments. The 
emissary named Rahu bowed to Siva. His haughtiness subsi- 
ded by the brilliance of his body. He went near Siva. 

21. Rahu was desirous of speaking to him. He sat in 
front of Siva. Urged by his gesture Rahu spoke to the 
three-eyed god Siva. 

225. For the similarity of ideas and verbal expression compare 
verses 10-16 and 22-29 °f this chapter with the verses of the Mkp. 



Sivapurdna 


888 

Rdku said : — 

22. I am the messenger of the lord of the three 
worlds, worthy of being served for ever by Daityas and 
serpents. I have come here to you on being sent by him. 

23. The son of the ocean J aland hara became the lord 
of all Daityas and now he is the lord of the three worlds. 
He is the emperor of all. 

24. That powerful king of Daityas is like the god of 
death to the gods. Listen to what he says addressing you the 
Yogin. 

25. O bull-bannered god, listen to the behest of the 
lord of Daityas who has divine power and who is the master 
of all excellent things. 

26. How can the auspicious daughter of Himavat be 
a wife unto you who habitually stay in the cremation ground 
wearing garlands of bones and assuming the form of a naked 
ascetic. 

27. I am the possessor of all excellent things. She is 
the most excellent of all ladies. She deserves me better than 
you who live on alms. 

28. The three worlds are under my control. I partake 
of shares in sacrifices. The excellent things of the three 
worlds are found in my palace. 

29. We are the enjoyers of excellent things. You are 
a mere naked ascetic and a Yogin, Surrender your wife unto 
me. Subjects shall always keep their king happy. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

30. When Rahu spoke thus, a terrific being resonant 
like the thunder came out from the space between the eye- 
brows of the trident-bearing deity. 

31. He had a leonine mouth with a moving tongue; 
his eyes shed fiery flames ; his hair stood at its end;*his body 
was dry and rough. He appeared to be the man-lion incar- 
nation of Visnu. 

32. He was huge in size. He had long arms. His 
calves were as stout and huge as the palmyra tree. He was 
very terrible. He immediately rushed at Rahu. 

33. On seeing him rushing to devour, Rahu was terri- 
fied. He ran out when he was caught by the terrible being. 



RudrasarfikitS 


889 


Rdhu said : — 

34. “O great lord, O lord of the gods, save me who 
have sought refuge in you. You are always worthy of being 
worshipped by the gods and Asuras. You are the lord endow- 
ed with all riches and accomplishments. 

35. O great lord, your terrible servant has come here 
to swallow me, a brahmin. 

36. O lord of gods, favourably disposed to your devo- 
tees, save me lest he should devour me. Obeisance be to 
you again and again.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

37. O sage, on hearing the words of the brahmin, the 
great lord, favourite of the distressed and helpless, spoke to 
his Gana. 

The great lord said : — 

38. “Leave off this brahmin Rahu, the emissary who 
has sought refuge. O excellent Gana, those who seek shelter 
shall be protected, not punished.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

39. Commanded thus by the lord of Parvatl, of sympa- 
thetic temperament, the Gana set Rahu free, immediately 
on hearing the word brahmin. 

40. After leaving off Rahu, the gana came near Siva 
and pleaded to the great lord in piteous words. 

The gana said : — 

41. O great lord, O lord of the gods, O Siva the 
merciful, O deity favourable to the devotees, my prey has 
been taken away. 

42^ O lord, I am tormented by hunger. So I am utterly 
emaciated. O lord of the gods, what shall be eaten by me? 
Please command me, O lord. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

43. On hearing these words of the being, the great lord 
of wonderful sports, eager to help his own persons, replied. 



The great lord said:—* 

44. “If you arc badly in need of food, if hunger torments 
you, eat up immediately the flesh of your own hands and 
feet.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

45. On being commanded thus by Siva, the being ate 
up the flesh from his limbs. He was then left only with his 
head. 

46. On seeing that being of terrible activities, left only 
with his head, the delighted SadaSiva spoke smilingly. 

Siva said: — 

47. “O great Gana, you are blessed since you carried 
out my behest to the very letter. O excellent one, I am 
pleased with this action of yours. 

48. You shall hereafter be known by the title Kirtimukha. 
You shall be my door-keeper. You shall be one of my 
great Ganas, very heroic and terrible to all wicked persons. 

49. You are my favourite. In the course of my worship, 
you too shall be worshipped always by my devotees. Those 
who do not worship you cannot be pleasing to me.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

50. With this excellent blessing from Siva, he became 
delighted. From that time onwards Kirtimukha 226 was 
stationed at the entrance of the lord of the gods. 

51. This Gana shall be specially worshipped in the 
course of the adoration of Siva. Those who do not worship 
him at the outset will find their worship in vain. 


226. Kirtimukha, the great Garia of Siva, represented in sculpture 
by a trunkless head, is installed beside, the door in front of Siva’s image. 



Rudrasartihitd 


891 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

(The fight between the rank and file 
of the Ga$af and the Asuras ) 


Vydsa said : — 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumara, a wonderful story has 
been narrated by you, wherein the sanctifying sports of Siva 
the great lord are included. 

2. Now take pity on me and tell me with pleasure. O 
great sage, when released by that being where did Rahu go ? 

Suta said : — 

3. On hearing the words of Vyasa of immeasurable 
intelligence, the great sage, the delighted son of Brahma, 
replied . 

Sanatkumara said: — 

4. Rahu had been let off in the land of the outcastes. 227 
He too became an outcaste and came to be known in the 
world as such. 

5. Considering that as his second birth he became 
humble. He became free from haughtiness. He slowly wended 
his way to the city of Jalandhara. 

6. After approaching Jalandhara the lord of Daityas, 
he explained everything concerning Siva in detail, O Vyasa. 

7. On hearing it, the powerful son of the ocean, the 
excellent lord of Daityas, Jalandhara became furious from head 
to foot. 

8. Then the infuriated excellent Daitya commanded the 
entire army of the Daityas to enter into the fray. 

Jalandhara said : — 

9-10. Let all the Asuras such as Kalanemi and others 
set out with their entire divisions; Sumbha, Nisumbha and 


227. The country of Varbaras or Barbaras is identified with the 
Abir (Abhlra) Dcsa in the south-west in the Indus delta. Barbaras were 
the wild people associated with Yavanas and Khasas. There is a reference 
to the town Barbari or Barbariki in Skanda Puraqa (1 1 1.37.1) and 
Barbaricum or Barbaricon by Perrplus and Ptolemy. For details see 
Awasthi: Studies in Skanda PurSria PP 100-101. 



892 


StvapurdQa 

other heroes; the descendants of Kotivlra, the scions of the 
family of Kambu. Daurhrdas, Kalakas, Kalakeyas, Mauryas 
and Dhaumras — let all these start for the fight. 

11. After ordering thus, the lord of the Asuras the 
valorous son of the ocean set out quickly accompanied by 
crores of Daityas. 

12. Then Sukra and Rahu with his head severed went 
ahead of him. In his quick jerky movement, his crown 
became dislodged and fell on the ground. 

13. The sky was entirely enveloped by clouds as in 
the rainy season. Many ill omens occurred portending great 
slumber. 

14. On seeing his enterprise, the gods including Indra 
went to Kailasa, the abode of Siva without being observed. 

15. After going there and seeing Siva, the gods including 
Indra, bowed to him with stooping shoulders. They joined 
their palms in reverence and eulogised. 

The gods said : — 

16. O great lord, lord of the gods, O Siva the merci- 
ful, obeisance be to you. Save us who have sought refuge in 
you. 

17. O lord, we are very much distressed by this harass- 
ment. All including Ijndra are deposed and compelled to 
stay on the earth. 

18. O lord, how is it possible that you do not know 
this adversity of the gods ? Hence in order to protect us please 
kill him. 

19. O lord, Vi$nu who was assigned by you the task of 
protection is now unable to protect us. 

20. He is also subservient to him and stays in his man- 
sion along with Laksmi. AH of us gods stay there obeying 
his behests. 

21. O Siva, we have approached you unobserved by 
him. That powerful son of the ocean is coming hither to fight 
with you. 

22. O omniscient lord, you shall kill Jalandhara in the 
battle without delay. Save us who have sought refuge in you. 



Rudrasarhhitd 
Sanatkumdra said : — 


893 


23. After saying this, the gods including Indra bowed 
to him and stood humbly glancing at the feet of lord Siva. 

24. On hearing the words of the gods the bull- 
bannered deity laughed. He called Visnu immediately and 
spoke these words. 

The lord Siva said : — 

25. O great Visnu, the distressed gods harassed by 
Jalandhara have sought refuge in me. 

26. O Visnu, how is it that Jalandhara was not killed 
in battle by you? Leaving ofT your own Vaikuntha you have 
gone to his mansion ? 

27. As I wanted to be free and sportful, I had appointed 
you for the protection of the good and the curbing of the 
wicked. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

28. On hearing the words of lord Siva, Visnu replied 
humbly bowing down with palms joined in reverence. 

Visnu said : — 

29. He was not killed in war by me because he was 
born of a part of yours. Moreover he is Laksmi’s brother. 
Please kill him. 

30. O lord of the gods, he is very powerful, heroic and 
indefatigable by all the heaven-dwellers and others too. I am 
telling you the truth. 

31. In fact a war was fought with him by me in the 
company of the gods. But my strategy was ineffective in regard 
to this great Danava. 

32. I told him “I am delighted with your valour. 
Tell me the boon you wish to have”. On hearing these words 
of mine he chose an excellent boon. 

33. ‘‘O great Visnu please stay in my mansion subser- 
vient to me along with my sister, 228 the gods and myself.** 
So I went to his mansion. 

228. LaksmI, produced at the churning of the ocean, became the 
daughter of the ocean. Thus she could be the sister ot Jalandhaia who 
was the son of the ocean. 



Sivapwrtfia 


894 

Sanathmdra said : — 

34. On hearing the words of Visnu, lord Siva who 
is favourably disposed to his devotees laughed and said deli- 
ghtedly and sympathetically. 

The great lord Siva said : — 

35. O Visnu, foremost among the gods, please listen 
to my words attentively. I will kill the great Daitya Jalan- 
dhara. There is no doubt about this. 

36. Go back to your abode fearlessly. Let the gods 
too go back without fear and hesitation, considering the 
ruler of the Asuras already killed. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

37. On hearing the words of lord Siva, the lord of 
Laksmi immediately went to his abode without doubts along 
with the gods. 

38. In the meantime, O Vyasa, that valorous king of 
the Daityas went along with the well- equipped Asuras to 
the outskirts of the mountain. 

39. Accompanied by a vast army he laid siege to 
Kailasa. He stood there like the god of death roaring like 
a lion. 

40. On hearing the tumultuous roar of the Daityas, lord 
Siva of great sports, the destroyer of the wicked, became very 
furious. 

41. The great lord of various sports, the enthusiastic 
Siva commanded his powerful Ganas, Nandin and others, 
severally. 

42. Nandin, Vighnesvara, Kumara and all other Ganas, 
at the bidding of Siva hurriedly got ready for the battle. 

43. The infuriated and invincible Ganas descended from 
Kailasa heroically shouting war cries and leaping to fight. 

44. Then at the ridges, valleys and sides of Kailasa, 
a terrible battle was fought between the leaders of the Pra- 
mathas and the Daityas. Weapons clashed with weapons. 

45. The whole earth shook resonant with the sounds 
of great war drums, Mrdangas and conches that inspired the 
heroes a * well as the sounds of elephants, horses and chariots. 

46. The whole atmosphere was filled with javeline, iron 



Rudrasarfikitd 895 

clubs, arrows, great pestles, iron rods, pikes etc. as if strewn 
with pearls. 

47. With the dead elephants, horses and foot soldiers, 
the earth shone in the same way as before when great moun- 
tains were scattered, smitten by the thunderbolt of Indra. 

48. With the groups of Dai tyas killed by the Pramathas, 
and with the Ganas killed by the Daityas, the whole 
ground was filled with suets, flesh and streams of blood. It 
became so marshy as it became impassable. 

49. With the power of Sanjivani, Bhargava resuscitated 
the forces of the Daityas killed by the Pramathas in the battle 
again and again. 

50. On seeing them, all the Ganas were agitated and 
terrified. They intimated to the lord of the gods what 
Sukra did. 

51. On hearing it, lord Siva became terribly furious. 
He became terrific blazing the quarters as it were. 

52. A terrible Krtya came out of Rudra’s mouth. Her 
calves were as stout as Palmyra trees. Her mouth was huge 
and deep like mountain caverns. With her breasts she crush- 
ed huge trees. 

53. O excellent sage, she rushed immediately to the 
battle ground. The terrible Krtya roamed the battle- 
ground devouring the great Asuras. 

54. Fearlessly she rushed amid the battle-field where 
Bhargava was stationed surrounded by the leading Daityas. 

55. O sage, she enveloped the whole sky with her 
terrible brilliance. She split the ground she trod; she stuffed 
Bhargava into her vaginal passage and vanished in the sky.. 

56. On seeing Bhargava seized, the invincible armies 
of the Daityas became dejected and faded in their faces. They 
fled from the battle ground. 

57. The army of the Daityas became scattered and 
split in their terrific fear of the Ganas like bundles of grass 
split and scattered when blown by the wind. ' 

58. On seeing the army of the Daityas thus dispersed 
and frightened of the Ganas, the leaders Sumbha and Ni«u- 
mbha and Kalanemi became infuriated. 

59. All the three powerful Daityas obstructed the 



896 Sivapurdnd 

army of the Ganas showering arrows like the destructive 
clouds in the rainy season. 

60. The volleys of arrows discharged by the Daityas 
enveloped all the quarters and the atmosphere like huge 
swarms of locusts. They shook the hosts of Ganas. 

61. Split by hundreds of arrows, the Ganas shed 
streams of blood. They resembled the red Kim£uka flowers 
of the spring season. They did not know what to do. 

62. On seeing their army thus shattered, the infuria- 
ted leaders Nandin, Gane:',a and Karttikeya hurriedly checked 
the rushing Daityas. 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 

( Description of the Special War) 

Sanatkumdra j aid : — 

1. On seeing the leaders of the Ganas, Nandin, 
Ganesa and Karttikeya, the Danavas rushed at them for a 
duel combat. 

2. Kalanemi clashed with Nandin; Sumbha fought 
Ganesa and Nisumbha hesitatingly rushed at Karttikeya. 

3. With five arrows Nisumbha hit the peacock of 
Karttikeya in the chest and it fell unconscious. 

4. Then the infuriated Karttikeya discharged five 
arrows at his chariot and pierced the horses and the 
charioteer. 

5. The invincible hero hit Nisumbha with another 
sharp arrow quickly and roared. 

6. The Asura Nisumbha of great prowess and heroism 
hit Karttikeya in the battle with his arrow as he roared. 

7. By the time the furious Karttikeya seized his spear, 
Nisumbha struck him with it. 

8. Thus, O Vyasa, a great fight between- Karttikeya 
and Nisumbha ensued as they shouted heroically. 

9. Then Nandin hit Kalanemi with seven arrows and 
pierced his horses, banner, chariot and charioteer. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


897 

10. With very sharp shafts discharged from his bow, 
the infuriated Kalanemi cut the bow of Nandin. 

11. Defying the great demon Kalanemi the heroic 
Nandlsvara hit him in the chest with his spear. 

12. With his horses and charioteer killed and himself 
wounded in the chest, he broke the top of a mountain and 
hit Nandin. 

1 3. Then Sumbha and Ganesa seated respectively in a 
chariot and on a mouse fought each other with volleys of 
arrows. 

14. Ganesa hit Sumbha in his chest with an arrow 
and felled his charioteer with three arrows on the ground. 

15. Then the infuriated Sumbha covered Ganesa with 
a shower of arrows. Hitting the mouse with three arrows 
he roared like thunder. 

16. The mouse pierced by the arrows, shook with 
acute pain. Ganesa was thrown off (his vehicle) and he 
became a foot soldier ( as it were) . 

17. Then Ganesa hit Sumbha in his chest with his 
axe and felled him to the ground. Thereafter he mounted 
his mouse again. 

18. Lord Ganesa of elephantine face got ready for 
the fight. He hit him mockingly and angrily as if hitting a 
great elephant with a goad. 

19. Kalanemi and Sumbha simultaneously attacked 
Ganesa furiously with arrows as ruthless as serpents. 

20. On seeing him afflicted, the powerful Virabhadra 
accompanied by a crore goblins rushed in. 

21. The Kusmandas, Bhairavas, Vetalas, Yoginls, 
Pisacas, Dakinis and Ganas came there with him. 

22. The Earth, resonant with various kinds of noise, 
shouts of joy, leonine roars and the sounds of Damarukas, 
quaked. 

23. Then the Bhutas ran here and there devouring the 
Danavas. They jumped up and danced in the 'battle field 
and threw the Asura on the ground. 

24. In the meantime, O Vyasa, Nandin and Guha 
regained their consciousness and got up. They roared in the 
battlefield again. 

25. Nandin and Karttikeya came hurriedly and struck 



898 Sivafmrdna 

the Daityas in the battle ground with incessant volleys of 
arrows. 

26. Then the army of the Daityas became agitated 
and dejected with many Daityas wounded, split, killed, felled 
to the ground and devoured. 

27. Thus Nandin, Karttikeya the formidable and 
valorous, Virabhadra and the other Gan as roared much in the 
battle. 

28. Then those two generals of the son of the ocean, 
Niiumbha and Sumbha, the great Daitya Kalanemi and the 
other Asuras were defeated. 

29. On seeing the army destroyed, the powerful son 
of the ocean rushed at the Ganas in his chariot of waving 
and wafting colours. 

30. Thereat even the defeated Daityas became 
jubilant. O Vyasa, they roared much and got ready for the 
fray. 

31. The victorious Ganas of Siva too roared, led by 
Nandin, Karttikeya, Ganesa and Vlrabhadara, O sage. 

32. The trumpets of the elephants, the neighing of 
the horses, the rumbling of the chariots, the sounds of the 
conches and war-drums and the leonine roars of the armies 
rose up. 

33. The space between heaven and the earth became 
enveloped by the many arrows discharged byjalandhara as 
if by floating masses of mist. 

34. Hitting Nandin and Ganesa with five arrows 
each and Virabhadra with twenty he roared like thunder. 

35. Karttikeya the heroic son of Siva then swiftly hit 
the Daitya Jalandhara with his spear and roared. 

36. With the body pierced through by the spear, the 
Daitya fell on the ground with eyes rolling. But the power- 
ful Asura swiftly stood up. 

37. Then Jalandhara the infuriated leader of the 
Daityas hit Karttikeya in his chest with his mace. 

38. O Vyasa, plainly exhibiting the successful efficiency 
of the Mace secured as a favour from Brahma Karttikeya 
fell on the ground suddenly. 

39. Similarly, struck by the mace Nandin too fell on 



Rudtasathhiid 899 

the ground. He was distressed a little although he was a 
great hero and a destroyer of enemies. 

40. Then the infuriated hero Gane£a came there 
after remembering the lotus like feet of Siva and split the 
mace of the Daitya with his axe. 

41. Virabhadra then hit the Danava in his chest with 
three arrows. He cut off the banner, umbrella, bow and the 
horses of the Daitya with seven arrows. 

42. Then the infuriated leader of the Daityas lifted 
up his terrible Sakti and felled Gane&. He mounted another 
chariot then. 

43. The powerful leader of the Daityas did not mind 
Virabhadra at all. Angrily he rushed at him. 

44. Jalandhara, the heroic king of Daityas, hit 
Virabhadra with a fierce arrow and roared. 

45. The infuriated Virabhadra split that arrow with a 
sharp-edged arrow. With another great arrow he hit him too. 

46. Then both of them, the most excellent of heroes 
refulgent like the sun, fought each other with different kinds 
of weapons and missiles. 

47. Virabhadra then felled his horses with his arrows. 
He forcefully cut off him bow and flags too. 

48. Then the king of the Daityas leapt up to him with 
a great iron club. That powerful warrior reached very near 
Virabhadra very quickly. 

49. The heroic and powerful son of the ocean hit 
Virabhadra on his head with his great iron club. He then roared. 

50. Virabhadra, the leader of the Ganas, fell on the 
ground with his head shattered by the iron club and shed 
much blood. 

51. On seeing Virabhadra fallen, the terrified Ganas 
abandoned the battle ground shrieking and fled to lord 
Siva. 

52. On hearing the tumultuous uproar of' the Ganas, 
the moon- crested lord asked the excellent Ganas, the heroes 
standing near him. 

Siva said : — 

53. How is this tumultuous uproar among my Ganas ? 



900 iivapurSna 

O heroes, let this be enquired into. Peace shall be established 
by me, of course. 

54. Even as the lord of the gods was conducting 
the enquiry, the leaders of the Ganas approached the lord. 

55. On seeing them dejected, the lord enquired after 
their health. The Ganas then intimated to him everything 
in detail. 

56. On hearing it, lord Siva, the expert in divine 
sports assured them of freedom from fear increasing their 
enthusiasm. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 

(Description of Jalandhara' s Battle) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. Then the great lord Siva assuming a terrible form 
went laughingly to the battle-field and sat on his bull, 
accompanied by his heroic Ganas. 

2. On seeing Siva coming, the Ganas who were for- 
merly defeated returned to fight roaring like lions. 

3. Other Ganas too shouted heroically and jubilantly. 
Well-equipped with their weapons they killed the Daityas 
with showers of arrows. 

4. On seeing Siva the terrible, all the Daityas fled 
for fear from the battle field as the sins on seeing a devotee 
of Siva. 

5. On seeing the Daityas returning from the battle 
field, Jalandhara rushed at Siva discharging thousands of 
arrows. 

6. Thousands of leading Daityas, NHumbha, Sumbha 
and others rushed at Siva, biting their lips. 

7. Similarly Kalanemi the hero, Khadgaroma, Balahaka, 
Ghasmara, Pracanqla and others rushed at Siva. 

8. O sage, the heroes Sumbha and others, covered 
the Ganas of Rudra with arrows and cut their limbs. 

9. On seeing his army of Ganas enveloped in darkness 



Rudrasarhhitd 


901 


by the vollevs of arrows, Siva split the net of their arrows 
and encompassed the sky with his own. 

10. He afflicted the Daityas with the gusts of wind 
raised by the arrows. He felled them to the ground with 
fierce volleys of arrows. 

11. He severed the head of Khadgaroma from his 
body with his axe. He shattered the head of Balahaka with 
his club into two pieces. 

12. He tied the Daitya Ghasmara with his noose and 
dashed him on the ground. With his trident, he chopped off 
the great hero Pracanda. 

1 3. Some of the Asuras were killed by the bull. Some 
were struck by the arrows. Like elephants harassed by lions, 
the Asuras were unable to stay there. 

14. Then the great Asura Jalandhara became in- 
furiated and rebuked the Daityas in the battle. The 
courageous Daitya mocked at Sumbha and others and spoke 
thus. 

Jalandhara said : — 

15. Of what avail is your boasting about the pedigree 
of your mother if you flee back on being attacked ? To die 
cowardly while you profess to be heroes is not commendable, 
nor does it yield heaven. 

16. O trivial fellows, if you have faith in war or the 
essential strength in the heart or if you have no lurking 
pleasures for sexual indulgence then you come forward and 
stand before me. 

17. Death in battle is preferrable. It yields all 
cherished desires. It is especially conducive to fame. It has 
been proclaimed as the bestower of salvation too. 

18. The wandering recluse of supreme knowledge and 
wisdom as well as he who dies fighting face to face, attain 
the greatest region after breaking through the solar sphere. 

19. No sensible man should ever be afrai^ of death. 
Death is inevitable notwithstanding all the remedies emp- 
loyed to ward it off. 

20. O heroes, death is congenital to any beihg born. 
Either today or at the end of a hundred years all living 
beings are sure to die. 



21. Hence, cast off all fear for death. Come and 
fight in war joyously. In every respect there is certainly a 
great bliss here and hereafter. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

22. Saying this, he tried to encourage his heroes in 
several ways. But the frightened demons did not regain 
courage. They fled from the battle in a trice. 

23. On seeing his army on the rout, the heroic son of 
the ocean Jalandhara became very furious. 

24. Then the infuriated Jalandhara challenged for a 
battle in a stentorian voice like the sound of fierce thunder- 
bolt. 

Jalandhara said : — 

25. O ascetic, fight with me now. What is the use of 
slaying these ? Show me what little strength you have. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

26. After saying this, Jalandhara the great Daitya 
hit the bull-bannered Siva of indefatigable endeavour, 
with an incessant volley of arrows. 

27. Laughingly, lord Siva split all the arrows of 
Jalandhara by discharging his own sharp arrows even before 
his arrows reached him. 

28. Then with seven arrows he split the horses, banner, 
umbrella and the bow of Daitya Jalandhara. O sage, it is 
not surprising in the case of Siva. 

29. The infuriated Asura the son of the ocean, devoid 
of a chariot and with bow split up rushed at Siva lifting his 
mace vigorously. 

30. O Vyasa, lord Siva of great sports immediately 
split asunder the mace hurled by him, by means of his 
arrows. 

31. Yet the highly infuriated great Asura rushed at 
Siva with the mailed fi^t lifted up, with a desire to kill him. 

32. By a volley of arrows Jalandhara was hurled 
back a Kro£a by Siva of indefatigable enterprise. 

33. Then, considering Siva more powerful, Jalandhara 



Rudrasartihitd 903 

the Daitya, created the illusion of Gandharvas that myste- 
riously fascinated even Siva. 

34. By the power of his Maya, hosts of Gandharvas 
and celestial damsels came into view for fascinating Siva. 

35. The Gandharvas and celestial damsels sang and 
danced. Others played on flutes, mrdangas and cymbals. 

36. On seeing that wonderful feat, Siva was fascinated 
by the Ganas. He was not conscious of even the garments let 
down from the hands. 

37. On seeing Siva concentrated in the dance 
Jalandhara urged by lust immediately went to the place 
where Gauri stood. 

38-39. He entrusted the powerful Sumbha and 
Ni£umbha with the conduct of war. With his demonaic 
Maya he assumed the form of Siva — with ten brawny arms, 
five faces, three eyes, and matted hair. He was seated on 
the great bull. In every respect, O Vyasa, Jalandhara 
appeared like Siva. 

40. On seeing Siva coming, the beloved of Siva 
came out from the midst of her female friends within the 
range of his vision. 

41. When the lord of Asuras saw the bauntiful Parvati, 
he let drops of semen fall and his limbs became benumbed. 

42. On realising that he was the demon, the terri- 
fied Gauri vanished immediately to the northern shore of the 
Manasa lake. 

43. Unable to see her who disappeared in a moment 
like lightning, the Daitya immediately went to the place 
where lord Siva stood in order to fight him. 

44. Parvati remembered lord Visnu mentally. Immedia- 
tely she saw the lord seated near her. 

45. On seeing Visnu bowing to her with palms joined 
in reverence, Parvati the beloved of Siva, the mother of the 
universe, spoke delightedly. 

P&rvati said : — 

46. O Vi$nu, is it not known to you that the* wicked 
Daitya Jalandhara perpetrated a wonderfully base deed ?” 

47. On hearing the words of the mother of the 



universe, the Garu^a-bannered lord bowed to Parvatl bending 
his neck and joining his palms in reverence and spoke. 

Vifnu said : — 

48. O mother, by your favour that incident is known 
to me. What you shall be pleased to commend I shall 
perform with your permission. 

Sanatk umara said : — 

49- On hearing the words of Visnu, Parvatl said 
again. The mother of the universe desired to teach Vi$nu 
the policy based on Dharma. 

Parvatl said : — 

50. He himself has shown the path. Know that to be 
the way in the same manner. At my bidding, make the 
chastity of his wife violated. 

51. O Visnu, that great Daitya cannot be killed 
otherwise. In the earth there is no other virtue equal to 
chastity. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

52. On hearing this command and accepting it with 
lowered head, Visnu immediately went to the city of Jalan- 
dhara for practising deception. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 

( Outraging the modesty of Vfndd) 


Vydsa said : — 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumara, please narrate, O 
eloquent one, what did Vi$nu do there ? How did she err 
from her virtue ? 

Sanatkumara said : — 

2. After going to the city of Jalandhara, Vi?nu thought 
of violating the chastity ofVpida. 



Rudrasarfihitd 


905 


3. The foremost among those who wield illusion, he 
assumed a wonderful body and stationed himself in a park 
of the city. He made Vfnda see a dream. 

4. The gentle lady VrndS, the wife of Jalandhara, 
though of pure rites, had a very bad dream at night on 
account of Vi?nu’s power of illusion. 

5. In the dream as a result of Vi$nu’s power of 
illusion she saw the naked form of her husband anointed 
with oil and seated on a buffalo. 

6. He was proceeding in the southern direction. His 
head had been completely shaved. He was wearing black 
flowers to decorate himself. He was being served by a number 
of Asuras. He was completely encompassed by darkness. 

7. Later, towards the end of the night she had 
various bad dreams, such as the whole city was submerged 
in the sea, all of a sudden, along with herself. 

8. Then the lady woke up still thinking of the dream 
she had had. She saw the rising sun with a hole in the middle 
and fading repeatedly. 

9. On realising that it was a bad portent, the terrified 
lady began to cry. She did not feel happy at all in the 
spacious terraces and towers of the palace. 

10. With two of her friends she then went to the 
park in the city. Even there she did not find herself at 
ease. 

11. Then she, the dejected gloomy wife of Jalandhara, 
wandered from forest to forest. She was not conscious of 
even herself. 

12. The wandering lady saw two demons of terrible 
leonine faces with shining curved fanglike teeth. 

13. Terrified much on seeing them, the lady fled 
from there and saw an ascetic of calm countenance observing 
silence and accompanied by his disciple. 

14. Putting her tender creeperlike hands round his 
neck due to fright she gasped out — ‘‘O sage, save me. I 
have sought refuge in you.” 

15. Seeing the agitated lady followed by the demons 
the sage drove them back with a loud bellowing sound of 
“Hum”. 

16. O sage, seeing them routed and terrified by the 



906 Sivapertya 

mere Humkara, the wife of the king of Daityas was struck 
with a great wonder in her heart. 

17. Freed from the fear she bowed down to the great 
sage with palms joined in reverence and prostrated herself in 
front of him. Vjrnda then spoke. 

Vjmdd said : — 

18. “O leader of sages, O ocean of mercy, O remover 
of harassment from others, I have been saved by you from 
this terrible danger from the wicked demons. 

19. You are competent in every respect. You are 
omniscient. Yet I wish to submit something. Be pleased to 
hear it. 

20. O lord, Jalandhara my husband has gone to fight 
Siva. O holy one of good rites, how does he fare in the 
war ? Please tell me.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

21. On hearing her words, the sage feigned a deceptive 
silence. Fully aware of the means of achieving his selfish 
ends he looked up sympathetically. 

22. In the meantime two lordly monkeys came there 
and stood bowing down in front of him. At a significant 
gesture from his eyebrows, the monkeys rose into the sky 
again. 

23. O great sage, within a trice, they came back 
taking with them his head, body and limbs and stood in 
front of the sage. 

24. On seeing the head, body and limbs of her husband, 
Vpida fell unconscious, extremely pained at the misery of 
her lord. 

Vrnda said : — 

25. “O lord, formerly you used to humour me with 
pleasant chats. How is it that, you do not speak to me now, 
to your pious beloved ? 

26. How is it that you, by whom all the gods 
including the Gandharvas and Visnu had been defeated, you 
who had conquered the three worlds, have now been killed 
by a poor sage ? 



RudrasashhUd 


907 


27. O excellent Daitya, you did not know the reality 
of Siva nor did you pay heed to my words ‘Siva is 
Supreme Brahman.’ 

28. Having served you I found that it was not due 
to haughtiness but due to your association with bad men that 
you did all this.” 

29. Saying these and other words of lamentation, his 
beloved wife strictly adhering to virtue, cried in diverse ways 
with a pained heart. 

30. Then steadying herself a little, and heaving deep 
sighs of grief she bowed to the excellent sage with palms 
joined in reverence. 

31. “O excellent sage, storehouse of mercy, eager to 
help others, O gentle sir, take pity on me and resuscitate 
my lord. 

32. O great sage, I know that you are competent 
to enliven him again. Hence please resuscitate my beloved 
husband.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

33. After saying this, the chaste wife of the Daitya fell 
at his feet heaving sighs of grief. 

The sage said : — 

34. This Daitya cannot be enlivened because he has 
been killed by Siva in the battle. Those killed in battle by 
Siva never return to life. 

35. Still, knowing the eternal Dharma that those who 
seek refuge should be protected, I shall resuscitate him urged 
by pity. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

36. After saying this and restoring him to life, O sage, 
that sage who was Visnu the foremost among those who wield 
illusion vanished from the scene. 

37. Jalandhara thus revived to life by him stood up. 
Delighted in mind he embraced Vrnda and kissed her face. 

38. On seeing her husband, Vrnda too was delighted. 
She forgot her sorrow. She considered everything a dream. 

39. Delighted in the heart and with all the dormant 



908 Swapurdna 

passions kindled up, she sported with him for many days in 
the middle of that forest. 

40. Once at the end of the sexual intercourse she re- 
alised that it was Visnu. Vrnda rebuked him angrily and 
spoke thus. 

Vrnda said : — 

41. Fie on this misdeed of Vi§nu in outraging the 
modesty of another man’s wife. I have now realised you as 
the wielder of illusion, appearing in the guise of an ascetic. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

42. O Vyasa, saying thus in great anger she showed 
her brilliant powers as a staunch chaste lady by cursing 
Vi$nu. 

43. “O base foe of the Daityas, defiler of other people’s 
virtue, O wicked one, take this curse from me, greater in 
force than all persons. 

44. The two persons whom you made to appear in 
front of me shall become Raksasas 220 and abduct your wife. 

45. You will be distressed on account of separation 
from your wife roaming about with Sesa ‘lord of snakes* 230 
who posed as your disciple here. You will seek the help of 
monkeys 231 in the forest. 

46. After saying this, Vrnda entered fire though prev- 
ented by Visnu who was fascinated by her charms* 

47. O sage, then Brahma and other gods, gathered in 
the sky accompanied by their wives in order to see the sal- 
vation of Vrnda. 

48. Then the great brilliance of the wife of Jalandhara 
immediately went to Sivaloka even as the gods stood watch- 
ing. 

49. The refulgence of Vmda became merged in Parvatl. 
There was a great shout of “Victory” in the rows of the 
gods standing in the sky. 

29Q. The two Raksasas referred to here were M&rlca and R&vaita 
who abducted Siti, wife of RSina, the seventh incarnation of Vi$nu- 

230. The monkeys referred to here were Sugriva, Hanuman, Nala 
Nil* and other*. 

231. The expression. ‘lord of snakes’ signifies Laksamana, said to be 
the incarnation of £e§a. 



Rudrasarfihitd 


909 


50. O sage, thus the great queen Vrnda the excellent 
daughter of Kalanemi attained great salvation, thanks to the 
power of her chastity. 

51. Vi§nu thought of Vrnda remorsefully. The smoke 
and dust from her funeral pyre covered his face. He stood 
there itself without any peace of mind though urged and 
consoled by hosts of gods and Siddhas. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 

(J alandhara is slain ) 

1. O excellent son of Brahma, O intelligent one, you 
have narrated a wonderful story. What happened there- 
after in the battle? How was the Asura killed ? Please 
narrate. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

2. Unable to see Parvati, the king of Daityas returned 
to the battle ground. The groups of deceptive Gandharvas 
vanished. It was only then that the bull-bannered deity 
regained awareness of the surroundings. 

3. On seeing the illusion vanished, Siva woke up. 
Following the way of the world, the annihilator became 
very furious. 

4. Then Siva was a bit surprised in the mind. He 
approached Jalandhara angrily in order to fight with him. 
On seeing Siva approaching again, the Asura showered him 
with arrows. 

5. Lord Siva immediately split the cluster of arrows 
discharged by the powerful Jalandhara by , means of 
his own excellent arrows. This was not surprising for the 
annihilator of the three worlds. 

6. Seeing Siva exhibiting wonderful feats of valour, 
Jalandhara created Parvati by means of his illusion in order 
to delude Siva. 

7. Siva saw Parvati tied to the chariot and crying. 



She was being harrassed by Nisumbha, Sumbha and other 
Daityas. 

8. On seeing that in her plight, Siva became dispirited 
and dejected in the mind like an ordinary man pursuing the 
way of the world. 

9. He, an expert in various kinds of sports, remained 
silent with face drooping down, utterly dejected, exhausted 
and forgetful of his own prowess. 

10. Then Jalandhara hurriedly hit Siva in his chest, 
belly and the head with three arrows that went deep down 
as far as their feathered tail. 

11. Then within a trice, lord Siva, the principle of 
perfect wisdom, expert in great sports, assumed a terrific 
form, dreadfully blazing. 

12. On seeing his excessively terrible form, the 
Daityas fled to the ten different quarters. They were un- 
able to stay facing him. 

13. O great sage, even Sumbha and Nisumbha who 
were renowned for their prowess could not stand in the 
battle ground. ^ 

14. The illusion created by Jalandhara had vanished 
in an instant. In that all out battle there was great hue 
and cry. 

15. On seeing Sumbha and Nisumbha fleeing, the 
infuriated Siva rebuked them and cursed as follows. 

Siva said : — 

16. “You are wicked and excessively roguish. You 
have offended me by harassing Parvatl. Now both of you 
have deserted the battle ground. 

17. A person fleeing the battle ground shall not be 
killed. So I do not kill you. Since you have escaped from 
a fight with me you would be killed by Parvati.” 232 

18. Even as Siva was saying, Jalandhara, son of the 
ocean, became very furious with Siva like the blazing fire. 

19. One after the other, he showered many sharp 

232. As cursed by Siva, the Asuras Sumbha and Niiumbha were 
killed by P&rvati later on. For th'* detailed description of their destruc- 
tion, see Markaitfeya P 



Rudrasarhhitd 91 1 

arrows on Siva in the battle. The whole of the Earth 
became enveloped in darkness by his arrows. 

20. . Siva split the arrows swiftly, the powerful Daitya 
hit the bull with an iron club. 

21. Due to that blow the bull turned away from the 
battle field. Even when dragged by Siva it did not stand 
there. 

22. Then the great Siva put forth an unbearable 
splendour visible to all in the battle field. O great sage, 
this is true. 

23. Then the infuriated Siva assuming a terrible form, 
became as dreadful as the fire of dissolution, all of a sudden. 

24. On seeing the Daitya standing in front like the 
lofty peak of Meru and hearing from others that he could 
hot be killed, he stood ready for it. 

25. As desired by Brahma, the lord protector of the 
worlds decided to kill Jalandhara, blessing him in the heart 
of his heart. 

26. Becoming excessively angry, the trident bearing 
deity made a mysteriously terrible wheel in the great waters 
by means of his big toe indulging in a divine sport. 

27. Creating a sharp wheel in the waters of the ocean 
and remembering that the three worlds had been harassed by 
Jalandhara, the lord Siva who had slain Daksa, Andhaka 
Antaka and destroyed the three cities and the sacrifice of 
Daksa 233 and annihilated the three worlds said laughingly. 

•Siva said : — 

28. O Jalandhara, if you are powerful enough to lift 
the wheel created by me with the leg in the great waters, 
you will be competent to stand and fight with me, not other- 
wise. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

29. On hearing his words the Daitya’s eyes gleamed 
fiercely with anger. He looked at Siva as if burning him with 
his eyes and said: — 

2«>o . For the destruction of Daksa’s sacrifice sec $P. RS. Section a. 
Chs 29-37- For the destruction of Andhaka, ibid. SecUon 5. Clis <42-49. 



Stvapurtyd 


912 

Jalandhara said : — 

30-31. After uplifting the wheel, I shall be killing 
you with your Ganas. Like Garuqla killing the serpepts I 
shall kill all the people in the world along with the gods. I 
can destroy the mobile and immobile along with Indra. O 
lord Siva, who is there in the three worlds that can escape 
being pierced by my arrows ? 

32. Even in my childhood, lord Brahma had been 
defeated by my vigour. That powerful Brahma is in my 
abode now along with the sages and leading gods. 

33. Within a trice, the entire universe of the mobile 
and immobile has been burnt by me. O Siva, what can be 
done by you or by your penance? Even lord Brahma has 
been defeated. 

34. Indra, Agni, Yama, Kubera, Vayu, and Varuna 
and others were unable to endure my valour like the ser- 
pents unable to bear even the odour of the lord of birds. 

35. O Siva, I have never been obstructed either in the 
heaven or on the earth. I have gone over all the mountains 
and crushed all the leading Ganas. 

36. To remove the itching sensation in my arms I have 
hit the lofty mountain Mandara, the glorious mountain Nila 
and the lustrous mountain Meru. 

37* Just for the sport the river Gariga was checked by 
me on the Himalaya mountain. Even my servants were 
victorious over the gods, my enemies. 

38. I seized the submarine fire 234 and closed its mouth 
when the entire ocean became one single unit instantaneously. 

39. Airavata and other elephants have been hurled 
into the ocean. Lord Indra along with his chariot has been 
thrown by me a hundred Yojanas away. 

40. Even Guruda has been bound by me along with 
Vi$nu by means of the serpent noose. Urvasi 236 and other 
women have been imprisoned by me. 

234. The submarine fire (Ba^ava ) is a flame with the head of a 
horse that consumes the water of the rivers falling into the ocean. When 
it is incapacitated, the water overflows the shore and drowns the universe. 
The entire units of creation are then drawn together and remain invisible 
in the ocean. 

233. The celestial damsels, Urvasi, Rambha, Mcnala, Tilottama and 
others are the symbols of heavenly beauty. 



RudrasartihitA 


913 


41. O Siva, you do not know me the conqueror of the 
three worlds, Jalandhara, the great Daitya and the powerful 
son of the ocean. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

42. After saying this to lord Siva, the son of the ocean 
did not move nor did he remember the Danavas killed in 
the battle. 

43. Lord Siva was slighted and insulted by means of 
harsh words by the haughty impudent Daitya after slapping 
each arm by the other forcibly. 

44. On hearing the inauspicious words of the Daitya, 
lord Siva laughed mockingly and became furious. 

45. Siva held in his hand the wheel Sudar£ana which 
he had made with his toe and got ready to kill him. 

46. Lord Siva hurled the discus Sudar&ana which re- 
sembled a crore suns and the fire of dissolution. 

47. Blazing the heaven and the earth, the discus hit 
Jalandhara and severed his head with wide gaping eyes. 

48- The body of the son of the ocean fell on the 
ground from the chariot making the earth resonant. The 
head too fell. There was a great hue and cry. 

49. His body fell in two halves like the mountain of 
colly rium split by the thunderbolt and hurled in the ocean. 

50. The whole universe was filled with his terrible 
blood O great sage, the entire earth became deformed. 

51 . His entire blood and flesh, at the bidding of Siva 
was taken to the hell Maharaurava 236 and became a big pit 
of blood there. 

52. His splendour that came out of his body merged 
into Siva just like the splendour that came out of the body 
of Vrnda and merged into Parvati. 

53. On seeing Jalandhara killed, the gods, the 
Gandharvas and the serpents became highly delighted and 
said “Well done, O lord”. 

54. The gods, Siddhas and great sages were delighted. 
Making showers of flowers they sang his glory loudly. 

236. Maharaurava is one of the man> hells to which the souls of the 
wicked are sent. But as Jalandhara had emanated from Rudra, his 
sou] was merged into Rudra’s soul but his flesh and blood went to 
Maharaurava hell and were turned into a pool of blood. 



55. The celestial damsels excited by love and joy 
danced. In the company of Kinnaras they sang in harmo- 
nious sweet voice. 

56. O sage, the quarters became clear when Vrnda’s 
husband was killed. The three winds, gentle to the touch 
and sanctifying, blew. 

57. The moon became cool. The sun blazed brilli- 
antly. The fires blazed quietly. The sky became clear. 

58. O sage, thus the entire universe of the three 
worlds regained their earlier health and normalcy much when 
the son of the ocean was killed by Siva of infinite forms. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 

(Prayer by the gods) 


Sanatkumara said : — 

1. Then Brahma, other gods and the sages eulogised 
lord Siva humbly by means of pleasing words. 

The gods said : — 

2. O great lord, lord of the gods favourably disposed 
to those who seek refuge, you always bestow happiness upon 
the saintly men and quell the misery of your devotees. 

3. O lord, you exhibit wonderfully good divine sports 
and are available by devotion. You are incapable of being 
attained or propitiated by the evil-minded. Be favourable to 
us always. 

4. Even the Veda does not know your greatness in 
reality. Noble men sing your great glory to the extent of 
their intellect. 

5. Indra 237 and others sing your secret greatness always 
with pleasure and sanctify their own tongue. 

237. Indra is called “the thousand-faced’’. In fact he is *the 
thousand-eyed God’. According to the Puranic tradition, Indra seduced 
Ahalya the wife of the sage Gautama, whereupon the gage cursed him to 
bear on his body a thousand marks resembling the female organ which 
were afterwards changed to eyes. He is therefore called Sahasraksa 'the 
thousand -eyed*. 



kudrasarhkitd 


915 

6. O lord of gods, by your favour even a sluggish 
person realizes Brahman. The Vedas say that you are 
always attainable by devotion. 

7. You are merciful to the distressed. You are all 
pervasive. You manifest yourself by good devotion. You 
are free from aberrations. You are the goal of the good. 

8. O Lord Siva, by devotion alone people have attained 
the power of miracles. They became indifferent to the 
pleasures they enjoy or the miseries they have to face. 

9. O lord, it was by his devotion alone that the foun- 
der of the Yadu family, the devotee Da€arha and his wife 
Kalavati attained great success. 

10. O lord of gods, the king Mitrasaha and his be- 
loved queen Madayanti attained great salvation through 
devotion to you. 

11. The daughter of the elder brother of the king of 
Kekayas named Saumini attained happiness inaccessible to 
even great Yogins, by his devotion to you. 

12. O lord, by devotion to you the excellent king 
Vimarsana enjoyed worldly pleasures for seven births in various 
ways and ultimately attained the goal of the good. 

13. The excellent king Candrasena enjoyed all pleasures, 
became free from misery and experienced great happiness 
here and hereafter by devotion to you. 

14. Srikara, the son of a cowherdess and the disciple 
of Mahavira enjoyed the goal of the good here and great 
happiness hereafter by his devotion to you. 

15. You removed the misery of the king Satyaratha 
and you conferred good goal on him. You enabled the 
prince Dharmagupta to cross the ocean of worldly existence 
and made him happy here. 

16. O great lord, mercifully you made the brahmin 
Sucivrata strictly adhering to devotion to you gain knowledge 
along with his mother and made him rich too. 

17. By his devotion to you the excellent king Citravar- 
man perpetually enjoyed in this world the pleasures inacces- 
sible even to the gods and attained salvation, the goal of the 
good. 

18. The prince Candrarigada along with his wife 



SimantinI got rid of all miseries, enjoyed happiness and 
attained great goal. 

19. The brahmin named Mandara who became a base 
knave indulging in lecherous association with prostitutes, O 
Siva, worshipped one of your women devotees and attained 
salvation along with her. 

20. O lord, thanks to the favour of a devotee of yours, 
the prince Bhadrayu attained happiness free from pain and 
achieved great goal along with his mother. 

21. O lord Siva, even wicked sinners eating forbidden 
foodstuffs and indulging in sexual dalliance with all sorts of 
women, have been liberated by their service to you. 

22. O Siva, Sambara a devotee of yours, smearing him- 
self with the ashes of the funeral pyre, attained your region 
along with his wife, thanks to his regular adherence to 
Bhasma. 

23-25. O lord, the son of Bhadrasena and the son of 
his minister both of virtuous and auspicious rites and regular 
wearers of Rudraksa beads, enjoyed good pleasures here and 
became liberated, thanks to your grace. The two devotees 
who had been monkey and a cock in a previous birth be- 
came the ornaments of Rudra. O lord, always engaged in 
uplifting the devotees, the two courtesans Pirigala and 
Mahananda attained the goal of the good, thanks to their 
devotion to you. 

26. The brahmin girl Sarada who had become a widow 
in childhood, was fortunate to regain her lost husband 
and was blessed with sons, thanks to the power of devotion to 
you. 

27. Binduga, a brahmin only in name, a harlot monger 
and his wife Caficula 238 attained great salvation on hearing 
your glory. 

28. O lord Siva, friend of the distressed, storehouse of 
mercy, many living beings have attained the goal in this way. 

29. O lord Siva, you are greater than Prakrti and 
Puru$a. You are the Brahman. You are devoid of attributes 

23B. For the narratives pf Binduga and Canculft see £P chs 3-5 *the 
glory of Sivapurana*. VaficukS. in the primed text is a misprint for 
Caficulfi. 



Rudrasarfihitd 917 

as well as the support of attributes in the forms of Brahma, 
Vi?nu and Rudra. 

30. You are free from aberrations, O lord of all, you 
perform different activities incessantly. O lord Siva, we all, 
Brahma and others are your slaves. 

31. O lord of gods, be pleased. O Siva, protect us 
ever. O lord, we are your subjects and we ever seek refuge 
in you.” 

Sanatkumdra said: — 

32. After eulogising Brahma, other gods and the great 
sages, the gods remained silent with their minds fixed on 
Siva’s feet. 

33. The great lord Siva heard the auspicious prayer 
of the gods, conferred boons on them and then vanished 
immediately from the scene. 

34. Brahma and other gods were jubilant as the 
enemies had been killed. Delightfully singing the great glory 
of Siva, they left for their own abodes. 

35. This great narrative describing the suppression of 
Jalandhara is a sanctifying story of lord Siva that destroys 
all sins. 

36. This prayer of the gods is holy and destructive of 
sins. It bestows happiness on the devotees and is delightful 
to Siva. 

37. He who reads or teaches the two narratives, enjoys 
great happiness here and becomes the lord of Ganas here- 
after. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 

(The Vanishing of Vitfu's delusion) 


Vifnu said : — 

1. O son of Brahm&, obeisance be to you. O excellent 
devotee of Siva, you are blessed, since you have narrated 
this highly divine and auspicious story of Siva. 

2. O sage, now narrate lovingly the story of Vi$nu* 
After enchanting Vrnda what did he do ? Where did he go ? 



Sanatkumdra said : — 

3. O Vyasa, listen. O intelligent excellent devotee of 
Siva, listen to the good story of Visnu mingled with the 
story of Siva. 

4. When Brahma and other gods became silent, lord 
Siva, favourably disposed to those who seek refuge in him, 
was delighted and said. 

Siva said : — 

5. O Brahma, O ye excellent gods, it is for you that 
Jalandhara has been killed by me although he was a part of 
myself. Truth. It is the truth that I say. 

6. O dear gods, tell me the truth. Have or have not 
you attained happiness ? It is for you that I indulge in sports 
though I am always free from all aberrations. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

7. Then Brahma and other gods, with eyes blooming 
with delight, bowed to Siva with bent heads and mentioned 
to him the activities of Visnu. 

The gods said : — 

8. “O great lord, all the gods have been saved by you 
from the danger of the enemy but another event has hap- 
pened. What shall we do in that respect ? 

9. O lord, Vrnda was fascinated by Vijsnu. She 
burnt herself on the pyre and attained the great goal. 

10. But Vi$nu deluded by your illusion is excessively 
agitated by the beauty of Vrnda. He has smeared himself 
with the ashes from her pyre. 

11. Although advised and consoled by the Siddhas 
and sages, and pacified by us with respect, Visnu deluded by 
your illusion does not come to his former self. 

12. O lord Siva, be pleased. Restore Visnu to his 
former self. This entire creation born of Prakrti and consis- 
ting of the mobile and immobile beings, is subservient to 
you”. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

13. On hearing these words of the gods, lord Siva of 



RudrasarhhiUl 919 

great sports and free to act as he pleases replied to them as 
they stood with palms joined in reverence. 

Lord Siva said:— 

14. O Brahma, O gods, you listen to my words atten- 
tively. My illusion deludes all the worlds. It cannot be 
transgressed. 

15. The entire universe including gods and human 
beings is subservient to it. Vi$nu too was deluded by that 
illusion and became a prey to the lustful love. 

16. That illusion is given various names : Uma, 
Mahadevi, the mother of the three deities, the greatest, pri- 
mordial Mulaprakrti and the lovely woman Parvatl. 

17. O gods, seek refuge in that fascinating goddess 
named illusion, for the removal of Visnu’s delusion. She is 
the bestower of cherished desires and worthy of being 
sought refuge in. 

18 Sing the eulogy that satisfies my Sakti. If she is 
delighted, she will carry out your tasks. 

Sanatkum&ra said : — 

19. O Vyasa, after saying this to the gods, the five- 
faced lord Siva vanished suddenly along with his Ganas. 

20. At the bidding of Siva, Brahma and other gods 
including Indra mentally eulogised to the primordial Prakrti 
favourably disposed to her devotees. 

The gods said : — 

21. We bow to the primordial Prakrti from which ema- 
nate the three attributes Sattva, Rajas and Tamas that 
cause creation, sustenance and annihilation, and by whose 
desire the universe is evolved and dissolved. 

22. May the great illusion save us, the great Prakrti 
that presides over the twentythree principles, 289 well enunciated 

239. The printed text is corrupt. Read for 

Cp. Bhagavata 3-6.8 The 

group of 23 Tattvas consists of 10 senes, 5 gross and 5 subtle elements, 
intellect, ego and mind. 



920 


SivapurSQa 

in the universe. We bow to the primordial Prakfti whose 
forms and activities are not known to the three worlds. 

23. We bow to the primordial Prakrti favourably dis- 
posed to the devotees. Persons endowed with devotion to her 
are not bedevilled by poverty, delusion and destruction. 

24. O great goddess, please carry out our tasks. O 
Parvatl, please remove the delusion of Visnu. O goddess 
Durga, obeisance be to you. 

25-26. O Siva, when the fight between Jalandhara and 
Siva started, for killing Jalandhara, Vrnda was deluded by 
Visnu at the bidding of Gaurl. She was made to forsake 
her virtue and reduced to ashes in the fire. She attained 
salvation. 

27. Jalandhara was slain in the battle by Siva who 
took pity on us and who always blesses his devotees. We 
have been relieved from his fear. 

28. It is at his bidding that we all have sought refuge 
in you. You and Siva, O goddess, are always engaged in 
uplifting your devotees. 

29. Infatuated by the beauty of Vrnda, Visnu is stay- 
ing there itself. He has lost his balance. He is deluded. 
He has smeared himself with the ashes from her pyre. 

30. O great goddess deluded by your illusion, Visnu 
does not come to his own though advised and consoled by 
the gods and Siddhas. 

31. O great goddess, be merciful. Enlighten Visnu so 
that he shall return to his region and carry out the task of 
the gods with a settled mind. 

32. Eulogising thus, the gods saw a sphere of refulgence 
in the sky pervading all the quarters with its flames. 

33. O Vyasa, Brahma and other gods including Indra 
heard a celestial voice from the sky bestowing their desire. 

The celestial voice said : — 

34. O gods, it is I who stand in three forms by the 
variety of the three attributes, Rajas, Sattva and Tamas. The 
three forms are Gaurl, Laksmi, and Sarasvati. 

35. Hence you go to them respectfully at my bidding. 

If they are pleased they will fulfil your desire. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


921 


Sanatkuuiara said : — 

36. Even as the gods were listening to this speech with 
eyes gaping with wonder, the refulgence vanished. 

37. On hearing the speech, the gods, urged by it bow- 
ed respectfully to Gauri, LaksmI and Sarasvati. 

38. Brahma and other gods eulogised the goddesses 
with various speeches and bowed their heads. 

39. Then the goddesses appeared in front of them, 
suddenly, O Vyasa, illuminating the quarters with their 
wonderful brilliance. 

40 On seeing them, the gods eulogised them with great 
devotion and delighted minds. They submitted what they 
wanted to be carried out. 

41. Thus bowed and eulogised, the goddesses who are 
favourably disposed to the devotees, faced the gods and 
addressed them eagerly after giving them seeds. 

The goddesses said : — 

42. “Sow these seeds in the place where Visnu is 
standing. Then your task will be fulfilled. ” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

43. O sage, after saying this, the goddesses, the Saktis 
of Siva, Visnu and Brahma, possessed of the three attributes, 
vanished. 

44. Then Brahma and other gods including Indra took 
the seeds and went to the place where Visnu was standing. 

45. The gods sowed those seeds in the ground where 
the pyre of Vrnda had been lit. O sage, they stayed there 
thinking these as parts of Siva’s Sakti. 

46. Out of the seeds sown, O great sage, three plants 
shot up — the Myrobalan, the Jasmine and the holy basil. 

47. The Myrobalan is born of the creator’s Sakti, the 
jasmine of LaksmI and holy basil of Gauri, born of the at- 
tributes Tamas, Sattva and Rajas. 

48. O sage, on seeing the plants in the forms of ladies 
Visnu stood up with excitement of infatuation over them. 

49. On seeing them he was deluded and his mind 
became overwhelmed by lust. The two plants — the holy 
basil and Myrobalan looked at him lovingly. 



922 Sivapurdna 

50. The womanlike plant born out of the seed by the 
Sakti of Laksmi became jealous of him. 

51. Hence the plant came to be called Varvari- 40 (a 
kind of wild basil) and was despised by all . The Dhiitrl 
and the Tulasi are always pleasing to him due to their love 
and affection. 

52. Then Visnu forgot his sorrow. Accompanied by 
them he went to Vaikunjha fully satisfied. He was bowed to 
by all the gods. 

53. O great brahmin, myrobolan and the holy basil 
shall be understood as the favourites of gods in the month of 
Karttika, especially of Visnu. 

54. There too, O great sage, the holy basil is the most 
blessed and the most excellent. Except Ganesa it delights 
every deity and bestows all desires. 

55. On seeing Visnu settled again in Vaikuntha, 
Brahma, Indra and other gods bowed to and eulogised him 
and then left for their respective abodes. 

56. O excellent sage, Visnu too, settled in his own 
world, freed from delusion and enlightened, became happy 
remembering Siva as before. 

57. This is the narrative that destroys sins, bestows 
desires to all men. It increases perfect knowledge and quells 
all aberrations of base lust. 

58. He who reads or teaches this every day, he who 
hears or narrates this with devotion attains the greatest goal. 

59. The intelligent man who reads this most excellent 
narrative and goes to war will certainly be victorious. There 
is no doubt about it. 

60. This yields the knowledge of Vedas to the brahmins, 
victory to the Ksatriyas, wealth to the Vaisyas and happiness 
to the &udras. 

61. O Vyasa, it confers devotion to Siva, it destroys 
the sins of all persons, it bestows the good goal here and 
hereafter. 

240. Malati (Jasmine), born of the seed provided by Laksmi, is 
called Barbari or Varvari and forbidden in tfae worship of Vi§nu. 



Rudrasarfihitd 


923 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 

(The birth of 5ahkhacu<la) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. O sage, now listen to another story of Siva lovingly, 
by listening to which the devotion to Siva is stabilised. 

2. The story narrates how the heroic Danava Sankha- 
cuda who harassed the gods was killed by Siva in the battle 
by means of his trident. 

3. O Vyasa, listen lovingly to the story of Siva, 
divine, holy and destructive of sins. I shall narrate the 
same because of my affection to you. 

4. The sage Kasyapa son of Marici and grandson of 
Brahma was a virtuous Prajapati engaged in creation. He 
possessed great learning. 

5. Daksa gave him his thirteen daughters in marriage. 
The descendants of these women are many and they cannot 
be enumerated easily. 

6. The whole universe consisting of gods and others the 
mobile and immobile is born of them. Who in the three 
worlds can mention this in detail ? 

7. Listen to what is relevant to the context wherein 
the divine sports of Siva too can be seen. It is conducive to 
the increase of devotion. I am narrating the same. 1 

8. Among the wives of Kasyapa the excellent lady 
Danu was one. She was very beautiful, chaste and tenderly 
nurtured by her husband with all devotion and love. 

9. Many powerful sons were born to that lady Danu. 
Their names are not mentioned O sage, by the fear of 
dilation. 

10. One of them is Vipracitti who was very powerful 
and valorous. His virtuous son Dambha of self-control was 
a great devotee of Visnu. 

11-12. No son was borg to him. Hence the hero 
became worried. He made the preceptor Sukra his initiator and 
learnt the mantra of Krsna. He performed a great penance 
in the holy centre Puskara 241 for a hundred thousand years. 

1241. l’uskara is a sarrrjd forest war Ajmer in Rajasthan There is a 
celebrated lake where Brahma set up a phallic image of Siva. It is a 
famous place of pilgrimage in Rajaputana. 



924 Sivapurdm 

Seating himself in a stable pose he performed the Japa of 
Krsna mantra for a long time. 

13. While be was performing the penance, an unbear- 
able refulgence sprang up blazing from his head and spread 
everywhere. 

14. All the gods, sages and Manus were scorched by 
that. With Indra ahead they sought refuge in Brahma. 

15. Bowing to Brahma, the bestower of riches, they 
eulogised him and narrated to him this event. 

16. On hearing that, Brahma accompanied them 
to Vaikunjha j n order to tell the same to Visnu in its 
entirety. 

17. After going there they stood humbly joining their 
palms in reverence. After bowing to him they eulogised 
Visnu the lord of the three worlds, the great saviour. 

The gods said : — 

18. “O lord of gods we do not know how this hap- 
pened to cause this. Please tell us. By what refulgence have 
all of us been scorched ? 

19. O friend of the distressed, you are the protector of 
the distressed and dispirited servants. Save, O lord of LaksmI 
who are worthy of being sought refuge by us. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

20. On hearing these words of Brahma and other gods, 
Visnu who is favourably disposed to those who seek refuge, 
said laughingly and lovingly. 

Visnu said : — 

21. “O gods, be calm and unperturbed, do not be 
afraid. No deluge will take place, this is not the time of 
dissolution. 

22. The Asura Dambha a devotee of mine is perform- 
ing a penance seeking for a son. I shall bestow a boon and 
quieten him.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

23. O sage, on being consoled thus, Brahma and 



Rudrasarhhita 


925 

other gods became encouraged and they returned to their 
respective abo les. 

24. In order to grant the boon, Visnu went to 
Puskara where Dambha was performing penance. 

25. On reaching there Visnu consoled Dambha who 
was repeating his name and told him the pleasing words — 
“Mention the boon you wish to be granted. 9 * 

26. On hearing his words and seeing Visnu standing 
in front, the Danava bowed with great devotion and 
eulogised him again and again. 

Dambha said : — 

27. “O lord of gods, Obeisance be to you, O Lotus- 
eyed one, O lord of LaksmT, O lord of the three worlds, 
please take pity on me. 

28. Please give me a powerful and valorous son who 
will be your devotee, who will be invincible to the gods and 
who will conquer the three worlds. 99 

Sanatkumara said : — 

29. On being thus requested by the lord of Danavas, 
Visnu granted him the boon. O sage, making him desist 
from the penance he vanished from the place. 

30. When Visnu went away, the lord of Danavas 
performed obeisance to that direction and returned home, 
his penance having been fulfilled and his desires realised. 

31. Within a short time, his fortunate wife became 
pregnant. Illuminating the inner apartments of her abode 
by her brilliance she shone much. 

32. O sage, it was Sudama a cowherd, one of the 
leading comrades of Krsna who had been cursed by Radha, 
that entered her womb. 

33. At the proper time the chaste lady gavp birth to a 
brilliant son. The father invited sages and performed the 
post-natal rites. 

34. O excellent brahmin, when the boy was bom 
there was great jubilation. On an auspicious day the 
father named him “Sahkhacuda." 

35. In the abo^e of his father he grew up like the 



926 tSivapurd^d 

moon in the bright half. Learning all lores in childhood 
he became resplendent. 

36. With his childish sports he increased the parents’ 
delight. He became a special favourite of all the members 
of the family. 


CHAPTER T WENTYEIGH T 

( The penance and marriage of Sankhacuda) 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

1. As instructed by Jaigisavya, Sankhacuda performed 
a penance in Puskara for a long time in order to propitiate 
Brahma with devotion. 

2. He concentrated his mind, controlled the senses and 
organs of activities, and muttered the mantra of Brahma 
imparted by his preceptor. 

3. Lord Brahma, the preceptor of the worlds, went to 
Sankhacuda who was practising penance at Puskara in 
order to grant him the boon soon. 

4. Brahma said to him : “Tell me the boon you wish 
to choose.” On seeing Brahma, the king of Danavas bowed 
to him humbly and eulogised him with words of devotion. 

5. He requested Brahma to grant him the power of 
being invincible to the gods. With a delighted mind, 
Brahma said “Be it so.” 

6. He gave Sankhacuda the divine amulet of Srikrsna 
the most auspicious of all auspicious things in the universe, 
that yielded victory everywhere. 

7. ‘‘You now go to Badari. There you marry Tulasi 
who is performing penance just at her own will. 

8. She is the daughter of Dharmadhvaja.” Brahma 
instructed him thus and vanished even as he was watching 
him. 

9. Then Sarikhacuqla whose penance had been fruitful 
in the holy centre of Puskara tied the most auspicious 
amulet round his neck. 



Rudrasamhita 


927 


10. At the behest of Brahma, the Danava whose 
desire had been achieved through penance went to 
Badarikasrama- 42 with delight beaming in his face. 

11. The Danava Sankhacuda casually visited the place 
where the daughter of Dharmadhvaja, Tulasi was performing 
the penance. 

12. The smiling beautiful gentle woman fully bedecked 
in ornaments cast loving glances at the great man. 

13. On seeing that charming, tender, beautiful and 
chaste lady, he stopped near her and spoke to her 
sweetly. 

Sankhacuda said '. — 

14. “Who are you, please? Whose daughter ? What 
are you doing ? Why do you stay here and observe silence. 
Consider me as your devoted slave.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

15. On hearing these words she spoke to him 

lovingly. 

Tulasi said : — 

16. I am the daughter of Dharmadhvaja. I am 

performing penance. I stay in this hermitage. Who are 
you ? You can go as you please. 

17. The entire class of women is fascinating. It 

enchants even Brahma, not to speak of others. It is 

censurable, poisonous and deceptive. It is illusion and a 
fetter to the devout and the faithful. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

18. Tulasi thus spoke to the passionate Dambha and 
stopped. On seeing her smiling he began to say. , 


2 , 2 . Badarikasrama, known as Badari Narayana or Badarinatha 
is situated on a peak of the Himalayas in Garhwal. It has a temple 
of Visi>u in his dual form of Nara-Narayana. According to Var&ha 
Purana(i 40 . a-',) it is one of the three abodes of Visnu on the Himalayas, 
the other two being Kokamukha and Lohargala. For details see Sircar 
GAMI. P- 2i9- 



Saflkhacuda said : — 

19. O gentle lady, what you said now is not entirely 
false. It is partially true also. Now listen to me. 

20. You are the foremost among chaste ladies. I am 
not a lusty person of sinful nature. I think you too are 
not like that. 

21. I come to you now at the behest of Brahma. 
O gently lady, I shall take your hand by the Gandharva 
rites of marriage. 

22. I am Sankhacuda, the router of the gods. O 
gentle lady, don’t you know me ? Have I never been 
heard by you ? 

23. I am a scion of the family of Danu. I am a 
Danava, the son of Dambha. In the previous birth I was 
the cowherd Sudama, a comrade of Krsna. 

24. Due to the curse of Radha I have become a 
Danava now. By the favour of Krsna I remember events 
of previous birth. I know everything. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

25. After saying thus to her, Sar'ikhacucja stopped. 
TulasI who was thus addressed truthfully and respectfully 
by the king of Danavas, was delighted and she spoke 
smilingly. 

Tulasi said : — 

26. I have now been overpowered by you who have 
Sattvika thoughts. That man is blessed in the world who 
is not overwhelmed by a woman. 

27. Even though he may be the observer of sacred 
rites, if he is overpowered by a woman he becomes impure 
and unclean, so he remains for ever. The manes, gods and 
human beings censure him. 

28-29. A brahmin is purified from impurity arising 
from births or deaths in the family, after the tenth day. A 
K$atriya in twelve days, a Vaisya in fifteen days and a 
Sudra in a month. This is what the Vedas enjoin. But a 
henpecked man can never be purified till death. 

30. The manes do not receive willingly the balls of 



Rudrasarhhita 


929 


rice or holy waters offered by him. Nor do the gods accept 
his offering of fruits and flowers. 

31. Of what avail are words of wisdom, penance, 
Japas, Homas, worships, learning or charitable gifts to that 
wretch whose mind is deadened by his thoughts of women ? 

32. You have been tested by me in order to know 
your knowledge and power. A woman must test her bride- 
groom before wooing him. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

33. Even as Tulasi was saying so, Brahma the creator 
came there and spoke these words. 

Brahma said : — 

34. “O Saiikhacuda, why do you hold discussion with 
her? Marry her according to the Gandharva 243 form of 
marriage. 

35. You are jewel among men. And she, the chaste 
lady, is a jewel among women. The union of an intelligent 
lady with an intelligent man must necessarily be virtuous. 

36. O king, unless forced who will abandon a chance 
of happiness ? He who does so unforced is a brute. There 
is no doubt about it. 

37. O chaste lady, why shall you test such a good 
and noble husband? He can suppress the gods, Asuras and 
Danavas too. 

38. O beautiful woman, you may sport with him for 
long, as you please, in different centres all over the world. 

39. In the end, he will attain Srlkrsna again in the 
Goloka. After he is dead, you will attain the four-armed 
lord in Vaikuntha.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

40. After conferring blessings, Brahma returned to his 

. According to Manu (iii. 32) in the Gandharva form of 
marriage, the bride and the bridegroom met each other of their own accord 
and their meeting consumma'ed in copulation born of passion. It was called 
Gandharva because it prevailed in a tribe called Gandharva which lived 
on the slopes of the Himalayas It was considered the most natural form 
because the bride and the bridegroom attracted each other without any 
force or fraud It became obsolete because it was performed without 
sacred rituals and originated from lust. See H.S. PP. 162-164. 



930 Sivapur&na 

abode. The Danava accepted her by means of the Gandharva 
rite. 

41. After marrying her he went to his father’s place. 
In the beautiful apartment he sported with her. 

CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 

( The previous birth of Sankhacuda) 

Sanalkumara said : — 

1. When Sarikhacutja returned home duly married, 
after performing the penance and receiving the boons, 
Danavas and others rejoiced. 

2. Leaving their world and accompanied by their 
preceptor, the Asuras assembled and approached the 
Danava. 

3. They bowed to that resplendent Danava their lord, 
humbly and eulogised him with love and respect. They 
stayed with him alone. 

4. On seeing the family preceptor, Sarikhacuda, son 
of Dambha bowed to him with devotion and prostrated 
before him with respect. 

5. After conferring his excellent benediction, Sukra, the 
family preceptor, narrated the tales of the gods and Danavas. 

6. He expatiated on the natural enmity of the two, 
the invariable defeat of the Asuras, the victory of the gods 
and the help rendered by Brhaspati. 

7. With the consent of the Asuras, the preceptor 
&ukra made him the emperor of Danavas, Asuras and 
others with jubilant festivities. 

8. The delighted Asuras were highly joyous. They 
offered him presents lovingly. 

9 . The son of Dambha, the heroic and valorous 
Sankhacuda shone as the Emperor of Asuras. 

10. Taking a vast army of Daityas, Danavas and 
Raksasas and seated in his chariot, he marched quickly to the 
city of Indra 244 with the intention to conquer it. 

11. The leader of the Danavas going in the midst of 

244. The capital city of Indra’s dominions, also called Amir^vat!, 
is situated in the vicinity of Mount Mem. It is also called Devapura, 
city of the gods. 



Rudrasarhhita 


931 

his attendants shone as the moon in the midst of stars or 
as the sun in the midst of planets. 

12. On hearing that Saiikhacuda was coming, Indra 
the king of heaven, accompanied by the gods made prepara- 
tions for a fight, 

13. Then a tremendous fight ensued between the 
Asuras and the gods delighting the heroic and terrifying the 
cowardly. It caused hairs to stand on end. 

14. When the warriors roared in the battle, there was 
a tumultuous noise. The sound of drums and other instru- 
ments encouraged the warriors. 

15. The powerful gods fought with the Asuras fero- 
ciously and defeated them. They were afraid and fled. 

16. On seeing them fleeing, their leader Sankhacuda 
roared like a lion and fought with the gods. 

17. With his power and force he distressed the gods. 
The gods could not endure his dazzling brilliance. They 
fled. 

18. The gods thus vanquished took shelter in the caves 
of the mountains. 1 hey lost their independence. They were 
subjugated. They lost their lustre like the frozen sea. 

19. Thus the son of Dambha, the valorous leader of 
the Danavas, conquered all the worlds and took up the 
powers of the gods. 

20. He kept the three worlds under his control. He 
partook of all the shares in sacrifices. He became Indra 
and ruled the universe. 

2 1 . He carried the tasks of Kubera, Moon, Sun, Fire, 
Yama and Vayu, according to his ability. 

22-23. The great hero, the powerful Sankhacuda 
became overlord of the gods, Asuras, Danavas, Raksasas, 
Gandharvas, serpents, Kinnaras, Nagas and in fact of all 
the people of the three worlds. 

24. Thus Saiikhacuda enjoyed the kingdom of the 
worlds for many years. He became a great Emperor. 

25. There was no famine, plague or pestilence in his 
realm. The planets were not inauspicious. There was no 



932 Sivaptiran 

worry or sickness among the people. The subjects were 
happy for ever. 

26. Even without being tilled, the earth yielded plenty 
of plants and vegetation. Many medicinal herbs grew up. 
Plants remained always fruitful and juicy. 

27. The oceans yielded plenty of gems and jewels. 

Abundant flowers and fruits grew up on the Earth. Rivers 

flowed with pure crystal clear water. 

28. Excepting the gods all living beings were happy 
and free from distress. The people of four castes and stages 
of life maintained their respective duties and activities. 

29. When he ruled, none was miserable in the three 
worlds. Only the gods were reduced to misery and that 
too by their fratricidal jealousy and enmity. 

30. Sankhacuda was a close friend of Krsna, the 

resident of Goloka. He was powerful, and always engaged 
in devotion to Krsna. 

31. O sage, although he was a Danava, his nature 

was different. He was born as a Danava due to a previous 
curse. 

32. O dear, thereafter, the defeated gods, deprived of 
their kingdom, consulted among themselves and went to 
Brahma’s assembly chamber along with the sages. 

33. They saw the creator and bowed to and eulogised 
him. With distress they explained to him everything in detail. 

34. After consoling the gods and the sages, Brahma 
accompanied by them went to Vaikuntha that yields 
happiness to the good. 

35. Accompanied by the gods, Brahma saw the lord 
of Laksmi decorated with a crown, earrings and a garland 
of wild flowers. 

36-37. On seeing Vi$nu bearing &ankha, Cakra, mace 
and the lotus, the lord with four arms, yellow garments, 
accompanied by Nandana, Siddhas, Brahma and other gods 
bowed to the lord along with the great sages. They 
eulogised him with palms joined in reverence. 

The gods said : — 

38. "O lord of the universe, lord of the gods, O lor 



Rudrasarhhitd 


933 


of Vaikuntha, save us who have sought refuge in you, O 
illustrious Visnu, O elderly one in the three worlds. 

39. O lord Visnu, O lord of the three worlds, you 
alone are the protector of the worlds. O supporter of 
LaksmI, O Govinda, O the vital air of the devotees, 
Obeisance be to you.” 

40. After eulogising thus, all the gods cried in front 
of Visnu. On hearing it lord Visnu spoke to Brahma thus. 

Visnu said : — 

41. Why have you come to Vaikuntha inaccessible 
even to Yogins. What distress has befallen you. Tell me 
just here. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

42-43. On hearing the words of Visnu and bowing to 
him with palms joined in reverence he narrated to him 
the activities of Sarikhacuda and the distress suffered by 
the gods. 

44. On hearing that Visnu who knew everything 
laughed. The lord then told Brahma the secret of Sankhacuda. 

Lord Visnu said : — 

45. O lotus-born Brahma, I know everything about 
Sarikhacuda, a great devotee of mine, of great splendour 
and who had been formerly a cowherd. 

46. Hear all the details about him, the old narrative. 
There is nothing to be suspected. Siva will necessarily 
perform what is good. 

47-50. His region called Sivaloka is greater than the 
greatest. It is above everything. Siva, the supreme Brahman, 
the great god shines there. He is the presiding deity of 
PrakrtI and Purusa. He wears three Saktis. He is both 
devoid and possessed of attributes. 246 He has the great 
splendour for his form. O Brahma, the three deities 
bringing about creation etc. are born of him. 246 They are 
Visnu, Brahma and Siva endowed with Sattvika and other 

245. See Note 286 P. 379. 

246. See Note 272 P. 36). Cp &P. RS. V. 30. 34 * 35 - 



934 SivapufSna 

attributes. He alone is the supreme soul. He sports there 
with Parvatl. He is free from illusion. He is the formu- 
lator of the eternal and the non-eternal. 

51. The Goloka is near it. Siva’s cowshed is situated 
there. Krsna having my form stays there at Siva’s 
behest. 

52. It is to tend his cows and bulls that he has been 
ordered by him. Deriving happiness from him he too sports 
there. 

53. His wife Radha 247 is the mother of the universe. 
Her form is greater than Prakrti. It is the fifth 248 sportive 
form. 

54. Many cowherds and cowherdesses born of her 
live there. They arc sportively inclined and follow Radha 
and Kr$na. 

55. That very same (Sudama, now born as Sankhacuda) 
has been fascinated by her by Siva’s illusion. Cursed by 
Radha he is born as a Danava to his distress. 

56. Krsna has already ordained that the death of 
Sankhacuda will be by Rudra’s trident. Casting off his 
body he will become his comrade again. 

57. O lord of gods, knowing this you need not have 
any fear. Let us seek refuge in Siva. He will do every- 
thing conducive to our good. 

58. You, I and the gods stand here fearless (due to 
that only). 

Sanatkumara said : — 

59. After saying this and mentally thinking upon Siva 
who, the lord of all, is favourably disposed to his devotees 
Visnu went to Sivaloka accompanied by Brahma. 


■247. Radha was a cowherds and a favourite mistress of Kr?na. 
She is worshipped among the Vaisnavas as an incarnation of Laksmi as 
Krsna is of Vi‘’nu. 

The energies oP Rudra, Visnu and Brahma are the three 
embodied forms of Primordial cosmic nature. There is a fourth Energy 
called £iva of the attnbutelrss Siva. Radha is the supreme and sportive 
fifth form of Prakrti. 



liudrasarhhita 


935 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

( Prayer to the lord of gods) 

Sanatkumaia said : — 

1-2. O Vyasa, starting then itself along with Brahma, 
Visnu, the lord of LaksmI, went to Sivaloka, highly divine, 
propless and unearthly. He was glad and his face beamed 
with pleasure. The region was strewn over with many gems. 
It was highly brilliant. 

3-4. The first entrance was of variegated nature with 
many Ganas standing there. It was resplendent, lofty and 
and beautiful. After reaching it he saw the gatekeepers 
seated on gem-set thrones. They had gem-set ornaments and 
white garments. 

5. They had five faces, three eyes and fair handsome 
bodies. They were trident-bearing heroes shining with 
Bhasma and Rudraksa. 

6. Both Brahma and Visnu bowed to them humbly 
and told them that they wanted to see the lord. 

7. They permitted them to enter. They saw another 
door very beautiful, variegated and very brilliant. 

8. They informed the gatekeeper of their desire to 
approach the lord. Permitted by them they entered and 
saw another door. 

9. Thus Brahma entered through fifteen doors and 
reached the main threshold. He saw Nandin. 

10. After bowing to and eulogising Nandin as 
Brahma did before, Visnu was permitted by Nandin and 
he entered joyously. 

11. Going in, they saw the grand assembly chamber 
of Siva, highly decorated and thronged by his attendants 
with lustrous bodies. 

12. The attendants had similar forms with lord Siva. 
They had ten arms, five faces, three eyes and blue necks. 
They had auspicious lustre and were brilliant. 

13. They were bedecked in ornaments set with gems. 
They wore Rudraksas. They had smeared themselves with 
the ashes. The chamber was square in shape and beautiful 
like the lunar sphere. 



14. Gems, necklaces, diamonds, etc. increased its bril- 
liance. Valuable precious stones were used to stud them. 
It was brightened by lotus petals. 

15. Manikya, Padmaraga and other valuable gems 
were used in the same. It was very wonderful. It was laid 
according to the desire of Siva. 

16. It had hundreds of steps leading to it, each made 
of Syamantaka stone; knotted golden threads joined them. 
Beautiful sprouts of sandal beautified it. 

17. Columns of sapphire supported it. It was richly 
decorated. The wind wafted fragrance everywhere. 

18. The chamber was a thousand Yojanas wide. Many 
servants were in attendance. Visnu the lord of gods saw 
Siva seated along with Parvatl. 

19. Siva was in the midst of his attendants like the 
moon surrounded by stars. He was seated in a variegated 
throne set with valuable gems. 

20. He had a crown on his head, earrings in his 
ears. He was embellished with gem necklaces. Ashes were 
smeared all over his body. He held a toy lotus. 

21. He was smilingly watching the song and dance 
going on in front of him. 

22. He was calm and delighted in the mind. He was 
highly brilliant. He was chewing the fragrant betel leaves 
offered by the goddess. 

23. He was attended upon by Ganas with white 
chowries and eulogised by Siddhas with stooping shoulders 
with great devotion. 

24-25. The great lord Siva, the progenitor of the three 
deities, the lord beyond the reach of attributes, who assumes 
and discords his forms as he pleases and is invariable, who is 
free from illusion, unborn, the primordial being, the lord of 
illusion, greater than the greatest and greater than the 
Prakfti and Purusa. 

26. On seeing Siva of perfect features, Visnu and 
Brahma eulogised him together after bowing to him with 
palms joined in reverence. 

Vifrtu and Brahma said : — 

27. O lord Siva, lord of the gods, O supreme Brahman, 



Rudrasarhhitft 


937 


lord of all. O quiet one that is beyond the three attributes, 
O lord progenitor of the three deities. 

28. We have sought refuge in you. O lord, save us 
who are distressed. O lord Siva, we arc harassed by 
Sankhacuda and so dejected and well nigh exhausted. 
Save us. 

29. The region that is adjacent to this place is called 
Goloka, Lord Krsna is its presiding deity. 

30. One of his leading attendants and comrades, 
Sudama, cursed by Radha and led by fate, has become the 
Danava Sankhacuda. 

31. O Siva, the gods divested of all powers ousted and 
harassed by him roam over the Earth now. 

32. Except by you he cannot be killed by any one of 
the gods. Please kill him and render the worlds happy. 

33. You alone are devoid as well as possessed of 
attributes, truthful, of infinite valour, embedded in the good 
and greater than Prakrti and Purusa. 

34. At creation, O lord, you are Brahma, the creator 
through Rajas. O protector of the three worlds, in the 
activity of protection through Sattva you are Visnu. 

35. In dissolution through Tamas you are Rudra the 
annihilator of the universe. In the state free from the three 
attributes you are Siva the fourth one, of the form of 
brilliance. 

36. At your behest, Krsna the protector, goes to Goloka. 
Stationed in the middle of your cowshed he sports day and 
night. 

37. You are the cause of all. You are the lord of all. 
You are Brahma, Visnu and Siva. You are free from aber- 
rations. You are the constant witness. You are the supreme 
soul, the great Isvara. 

38. You are the redeemer of the distressed and the 
poor, the protector and the kinsman of the distressed, the 
lord of the worlds. You are favourably disposed to those 
who seek refuge in you. 

39. O lord of Parvati, uplift us. O lord Siva, be pleased. 
O lord, we are subservient to you. You do as you please, 
O lord. 



938 


Sivapur&qa 


Sanaikumara said : — 

40* After saying this, O Vyasa, those two deities, Vi§nu 
and Brahma bowed to Siva and stopped. They joined their 
palms in reverence and stood humbly. 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 

(Siva's advice) 


Sanatkumdra said : — 

1. On hearing these words of the distressed Visnu 
and Brahma, Siva laughingly spoke in the rumbling tone of 
the cloud. 

Siva said : — 

2. “O dear Visnu, O Brahma, cast off your fear from 
all sides. Certainly something good will result from the 
activities of Sarikhacuda. 

3. I know all the details of his activities factually as 
well as those of Sudama the cowherd devotee of Kr$na. 

4. At my bidding Vi$nu has assumed the form of 
Kr$na and is stationed in the cowshed in the beautiful 
Goloka presided over by me. 

5. Considering himself independent under a delusion he 
indulged in many kinds of sportive dalliance like a deluded 
licentious person. 

6. On seeing his excessive delusion as a result of my 
deceptive art I suppressed their virtuous intellect and made 
them suffer curse. 

7. Having thus performed my sport, I suppressed the 
illusion. Regaining knowledge they got rid of delusion and 
became well-intentioned. 

8. They came near me in a piteous plight.. After bow- 
ing to me they eulogised me devoutly and humbly with palms 
joined in reverence. 

9. Overwhelmed by shame they told me all the 
details. Dejected, they lamented before me saying the words 
“Save us, O save us.” 



Rudrasaihhitd 939 

10. Then I, becoming delighted, told them these words, 
Krsna, you forget your fear at my behest. 

11. I am the protector, always infused with love. Good 
will befall you. All this has happened at my will. There 
is no doubt in it. 

12. Go to your abode along with Radha and your 
comrade. He will become a Danava here in Bharata, 
certainly. 

13-14. At the proper time I shall redeem you from 
the curse”. What I told thus Srikrsna and Radha accepted 
readily. Srikrsna the intelligent rejoiced and returned to 
his abode. There they engaged themselves in propitiating me 
and bidding their time. 

15. Realising that everything is subject to my control 
and his will is not independent, Sudama became the lord of 
Danavas as a result of the curse of Radha. 

16. The virtuous demon Sankhacuda distresses and 
harasses the gods always with his might. He is evil- 
minded to this extent. 

17. He has been deluded by my deception and hence 
he seeks the help of evil ministers. But myself being the 
chastiser of the wicked you can get rid of his fear quickly”. 

Sanalkumara said : — 

18. O sage, by the time Siva completed this expatia- 
tion in front of Visnu and Brahma, another event happened 
there. Listen to it. 

19. In the meantime Krsna came there along with 
Radha and his attendant cowherds in order to propitiate 
Lord Siva. 

20. Devoutly bowing to the lord, meeting Vi$nu with 
respect and honoured by Brahma with love he stood there 
awaiting Siva’s behest. 

21 . Then he bowed again to Siva with palms joined 
in reverence. Realising the principle of Siva and getting rid 
of his delusion Krsna eulogised Siva. 

Lord,Kr$na said : — 

22 . O supreme God, lord of gods, Supreme Brahman 



940 Svoaputdna 

and the goal of the good, forgive me my guilt. O supreme 
god, be pleased. 

23. O Siva, everything originates from you. O 
supreme lord, everything merges in you. O lord of all, you 
are everything. O supreme lord, be pleased. 

24. You are the greatest splendour. You are the 
eternal being directly pervading everything. O lord of 
Gauri, with you as leader, we are well-guided. 

25-26. Considering myself above all, I sported about, 
under the delusion. I reaped the fruit thereof. He who 
went astray was cursed. O lord, my leading comrade 
Sudama the cowherd is born as a Danava. 

27. O lord of Parvatl, uplift us. O supreme lord, be 
pleased. Please redeem us from the curse. Save us who have 
sought refuge in you. 

28. After saying this, Lord Krsna, accompanied by 
Radha, stopped. Siva was delighted thereat, Siva who is 
favourably disposed to those who seek refuge in him. 

Lord Siva said : — 

29. “O Krsna, O lord of cowherdesses leave off your 
fear. Be happy. O dear, all this has been brought about 
by me with blessing in disguise. 

30. Good will befall you. Go back to your excellent 
abode. You shall be cautious and guarded in your position 
of authority. 

31. Sport about as you please after realising me the 
greater than the greatest. Accompanied by Radha and your 
comrades carry out your task unexasperated and unfluttered. 

32. In the excellent Varaha Kalpa, 249 you shall undergo 
the effect of the curse along with the young damsel Radha 
and then attain your region. 

33. O Kr$na, your comrade, the most beloved Sudama 
is born of a Danava now and he harasses the universe. 

34. He has become a Danava, an enemy of the gods, 
named Sankhacuda as a result of the power of Radha’s 
curse. He hates and belongs to the party of Daityas. 

249. Virahakalpa, identical with Sveta-Viraha or Sveta Kalpa, is 
one of the thirty Kalpas known to the Puripas. Each Kalpa lasts for a 
specified period and is repeated in order of succession. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


941 


35. Divested of their powers, ousted and harassed by 
him for ever, the demoralized gods including Indra have 
fled to the ten directions. 

36. It is for their sake that Brahma and Visnu have 
come here and sought refuge in me. There is no doubt in 
this that I will relieve them of their distress.” 

Sanatkumaia said : — 

37. After saying this, he addressed Krsna again 
eagerly after consoling Visnu and Brahma with words that 
quelled their agony. 

Siva said : — 

38. “O Visnu, O Brahma, lovingly listen to my words. 
O dear ones, go quickly for the pleasure of the gods. Be 
fearless. 

39. Go to Rudra, resident of Kailasa, 860 who has my 
excellent and perfect form. He has manifested himself for the 
task of the gods with a separate form and features. 

40. O Visnu, it is for this purpose that the lord assum- 
ing my form fully and perfectly stays on the mountain 
Kailasa favouring the devotees by being subservient to them. 

41. There is no difference in him from us both. He 
shall be served by you two and all living beings — mobile 
and immobile as well as the gods and others always. 

42. He who differentiates between us falls into hell. 
In this life too he will attain stress and be devoid of sons 
and grandsons. 

Sanalkumara said : — 

43. After bowing again and again to the lord of Parvatl 
who had spoken thus, Krsna returned to his abode accom- 
panied by Radha. 

44. O Vyasa, Vi$nu and Brahma became delighted 
and relieved of fear. After bowing again and again to Siva 
they hastened to Vaikuntha. 

250. Mount Kailasa is a part af the Himalayan range lying to ihe 
north of Manasa-saruvara, not far oft’ from the origin <>! Ghogra (Sata)u) 
river. The detailed description of the mount is found in the Matsya P. 
Ch. 121. 



45. Having come there and mentioning everything to 
the gods, Brahma and Vi?nu went to Kailasa taking the 
gods with them. 

46-47. On seeing lord Siva there, the lord and hus- 
band of Parvati, who had taken a body for protecting the 
distressed, the lord of the gods possessed of attributes, they 
eulogised him as before with devotion and choking words. 
They joined their palms in reverence humbly and with 
drooping shoulders. 

The gods said : — 

48. O great god, lord of the gods, O Siva, the lord of 
Parvati, we seek refuge in you. Please save the terrified 
gods. 

49. Please slay Sankhacuda the king of Asura and the 
destroyer of the gods. The gods have been defeated and 
harassed by him. 

50. Like men they are roaming on the earth divested 
oi their powers. Their region the Devaloka has become 
very dreary to look at due to fear. 

51. O upliftcr of the distressed^ O ocean of mercy, 
redeem the gods, from this exigency. O great lord, save 
Indra from fright by killing that ruler of Danavas. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

52. ‘‘On hearing the words of the gods, Siva favour- 
ably disposed to his devotees spoke to them laughingly in the 
rumbling tone of the cloud. 

Lord S'iva said : — 

53. O Visnu, O Brahma, O Gods, return to your own 
abodes by all means. I shall kill Sankhacuda along with 
his followers and attendants. There is no doubt about it. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

54. On hearing the words of lord Siva sweet as nectar 
they were excessively delighted considering the Danava 
already killed. 

55. After bowing to lord Siva, Visnu went to Vaiku^fha 



Rudfasartihita 943 

and Brahma to Satyaloka. The god and others went to their 
own abodes. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 

{The Emissary is sent) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. Then lord Siva, Death to the wicked, goal of the 
good, decided in his mind to slay Sankhacuda in accordance 
with the wishes of the gods. 

2. He made his friend the lord of Gandharvas his 
messenger and sent him in a wonderful chariot 251 hurriedly to 
Sarikhaciida joyously. 

3. At the bidding of lord Siva, the emissary went to 
the city of the Asura which was superior to Indra’s Amaravati 
and Kubera’s Palace. 

4. Reaching there, he saw the excellent abode of 
Sarikhaciida in the middle; it shone with its twelve entrance 
doors with gatekeepers in each. 

5. Puspadanta saw the main excellent entrance. 
Fearlessly he informed the gatekeeper. 

6. Passing beyond that door he joyously went in. It 
was spacious, exquisitely fine and richly decorated. 

7. Going in he saw Sankhacuda, the ruler of Danavas, 
seated on a gem-set throne in the midst of heroic warriors. 

8. He was surrounded by leading Danavas and served 
by three crores of attendants and guarded by another hundred 
crores of well armed soldiers moving to and fro. 

9. Seeing him, Puspadanta was struck with wonder. 
He gave the message of war as conveyed by Siva. 

Puspadanta said : — 

10. O great king, O lord, I am the Emissary of Siva 

2 -,1 . Citraratha flit, of wonderful chariot; seems to be an appella- 
tion of Puspadanta. Or Citraratha, lord of Gandharvaa, may have 
assumed the name Puspadanta as an emissary. 



named Puspadanta. Please listen to what is mentioned by 
Siva himself. I am telling you the same. 

Siva said : — 

1 1 . Now, give back their kingdom to the gods and 
their authority. If not, fight with me, the greatest of the 
good warriors. 

12. The gods have sought refuge in me, the lord of 
the gods and the benefactor of the good. I the infuriated will 
certainly slay you. 

13. I am Siva, the destroyer. I have granted protec- 
tion to all the gods. I am the holder of the chastising rod 
for the wicked and favourably disposed to those who seek 
refuge in me. 

14. O lord of Danavas, consider and let me know one 
of the two alternatives specifically, whether you will return 
the kingdom or fight. 

Puspadanta said: 

15. O lord of Danavas, what has been stated by Siva 
has been conveyed to you. Siva’s words have never gone 
in vain. 

16. I wish to return to my lord Siva immediately. 
After going back what shall I tell S*va ? you clearly let me 
know. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

17. On hearing these words of Puspadanta who was 
the emissary of lord Siva, the king laughed, then spoke to 
him. 

SankhacQda said : — 

18. I will never return the kingdom to the god. The 
earth shall be enjoyed by heroic warriors. O Siva, I shall 
fight with you who are a partisan of the gods. 

19. The hero who allows another to supercede him is 
the basest in the world. Hence O Siva I shall certainly 
march towards you just now. 

20. I reach there in the morning in the course of my 
victorious campaign. O messenger, go and tell all this to Siva. 



Hudrasarhhitd 945 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

21. On hearing these words of Sankhacu^a, the emissary 
of Siva laughed aloud and then spoke haughtily to the lord 
of the Asuras. 

Pufpadanta said : — 

22. O Great king, you cannot face the Ganas of Siva. 
Then how can you face lord Siva himself? 

23. So return their positions of authority to the gods 
entirely. Move immediately to Patala if you wish to live. 

24. O excellent Danava, do not regard Siva an ordinary 
deity. He is indeed the great soul, the lord of the lord 
of all. 

25. Indra and other gods abide by his commands. 
The Siddhas, the patriarchs, the sages and the serpent lords 
all follow suit. 

26. He is the overlord of Visnu and Brahma. He is 
both possessed and devoid of attributes. By a mere twitch 
of his knitted eyebrow everything is dissolved. 

27. Siva is the perfect form of gods, the cause of the 
annihilation of the worlds, the goal of the good, the destroyer 
of the wicked. He is free from aberrations. He is greater 
than the greatest. 

28. He is the overlord of Brahma. He is lord Siva 
even into Vi$nu.. O excellent Danava, his behest should 
never be slighted. 

29. Of what avail is an unnecessary digression, O 
great king. Ponder deeply. Know him to be great lord, the 
great Brahman, the knowledge-formed. 

30. Return their kingdoms to the gods as well as their 
positions of authority. O dear, thus you will fare well. 
Otherwise, terror will strike you. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

31. On hearing this, the valorous king of the Danavas, 
deluded by his fate spoke to the emissary of Siva thus. 

SankhacUda said : — 

32. I shall neither give up kingdom nor the positions 



946 Sivapurtina 

of authority, without a fight with him. This is certain. I tell 
you the truth. 

33. The entire universe whether mobile or immobile 
is subject to the vagaries of time. Everything originates in 
time and everything merges into time. 

34. Go and tell Siva exactly what I have said to you. 
Let him do what is proper. Do not talk much. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

35. O good sage, Puspadanta the emissary of Siva 
when thus addressed by the Asura returned to lord Siva and 
told him everything duly. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

( March of The Victorious Lord Siva) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1 . On hearing those words of the emissary, the 
infuriated emperor of the gods, Siva spoke to Virabhadra 
and other Ganas. 

Siva said . 

2-3. t: 0 Virabhadra, O Nandin, O eight Bhairavas,* 

the frontier guards, 252 let the Ganas start along with my sons, 
at my bidding. Let those strong ones be ready and fully 
equipped with weapons. Let Bhadrakali start with her army 
for the war. I start just now for slaying Sankhacuda”. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

4. Having ordered thus, lord Siva started along with 
his army. His delighted heroic Ganas followed him.. 

5. In the meantime Karttikeya and GaneSa, the over- 
all generals of the army, came near Siva joyously, fully 
equipped with weapons and ready for war. 

♦See Note 25fj P. 94«. 

2-, 2 . K?etrapalas arc tutelary deities whose number is given as 
fortynine. 



Hudrasarhhita 


947 


6-9. The leading chiefs of the Ganas were Virabhadra, 
Nandin, Mahakala, Subhadraka, Visalaksa, Bana, Pingalaksa, 
Vikampana, VirQpa, Vikrti, Manibhadra, Baskala, Kapila, 
Dirghadamstra, Vikara, Tamralocana, Kalankara, Balibhadra, 
Kalajihva, Kutfcara, Balonmatta, Rana41aghya, Durjaya, 
Durgama and others. I shall enumerate the number of Ganas 
they had. Listen attentively. 

10. Sarikhakarna the suppressor of enemies went, 
accompanied by a crore Ganas; Kekarak$a went with ten 
crores and Vikrta with eight crores. 

11. Vi.sakha with sixty four crores; Pariyatrika with 
nine crores; Sarvantaka with six crores and the glorious 
Vikftanana too with six crores. 

12. The chief of Ganas, Jalaka went with twelve crores; 
the glorious Samada seven and Dundubha with eight crores. 

13. Karalaksa went with five crores; the excellent 
Sandaraka with six crores; Kunduka and Kundaka each went 
with crores of Ganas. 

14. The leader of Ganas, the most excellent of all, 
Vistambha, went with eight crores Pippala and Sannada 
went with a thousand crores. 

15. Avc^ana went with eight crores ; Candratapana 
with eight crores; Mahakesa the chief of Ganas with a 
thousand crores. 

16. The heroic Kundin and the auspicious Parvataka 
went with twelve crores each; Kala, Kalaka and Mahakala 
with a hundred crores each. 

17. Agnika went with a hundred crores, Agnimukha 
with a crore, Aditya and Ghanavaha with half a crore. 

18. Sannaha and Kumuda went with a hundred crores 
each; Amogha, Kokila and Sumantraka with a hundred 
crores each. 

19. Kakapada and Santanaka went with sixty crores 
each: Mahabala with nine crores and Madhu Pingala with 
five crores. 

20. Nila, DeveSa and Purnabhadra each went with 
ninety crores; the powerful Caturvaktra with seven crores. 

21. With thousands, hundreds and twenties of crores 
many heroes came there to take part in that festival of 
War. 



948 


Sioapurd^a 

22. Vlrabhadra came there with a thousand crores of 
Bhutas, three crores of Pramathas and sixtyfour crores of 
Lomajas. 

23. Kastharutjha with sixty four crores and Suke£a 
and Vr$abha too similarly. The honourable Virupaksa and 
Sanatana went with sixtyfour crores. 

24-26. Talaketu, $adasya, the valorous Paficasya, 
Samvartaka, Caitra, LarikulHa Svayamprabhu, Lokantaka, 
Diptatman, lord Daityantaka, lord Bhrngiri(i, the glorious 
Devadevapriya, A£ani, Bhanuka, Kankala, Kalaka, Kala, 
Nandi n and Sarvantaka each went with sixtyfour crores. 

27. These and other leading Ganas, powerful and in- 
numerable started lovingly to fight fearlessly with Sankhacuda. 

28. All of them had thousand arms, matted hair for 
their crowns, and crescent moon for embellishment. They 
had blue necks and three eyes. 

29. They wore Rudrak§as as ornaments. They had 
smeared their bodies with fine Bhasma. They were decorated 
with necklaces, earrings, bracelets, coronets and other 
ornaments. 

30. They resembled Brahma, Indra and Visnu. They 
had the attributes of Anima 263 etc. They were as refulgent as 
a crore suns. They were efficient in warfare. 

31. O sage, some of them were the residents of the 
earth; some of the Patala, some of the sky and some of the 
seven heavens. 264 

32. O celestial sage, why shall I dilate ? All the 
Sivaganas, residents of different regions went to fight with 
the Danavas. 

33-35. The eight Bhairavas 266 the terrible eleven Rudras, 264 


233. For eight Siddhis — Arimft etc. see Note 203 P. 235. 

234. The concept of seven heavens is not peculiar to tb« Pur in as 
alone, it is found in the S mitic and Christian sacred lore as well. 

253. Bhairava is a fierce form of Siva. The Puragas mention eight 
Bhairavas : viz or 

qiqTO, and Sometimes other names are given : fTORPT, 

qfrpRTT'ST, HHKNI, and fWT I 

256. Eleven Rudras are regarded as inferior manifestations of Siva. 
They are variously named in different Pur ft n as. See Note 127 P. 13b. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


949 


the eight Vasus, 257 the twelve Adityas, 858 Indra, the fire god, 
the moon, ViSvakarman, the ASvins, Kubera, Yama, Niryti, 
Nalakubara, Vayu, Varuna, Budha, Mangala, the other 
planets and the valorous Kamadeva went with lord Siva. 

36-37. Ugradantja, Ugradam?tra, Korafa and Kotabha 
too went. The great goddess Bhadrakall herself with hundred 
arms was seated in an aerial chariot studded with gems. 
She was wearing a red cloth and a red garland. She had 
smeared red unguents over her body. 

38. She was dancing, laughing and singing in a 
sweet voice joyously. She was offering protection to her 
own people and striking terror to the enemies. 

39-44. Her tongue was a yojana long and terrible. 
She bore conch, discus, mace, lotus, sword, leather shield, 
bows, arrows, skull of circular shape, a yojana in width and 
majestic in appearance, a trident that touched the sky, a 
yojana long spear, iron club, threshing rod, thunderbolt, 
sword, a thick shield, the miraculous weapons of Visnu, 
Varuna, Vayu, Narayana, Gandharva, Brahma, Garu^a, 
Parjanya, Pasupati, Parvata, and Mahesvara, Nagapasa, 
Jrmbhanastra, the Mahavlra, the Saura, the Kalakala and 
the Mahanala weapons, the staff of Yama, the Sammohana, 
the divine weapon called Samartha. Many such and other 
divine weapons she held in her hands. 

45. She came and stood there with three crores of 
Yoginls and three crores of terrible Dakinls. 

46. Bhutas, Pretas, Pisacas, Kusmandas, Brahmarak- 
sasas, Vetalas, Yaksas, Kinnaras and Raksasas too came there. 

47. Skanda was surrounded by these all. He bowed 
to Siva and at his bidding stayed near his father to assist 
him. 

48. The fearless, fierce Siva gathered his armies and 
went to fight Sarikhacuda. 

257. Vasus, a class of deities, are rather Vedic personifications of 

natural phenomena. They are eight in number 3 TPT (Water) 
(pole-star), *ft*T (moon), 3TT (earth), (wind), 3 ^** (fire), 

SHTTfr (dawn) and lipht. See SP, VS 24. 101 and Note 163 P. 162. 

258. Adityas are twelve in number : WT, W 

etc. Tney are variously named in the Pur&iias. 



950 Sivapurdna 

49. The great god stationed himself at the foot of a 
beautiful Banyan tree on the banks of the river Candra- 
bhag&, 239 for the emancipation of the -gods. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

( The March of Sahkhacuda) 

Vydsa said : — 

1. O dear son of Brahma, O sage of great intellect, 
live long for many years. You have narrated the great 
story of the mooncrestcd lord. 

2. When Siva’s emissary had departed, what did the 
valorous Danava, Sar'ikhacuda do ? Please mention that in 
detail. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

3. When the messenger returned, the valorous Sarikha- 
cuda went in and told his wife TulasI all the details. 

Sahkhacuda said : — 

4. O dear lady, infuriated by the words of Siva’s 
messenger I have prepared for a war. Hence I am going 
to fight. You carry out my directions. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

5. After saying this and slighting Siva, that demon 
professing to be wise advised his wife in various ways and 
sported with her with delight. 

6. Throughout that night, the couple indulged in 
sexual dalliance. Uttering coaxing and cajoling words, 
practising various erotic arts, they immersed themselves in the 
ocean of happiness. 

259. CandrabhSga, (Mod. Chenab, Ptolemy’s Sandabaga) rises from 
the foot of the Himalayas in two rivulets Chandra and Bhagfl which join 
at Tandi. The joint stream is known as Chandrabhfiga. See Note 237 

P. 235- 



Rudrasarhhiid 


951 


7. He got up in the Brahma Muhurta, 260 and finished 
his daily routine in the morning. He then performed the 
offering of charitable gifts. 

8-9. He crowned his son as the lord of Danavas. He 
entrusted his wife, his kingdom and his riches to the care of 
his son. When his wife cried and dissuaded him from going 
to the war he consoled her by various words of appease- 
ment. 

10. He called his general and ordered him to be ready 
for the war. 

SankhacUda said : — 

11. O general, let the heroic warriors start for the 
war. Let them be ready for action; they have been trained 
well for the war. 

12. Let the heroic Danavas and Daityas, the armies 
of the powerful Karikas of eightysix divisions well-equipped 
in arms set out fearlessly. 

13. Let the fifty families of Asuras, having the 
heroism and prowess of a crore set out to fight with Siva, 
the partisan of the gods. 

14. At my bidding, let the hundred armed families of 
Dhaumras speedily set out to fight with Siva. 

15. At my behest, let the Kalakeyas Mauryas, 
Dauhrdas and the Kalakas set out ready for the fight 
with Siva. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

16. After ordering thus, the powerful lord of Asuras 
and the Emperor of the Danavas set out surrounded by 
thousands of warriors and great armies. 

17. His general was an expert in the science and 
technique of warfare. He was the best of charioteers a great 
hero and skilled in waifave. 

18. He had three hundred thousand Aksauhini 261 armies. 
He performed the rites of auspicious beginning and came 
out of the camp. He was terrible to the watching heroes. 

260. See Note 191 2*8. 

261. A single Ak^auhipi consists of 21, 870 elephants, 21870 chariots, 
65610 horses and 109, 350 foot. 



19. Mounting on an aerial chariot of exquisite build 
and inlaid with gems, and making obeisance to the elders 
and preceptors he set out for the batjtle. 

20-21. In the holy land of Bharata, to the east of the 
western ocean and to the west of Malaya 262 mountain, on the 
banks of river Pu?pabhadrS, 263 there is a hermitage of 
Kapila 264 with an auspicious holy Banyan tree. It is called 
Siddhagrama. 285 It is the place where holy men achieve the 
result of their action. 

22. It is to the north of Srl;saila 286 and to the south of 
Gandhamadana. 267 It is five Yojanas in width and a hundred 
times as much in length. 

23. The river Puspabhadra is very beautiful and full 
of transparent water. It confers merits cn everyone in 
Bharata, like the river Sarasvati. 

24. It starts from Himalaya, has its confluence with 
Sarasvati. It is the beloved of the briny sea and blessess 
people with good fortune- 

25. It enters the western ocean where Gomanta 268 is on 
its left. Sankhacuda went there and saw the army of Siva. 


262. Malaya (Dravidian : inalai) is identical with the Travancore 
hills and the southernmost part of the Western Ghats. 

263. It has not been possible to identify this river. According to 
the present context, Puspabhadra issues from the Himalayas, rises along 
with the Sarasvati and falls into the Western ocean. (Gp Verses 24-25 
of this ch.) 

264. Kapila was an ancient sage who destroyed a hundred thousand 
sons of King Sagara. 

265. The wide tract of land, the Scene of Kapila's hermitage, lies 
to the East of the Western ocean to the West of Travancore hills to the 
north of &risaila hills and to the south of Gandham&dana mountain. 

266. It is one of the most sacred and beautiful hills of the South 
overhanging the river kfsr^a. 

267. The location of Gandhamadana is highly controversial See 
Note 309 P. 405 and Note 66 P. 623. Most probably this is the Hima- 
layan Gandhamadana that is referred to here. 

268. It is identical with Goa. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


953 


CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 

(The conversation between Siva and the emissary of Sankhacuda) 
Sanatkumdra said : — 

1 . Stationing himself there, the lord of Danavas sent 
a leading Danava of great knowledge as his emissary to 
Siva. 

2. The emissary went there and saw the moon-crested 
lord Siva, of the refulgence of a crore suns, seated at the root 
of the Banyan tree. 

3. He saw him sitting in a yogic pose, showing the 
mystic gesture with his eyes, with a smiling face and body 
as pure as crystal and blazing with transcendent splendour. 

4-7. Siva held the trident and the iron club. He was 
clad in the hide of the tiger. The emissary saw the three-eyed 
lord of Parvatl, the enlivener of the life of the devotees, the 
quiet Siva, the dispenser of the fruits of penance, the creator of 
riches, quick in being propitiated, eager to bless the devotees 
and beaming with pleasure in his face. He saw the lord of 
the universe, the seed of the universe, identical with 
the universe and of universal form, born of all, lord of all, 
creator of all, the cause of the annihilation of the universe, 
the cause of causes, the one who enables devotees to cross 
the ocean of hell, the bestower of knowledge, the seed of 
knowledge, knowlege-bliss and eternal. 

8. On seeing him, the messenger, the leader of Danavas, 
descended from his chariot and bowed to him as well as to 
Kumara. 

9. He saw Bhadrakali to his left and Karttikeya stand- 
ing before him. Kali, Karttikeya and Siva offered him the 
conventional benediction. 

10. This emissary of Sarikhacuda, had full knowledge of 
the sacred texts. He joined his palms in reverence and 
bowing to him spoke the auspicious words. 

The Emissary said : — 

11. “O lord, I am the emissary of Sankhacuda and have 
come to you. What is it that you desire ? Please tell me.” 



Sanatkumara said : — 

12. On hearing these words of Sankhacuija, lord Siva 
became delighted and spoke. 

Lard Siva said : — 

13. O messenger of great intellect, listen to my words 
conducive to happiness. After pondering over this, without 
disputation, this shall be mentioned to him. 

1 4. Brahma is the creator of the worlds and father of 
Dharma. He knows virtue. Marici is his son. Kagyapa is 
Marici’s son. 

15. Daksa gave him his thirteen daughters, with 
pleasure. Among them the chaste lady Danu increased his 
fortune to a great extent. 

16. Danu gave birth to four sons called Danavas. 
They were vigorous and powerful. Vipracitti of great 
strength and valour was one of them. 

17. His son, the virtuous Dambha of great intellect 
was the ruler of Danavas. You are his excellent son, a pious 
soul, and the lord of Danavas. 

18. In previous birth you were a cowherd and an 
attendant of Kr$na. Among the cowherds you were virtuous. 
As a result of Radha’s curse, you are born as Danava and 
have become the king of Danavas. 

19. You are casually born as a Danava. You are 
really no Danava. Realising your previous birth you leave 
off your inimical attitude to the gods. 

20. Don’t be malicious towards them. You can enjoy 
your kingdom zealously. Do not try to expand your king- 
dom nor spoil it. 

21. O Danava, return their kingdom to the gods. 
Maintain my affection. Stay in your kingdom happily. Let 
the gods stay in their region. 

22. Do not offend people. Don’t be malicious to the 
gods. The descendants of Kagyapa are noble and indulge in 
pure activities. 

23. Whatever sin is there in the world, even including 
that of slaughter of a brahmin, does not merit even a 
sixteenth part of the sin accruing from the offence towards 
kinsmen. 



Rudrasarhhitd 955 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

24. These and many such words of advice, auspiciously 
based on injunctions of Sruti and Smrti, Siva said to him 
enlightening him in an excellent manner. 

25. The emissary who had been well instructed by 
Sankhacuda who knew his duties well but who had been 
deluded by destiny spoke these words humbly. 

The messenger said : — 

26. O lord, what has been narrated by you is true. 
It cannot be otherwise. But let my submission based on 
certain factual elements be heard. 

27. O lord Siva, verily a great sin has been cited as 
the result of offence to kinsmen by you now. But does it 
concern dnly Asuras and not the gods? Please tell me. 

28. If it applies to all alike, I shall consider it and 
let you know. Please tell me your decision at the outset* 
and clear my doubts. 

29. O lord Siva, why did the discus-bearing lord Vi$nu 
sever the heads of Madhu and Kaitabha 299 the excellent 
Daityas in the ocean of dissolution ? 

30. Your Majesty too, O Siva, is famous as a partisan 
of the gods. Why did you fight with the Tripuras 270 and 
reduce them to ashes ? 

31. After divesting him of every thing why was Bali 
packed off to Sutala and other regions 271 ? Did Visnu go to 
his threshold as his uplifter ? 

32. Why was Hiranyaksa 272 harassed by the gods along 

with his brother ? Why were Sumbha 273 and other Asuras 
subjected to fall by the gods ? r 

269. The Asuras Madhu and Kaitabha bom of the ears of Vi*QU 
in the ocean at the end of a kalpa rushed against Brahmft who appealed 
for help to Vi?flii. Visnu extended his arms, seized the Asuras and slew 
them with his might. 

270. For the destruction of Tripuras see oP. RS. V. Ch- 10 

27*. It refers to the legend of Visnu who assuming the form of a 
dwarf craved from Bali the boon of three steps of ground and then 
stepping over heaven and earth in two strides left the nether region for 
Bali's abode. 

272. Hirany&k?a and Hira^yakasipu were slain by Vispu in his 
Boar and Man-lion incarnations respectively. 

273. Sumbha, Ntfumbha and other Asuras were killed by the Goddess 
Durgft at the instance of the gods. 



33. Formerly when the ocean was churned, the 
nectar was drunk off by the gods. 274 All the strain and stress 
was ours but the gods reaped the fruit of our endeavour. 

34. The entire universe is but an object of sport of 
Kala the supreme soul. Whomsoever and whensoever he 
pleases to bestow the riches he atttains them. 

35. The enmity of the gods and the Danavas is 
perpetual and sparked off due to some reason or other. By 
turns, subject to the whims of Kala they enjoy victory or 
defeat. 

36. Interference on your part in the dispute between 
the two is futile. This does not behove you, the lord who are 
equally in touch with both. 

37. Your rivalry to us is excessively shameful since you 
are loid unto the gods as well as to the Asuras. You are the 
supreme soul. 

38. In the event of your victory your fame is not 
enhanced. In the event of your defeat you suffer a great 
loss. Let this disadvantage be pondered over. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

39. On hearing these words, the three-eyed lord 
laughed and spoke sweetly to the leading Danava what seemed 
proper. 

Lord Siva said : — 

40. We are subservient to our devotees. We are 
never independent. We carry out their tasks at their wish. 
We are not the partisans of any one in particular. 

41. Formerly the fight of Visnu with the excellent 
Daityas Madhu and Kaifcabha in the ocean of dissolution was 
due to the prior request of Brahma. 

42. For the sake of Prahlada, at the request of gods, 
Hiranyakasipu was slain by him acting in the interest of his 
devotees. 

43. Formerly I fought with the Tripuras and reduced 

274. It refers to the churning of the nectar from the ocean by the 
joint endeavour of the gods and Asuras. The gods drank the nectar while 
the Asuras were deceived by Visriu and deprived of their legitimate right to 
drink the same. 



Rudrasarhhitd 957 

them to ashes, only at the request of the gods. It is well 
known. 

44. Formerly Parvati, the Mother of all, the goddess of 
all, fought with Sumbha and others and killed them only at 
the request of the gods. 

45. Even today, the gods have sought refuge in Brahma. 
And he along with the gods and the lord Visnu has sought 
refuge in me. 

46. O Emissary, paying heed to the request of Visnu, 
Brahma and others, I, though lord of all, have come here 
in the battle of the gods. 

47. Really you are the foremost of the comrades of 
Krsna, the great soul. Those Daityas who had been for- 
merly killed are not on a par with you. 

48. What is there excessively shameful in my fight 

with you, O king ? I the lord have been urged humbly to 

carry out the task of the gods. 

49. Go to Sankhacuda and tell him what I have 

said. Let him do what is proper. I shall carry out the 

ta$k of the gods. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

50. On saying this, Siva the great god, stopped. 
The emissary stood up and returned to Sankhacuda. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 

(Mutual fight) 


Sanatkumara said : — 

1. The emissary returned and mentioned the words of 
Siva, in detail and truthfully. He conveyed his 'decision as 
it was. 

2. On hearing that, the valorous Danava Sankhacuda 
accepted lovingly the alternative of a fight. 

3. Hurriedly he got into his vehicle along with his 
ministers. He commanded his army against Siva. 



4. Siva too hastened to urge his army and the gods. 
The lord of all was ready himself with his sport. 

5. The musical instruments formally announced the 
beginning of war. There was a great tumult along with the 
shouts of the heroes. 

6. O sage, the mutual fight between the gods and the 
Danavas ensued. Both the hosts of the gods and the Danavas 
fought righteously. 

7. Mahendra fought with Vr$aparvan. Bhaskara 
fought with Vipracitti. 

8. Visnu fought a great battle with Dambha, Kala 
with the Asura Kala and the firegod fought with Gokarna. 

9. Kubera fought with Kalakeya and ViSvakarman 
with Maya. Mrtyu fought with Bhayarhkara and Yama with 
Samhara. 

10. Varuna fought with Kalambika, the wind gpd 
with Cancala. Mercury with Ghataprsjha and Sanai£cara 
with Raktaksa. 

11. Jayanta fought with Ratnasara; the Vasus with the 
groups of Varcas’s; the Asvins with the two Diptimants and 
Nalakubara with Dhumbra. 

12. Dharma fought with Dhurandhara; Mangala with 
Ganakaksa; Vaisvana with Sobhakara and Manmatha with 
Pipita. 

13-14. The twelve sun gods fought with the Asuras — 
Gokamukha, Curna, Khadga, Dhumra, Samhala, the valorous 
ViSva and PalaSa. The other gods assisting Siva fought 
righteously with the other Asuras. 

15. The eleven Maharudras 275 fought with the eleven 
terrible Asuras of great power and valour. 

16. Mahamani fought with Ugracancjia and others. 
The god Moon fought with Rahu and Jiva fought with 
Sukra. 

17. Nandi€vara and the rest fought with leading 
Danavas in the great battle. This is not being explained 
separately. 

18. O sage, then Siva stayed at the foot of the 


275* For eleven Rudras, see Note 127. P 138; 256 P 948. 



RudrasarhkitA 959 

Banyan tree along with Kali and his son. The hosts of the 
two armies fought continuously against each other. 

19. Decorated with gemset ornaments, Sarikhcuda 
sat on his gemset throne of great beauty attended upon by a 
crore Danavas, 

20. Then ensued a great war in which both gods and 
Asuras were crushed. In that great war many divine and 
miraculous weapons were hurled. 

21-22. Maces, long and short swords, Patt&as, 
BhuSundis, Mudgaras (different kinds of iron clubs), javelins, 
spears, Parighas, Saktis, axes, arrows, Tomaras, &ataghnis, and 
other weapons shone in the hands of the heroes. 

23. Using these weapons, the heroes severed the heads of 
each other. It was a jubilant occasion for the roaring heroes 
of the armies. 

24. Elephants, horses, chariots and foot soldiers along 
with their drivers and riders were hit and split up. 

25. The arms, thighs, hands, hips, ears and feet were 
cut off. The banners, arrows, swords, coats of mail and 
excellent ornaments were slit and split. 

26. The earth shone with heads divested of coronets 
but with earrings retained, strewn about and with thighs 
resembling trunks of elephants broken off during the tussle. 

27. Severed arms with the ornaments and weapons 
still retained and other limbs too were lying scattered about 
like honeycombs. 

28. The soldiers running in the battle field saw several 
headless bodies that jumped with many weapons lifted in 
their hands. 

29. With different kinds of miraculous and ordinary 
weapons and missiles, the heroes of great strength and valour 
fought one another shouting and leaping. 

30. Some heroes killed the soldiers with their arrows 
fitted with goden tips and roared like water-laden rumbling 
clouds. 

31. One hero fully encompassed another hero as well 
as his chariot and charioteer, by discharging heaps of arrows 
like the rainy season covering up the sun under the clouds. 

32. Fighters of duel rushed against one another, 
challenging, thrusting and diving in at the vulnerable points. 



960 Sioapur&Qa 

33. Everywhere groups of heroes were seen in that 
terrible war roaring like lions with various weapons displayed 
in their hands. 

34. The heroes in their joy shouted and leapt blowing 
on their conches of loud sound severally. 

35. Thus for a long time the great combat between 
the gods and Danavas continued, terrible and tumultuous 
but delightful to the heroes. 

36. Such was the divine sport of the great lord Siva, 
the great soul. Everyone including the gods, Asuras and 
human beings was deluded by it. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 

( Sankhacuda fights with the full contingent of his army) 
Sanatkumara said : — 

1 . Then the gods were defeated by the Danavas. Their 
bodies were wounded by weapons and missiles. Terrified, 
they took to flight. 

2. Returning to Siva, the lord of the universe, they 
sought refuge in him. In agitated words they cried “O Lord 
of all, save, O save us.” 

3. On seeing the defeat of the gods and others and 
on hearing their cries of fear, Siva was greatly infuriated. 

4. He glanced at the gods sympathetically and assured 
them of his protection. With his brilliance he enhanced the 
strength of his Ganas. 

5. Commanded by Siva, the great hero Karttikeya, 
son of Siva fought fearlessly with the hosts of Danavas in the 
battle. 

6. Shouting angrily and roaring like a hero, the lord, 
the slayer of Taraka killed a hundred Ak$auhinis 27 * in the 
battle. 

7. Clipping off their heads, Kali with eyes like a 
red lotus, drank off the blood and devoured the flesh 
rapidly. 


976. For Akf&uhiQi »ce Note 961 P. 951. 



Rudrasarhhita 


961 


8. She fought in diverse ways terrifying both the gods 
and the Danavas. She drank the blood of the Danavas all 
round. 

9. Seizing ten million elephants and an equal num- 
ber of men with a single hand she playfully thrust them into 
her mouth. 

10. Many thousands of headless bodies danced in 
the battle field. There was a great tumult that terrified the 
cowards. 

1 1 . Again Karttikeya became furiously angry and 
showered volleys of arrows. He struck crores of leaders of the 
Asuras within a trice. 

12. The Danavas wounded in their bodies by the 
numerous arrows of Karttikeya fled in fright. Those who 
remained were killed. 

13. Vrsaparvan, Vipracitti, Danda, and Vikampana 
fought with Karttikeya by turns. 

14. Mahamarl also fought. She was never routed. All 
of them afflicted by Karttikcya’s spear were wounded. 

15. O sage, Mahamarl and Skanda won the battle. 
Big wardrums were sounded in the heaven. Showers of 
flowers fell down. 

16-17. On seeing the wonderfully terrible fight of 
Karttikeya that caused wastage in the rank and file of the 
Danavas like natural disasters, as well as the harassment 
and havoc wrought by Mahamarl, Sankhacuda became 
furious and himself got ready for the battle. 

18-19. He got into his excellent aerial chariot that 
contained different weapons and missiles, that was set in 
diamond and that encouraged and emboldened the heroes. 
Sankhacuda drew the string of the bow upto his ear and 
discharged volleys of arrows from his seat in the middle 
of the chariot. He was accompanied by many heroes. 

20. His volley of arrows was terrifying. It could not 
be withstood. A terrible darkness spread in the battlefield. 

21. The gods Nandisvara and others fled. Only 
Karttikeya stayed behind in the battle field. 

22. The king of Danavas showered mountains, serpents, 
pythons and trees so terrifyingly that it could not be with- 
stood. 



23. Oppressed by that shower Karttikeya, the son of 
Siva, looked like the sun enveloped by thick sheets of frost. 

24. He exhibited many types of illusions in the manner 
indicated by Maya. O excellent sage, none of the gods or 
Gagas understood it. 

25. At the same time, the powerful Sankhacuda of 
great illusion split his bow with a divine arrow. 

26. He split his divine chariot and the horses pul- 
ling it. With a divine missile he shattered the peacock too. 

27. The Danava hurled his spear as refulgent as the 
sun fatally on his chest whereat he fell unconscious by the 
force of the blow. 

28. Regaining consciousness, Karttikeya the destroyer 
of heroic enemies, mounted his vehicle of sturdy build, set 
with gems. 

29. Remembering the feat of lord Siva accompanied 
by Parvati, and taking up weapons and missiles, the six- 
faced deity fought terrifically. 

30. With his divine missiles, the son of Siva split the 
serpents, mountains, trees and rocks, everything furiously. 

31. He prevented a conflagration by the missile of 
cloud. He split the chariot and the bow of Sankhacuda 
playfully. 

32. He split his armour, coronet and the vehicles. 
He roared like a hero and shouted again and again. 

33. He hurled his spear refulgent like the sun at the 
chest of the lord of Danavas. At the blow he fell uncons- 
cious. 

34. That powerful Asura got rid of the affliction in 
a Muhurta and regained consciousness. With a leonine 
vigour he got up and roared. 

35. He bit Karttikeya of great strength with his spear. 
Not making that spear, a gift of Brahma, futile, Karttikeya 
fell on the ground. 

36. Taking him on her lap Kali brought him near 
Siva. By his divine sport and perfect wisdom Siva enlivened 
him. 

37. Siva gave him infinite strength* As a result of 
that the valorous Karttikeya stood up and felt inclined to 
go to the battlefield. 



RuJrasarhhitd 


963 


38. In the meantime the heroic Virabhadra of great 
strength fought with the powerful Sankhacuda in the 
battle. 

39. Whatever arrows were discharged by the Danava 
in the battle were split playfully by Virabhadra by means 
of his own arrows. 

40. The lord of Danavas discharged hundreds of 
divine missiles. The valorous Virabhadra split all of them 
by means of his arrows. 

41. The valorous Sankhacuda became infuriated and 
hit him on the grounds. 

42. Regaining consciouness in a trice the leader of 
the Ganas, Virabhadra caught hold of his bow again. 

43. In the meantime Kali went to the battle ground 
again at the request of Karttikeya to devour the Danavas 
and to protect her own people. 

44. NandlsVara and other heroes, the gods, Gandhar- 
vas, Yaksas, Rak?asas and serpents followed her. 

45. Drum-bearers and wine-carriers 277 accompanied 
them in hundreds. Heroic warriors on either side were 
active again. 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 

(Kali fights ) 


Sanatkumara said : — 

1. Going to the battle ground, the goddess Kali roared 
like a lion. On hearing that the Danavas fainted. 

2. She laughed boisterously again and again boding ill 
to the Asuras. She drank the distilled grapewine and danced 
on the battle ground. 

3. The manifestations of Durga viz— ygradam?tra 
(one with fierce fangs) Ugradancja (one with fierce baton) 
and Kotavi (the naked) danced on the battle ground and 
drank wine. 


The expression ‘Maphuvahaka’ indicates that the custom of 
drinking wine among the fighting ranks in the battlefield prevailed even m 
ancient days. 



^6* Sivapurana 

4. There was great tumult on the side of the Ganas 
and the gods. All the gods and the Ganas roared and 
rejoiced. 

5. On seeing Kali, Sankhacuda hastened to the battle 
ground. The Danavas were frightened but the king Sankha- 
cuda assured them of protection. 

6. Kali hurled fire as fierce as the flame of dissolution 
which the king put out sportively by means of Vaisnava 
missiles. 

7. Immediately the goddess hurled the Narayana mis- 
sile at him. The missile developed its power on seeing the 
Dinava Sarikhacuda. 

8. On realising it as fierce as the flame of fire of dis- 
solution, the Danava Sarikhacuda fell flat on the ground 
and bowed again and again. 

9. On seeing the Danava humbled the missile turned 
away. Then the goddess hurled the Brahma missile with due 
invocation through the mantra. 273 

10. On seeing the missile blazing he bowed and fell on 
the ground. The leader of the Danavas thus prevented the 
Brahma missile from attacking him. 

11. Then the infuriated leader of the Danavas drew 
the bow violently and discharged divine missiles at the goddess 
with due invocation through the mantras. 

12. Opening the mouth very wide she swallowed the 
missiles and roared with a boisterous laugh. The Danavas 
were terrified. 

13. He then hurled a Sakti, a hundred Yojanas long 
at Kali. By means of divine missiles she broke it into a 
hundred pieces. 

14. He hurled the Vaisnava missile on Kali. She 
blocked it with the Mahesvara missile. 

15. Thus the mutual combat went on for a long time. 
All the gods and Danavas stood as mere onlookers. 

16. Then the infuriated goddess Kali, as fierce as the 
god of death on the battleground, took up angrily the 
Faiupata arrow sanctified by mantras. 

278. The reference to the missiles of unfailing effect discharged with 
the magic formulae indicates the heights that military science had attained 
in that age. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


965 


17. In order to prevent it from being hurled, an un- 
embodied celestial voice said — “O goddess, do not hurl this 
missile angrily at Sankhacuda.” 

18. “O Candika, death of this D&nava will not take 
place even through the never failing Pasupata missile. Think 
of some other means for slaying this warrior Sankhacuda.” 

19. On hearing this, Bhadrakali did not hurl the mis- 
sile. Sportively she devoured ten million Danavas as if in 
hunger. 

20. The terrible goddess rushed at Sankhacu^a to 
devour him. The Danava prevented her by means of the 
divine missile of Rudra. 

21. Then the infuriated leader of the Danavas hurled a 
sword, as fierce as the summer sun, with sharp and terrific 
edge. 

22. On seeing the blazing sword approaching, Kali 
furiously opened her mouth and swallowed it even as 
Sar'ikhacuda stood watching. 

23. The lord of Danavas hurled many divine missiles 
but before they reached her she broke them into hundreds of 
pieces. 

24. Again the great goddess rushed at him in order to 
devour him. But that glorious Danava, leader of all Siddhas 
vanished from sight. 

25. Thus unable to see him, Kali who rushed with 
great velocity crushed his chariot and killed the charioteer 
with her fist. 

26. Then Saiikhacuda, an expert in using deception 
returned quickly and forcefully hurled the wheel blazing like 
the flame of fire of dissolution, at Bhadrakali. 

27. The goddess sportively caught hold of the wheel 
with her left hand and immediately swallowed it. 

28. The goddess then hit him with her fist forcefully 
and angrily. The king of Danavas whirled round and fainted 
for a short while. 

29. Immediately the Danava regained consciousness 
and got up valorously. He did not fight her with his arms 
by the thought that she was a woman like his mother. 

30. The goddess seized the Danava, whirled him again 
and again and tossed him up with great anger and velocity. 



31. The valorous ° Sankhacucja fell down after being 
tossed up very high. He got up and bowed down to 
Bhadrakall. 

32. Highly delighted thereafter, he got into a beautiful 
aerial chariot of exquisite workmanship set with gems and 
did not lose the balance of his mind in the battlefield. 

33. Hungrily Kali drank the blood of the Danavas. 
In the meantime an unembodied celestial voice said: 

34. O goddess, a hundred thousand haughty leading 
Danavas have been left out in the battle still roaring. Devour 
them quickly. 

35. Do not think of slaying the king of Danavas. O 
goddess, Sankhacutja cannot be killed by you. It is certain. 

36-37. On hearing these words from the firmament, 
Bhadrakall drank the blood and devoured the flesh of many 
Danavas and went near Siva. She then narrated to him the 
events of the war in the proper order. 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 

{The annihilation of the. army of SahkhacQda) 

Vyasa said : — 

1. O intelligent one, on hearing the narrative of Kali 
what did Siva say? What did he do? Please narrate to 
me. I am eager to know it. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

2. On hearing the words of Kali, lord Siva, the actor 
of great divine sports, laughed. Siva consoled her. 

3. On hearing the celestial voice, Siva, an expert in 
the knowledge of principles, went himself to the battle along 
with his Ganas. 

4. He was seated on his great bull and surrounded by 
Vir&bhadra and others, *■ the Bhairavas and the Ksetrapalas all 
equal in valour to him. 

5. Assuming a heroic form, lord Siva entered the 



RudrasmhhiUt 


967 

battle ground. There Siva shone well as the embodied form 
of the annihilator. 

6. On seeing Siva, Sankhactuja got down from the 
aerial chariot, bowed with great devotion and fell flat on 
the ground. 

7. After bowing to him he immediately got - into his 
chariot. He speedily prepared for the fight and seized the 
bow and the arrows. 

8. The fight between Siva and the Danava wept on 
for a hundred years and they showered arrows fiercely like 
clouds pouring down incessantly. 

9. The heroic Sankhacutja discharged terrible arrows 
playfully. Siva spli t all of them by means of his arrows. 

10. Maharudra, the odd-eyed Siva, the punisher of the 
wicked and the goal of the good, angrily hit his limbs with 
various weapons. 

1 1 . Taking up his sharp sword and the leather shield 
the Danava rushed at the sacred bull of Siva and hit it on 
its head. . 

12. When his bull was hit, Siva sportively cut off the 
sword and the shining shield by means of his K$urapra. 

13. When the shield was split, the Asura hurled his 
spear. Siva split it into two with his arrow as it came before 
him. 

14. The infuriated Danava, Sarikhacucja hurled a dis- 
cus. Immediately Siva smashed it into pieces with his fist. 

15. He hurled his club with force at Siva. Rapidly 
split by Siva, the club was reduced to ashes. 

16. Then seizing an axe with his hand, the infuriated 
king of Danavas, Sankhacu<Ja rushed at Siva. 

17. By the volley of his arrows Siva sportively struck 
the Asura with axe in his hand. 

18. The Danava quickly regained consciousness and 
got into his excellent chariot. With divine weapons and 
arrows he encompassed the whole sky and shone. ' 

19. On seeing him coming on, Siva sounded his 
Ipamaru enthusiastically and twanged the bowstring, the noise 
whereof was unbearable. 

20. The lord filled all the quarters with the sound of 
his horn. Siva himself roared then, frightening the Asuras. 



968 Siuapwdna 

21. The lordly bull then bellowed putting the haughty 
trumpeting elephants to shame. The deep roar filled the 
sky, the earth and the eight quarters. 

22. With his hands the fierce l6rd Siva clapped the 
earth and the sky. All the previous shouts and roars were 
surpassed by that sound. 

23. The Ksetrapala produced a boisterous laughing 
sound boding ill to the Asuras. In that great battle Bhairava 
too roared. 

24. There was a terrific tumult in the midst of that 
battle. All round amongst the Ganas, the shouts of heroes 
rose up. 

25. The Danavas were frightened by those harsh and 
terrible sounds. On hearing them the powerful king of 
Danavas became very furious. 

26. When Siva shouted “O wicked one, stay by. Stay 
by’ 9 , the gods and the Ganas rapidly shouted “victory, 
Victory”. 

27. Then coming again the valorous son of Dambha 
hurled at Rudra his spear terrible with shooting flames. 

28. While it came on, blazing brilliantly like a great 
conflagration in the battleground, it was immediately sup- 
pressed by Ksetrapala by means of the meteor springing from 
his mouth. 

29. Again the great battle between Siva and the Danava 
was resumed. The heaven and the earth including all moun- 
tains, oceans and rivers shook and trembled. 

30. Siva split up the arrows discharged by the son of 
Dambha by means of hundred and thousands of his fierce 
arrows. Similarly the arrows of Siva were split up by the 
Danava. 

31. Then the infuriated Siva hit him with his trident. 
Unable to bear that blow he fell unconscious on the. ground. 

32. The Asura regained consciousness rapidly. He 
seized his bow and hit Rudra and all others by means of 
his arrows. 

33. The valorous Sarikhacuda assumed ten thousand 
arms by means of magic and rapidly enveloped Siva by means 
of ten thousand discuses. 

34. Then Siva, the infuriated consort of Durga, the 



Rudrasarhhiti %9 

destroyer of all insurmountable distress split the discuses 
rapidly by means of his excellent arrows. 

35. Then the Danava seised his mace and accompanied 
by a huge army rushed at Siva with the intention to kill 
him. 

36. The infuriated Siva, the destroyer of the pride of 
the wicked split the mace of the Danava rushing headlong 
by means of a sharp-edged sword. 

37. When the mace was split, the Danava became very 
furious. The brilliant Danava took up a spear that blazed 
unbearable to the enemies - 

38. By means of his trident Siva hit the comely king 
of Danavas rapidly in the chest even as he approached with 
the spear in his hand. 

39. From the chest of Sankhacuda pierced by the tri- 
dent, a valorous huge being came out and said “Stand by, 
Stand by”. 

40. Laughing noisily Siva severed the terrible head of 
the being that was coming out, by means of a sword. He 
fell on the ground. 

41. Then spreading her mouth wide open Kali furiously 
devoured innumerable Asuras whose heads were crushed 
by her fierce fangs. 

42. The excited and infuriated K?etrapala devoured 
many other Daityas. Some were killed struck down by 
Bhairava's missiles. Others were wounded. 

43. Virabhadra furiously destroyed many other heroes. 
NandiSvara killed many other demons. 

44. Thus the other Ganas, readily prepared and 
furiously heroic, destroyed many Daityas, Asuras and sup- 
pressors of the gods. 

45. Thus a major portion of his army was destroyed 
there. Many other soldiers, cowardly and terrified, fled. 



970 


iwapurS^a 


CHAPTER FORTY 

(< Sankhacuda is slain ) 


Sanatkumdra said : — 

1. On seeing the important and major portion of his 
aVmy killed, including heroes as dear to him as his life, the 
Dinava became very furious. 

2. He spoke to Siva. “I am here standing ready. Be 
steady in the battle. What is it to me, if these are killed? 
Fight me standing face to face”. 

3. O sage, after saying this and resolving resolutely the 
king of Danavas stood ready facing Siva. 

4. The Danava hurled divine missiles at him and sho- 
wered arrows like the cloud pouring rain. 

5. He exhibited various kinds of deceptive measures 
invisible and inscrutable to all the excellent gods and Ganas 
and terrifying as well. 

6. On seeing that, Siva sportively discharged thereat 
the excessively divine Mahe£vara missiles that destroy all 
illusions. 

7. All the illusions, were quelled rapidly by its brilliance. 
Though they were divine missiles they became divested of 
their brilliance. 

8. Then in the battle, the powerful lord Siva suddenly 
seized his trident which could not be withstood even by bril- 
liant persons, in order to slay him. 

9. In order to prevent him then, an unembodied cele- 
stial voice said — “O Siva, do not hurl the trident now. 
Please listen to this request. 

10. O Siva, by all means, you are competent to des- 
troy the entire universe in a trice. What doubt then in regard 
to a single Danava Sankhacutja ? 

11. Still, the limit imposed by the Vedas should not 
be disregarded by you, the lord. O great god, listen to that. 
Make it truthful and fruitful. 

12-13. O lord Siva, it has been mentioned by Brahma, 
that, as long as he wears the armour of Visnu and as long as 
his wife maintains the marital fidelity, Sankhacuda has neither 
death nor old age. Please make those words truthful.’ 



Rudrasartihitd 


971 


14. On hearing this celestial voice, Siva said “So be it”. 
Visnu came there at the wish of Siva. Siva, who is the goal 
of the good, commanded him. 

15. Then, in the guise of an old brahmin, Visriu, the 
foremost of those who wield magic, approached Sankhacuda 
and told him. 

The aged brahmin said : — 

16-17. “O lord of Danavas, give me the alms for 
which I have come to you. I shall not say openly what I 
wish to have from you who are favourably disposed to the 
distressed. I shall tell you when you have promised me first. 

18. With face and eyes indicating pleasure the king 
replied affirmatively. Then the deceptive Visnu in the form 
of a brahmin said — “I am the suppliant for your armour.” 

19. On hearing that, the lord of Danavas, a well 
wisher of the brahmins and of truthful word handed over the 
divine armour, his vital breath, to the brahmin. 

20. Visnu thus snatched off his armour by means of 
deception. Then in the guise of Sankhacuda Visnu appro- 
ached Tulasl. 

21. Lord Visnu, an expert in wielding magic went 
there and deposited his semen in her vaginal passage for the 
protection of gods. 

22. In the meantime the lord of Danavas approached 
Siva without the armour. He took up his trident that 
blazed to slay Safikhacuda. 

23. That trident, named Vijaya, of Siva, the great 
Atman, shone illuminating heaven and earth. 

24. It was as refulgent as a crore midday suns and as 
fierce as the shooting flame of fire at the time of dissolution. 
It could neither be prevented nor withstood. It was never 
ineffective in destroying enemies. 

25. It had a fierce halo all round. It wa i the best of 
all weapons and missiles. It was unbearable to gods and 
Asuras. It was terrible to all. 

26. In order to annihilate the whole cosmos sportively 
all brilliance had converged into it. 

27. It was a thousand Dhanus in length and a hundred 



972 Sivapuf&Qa 

Hastas in width. It was in the form of individual as well 
as universal soul. It was eternal and uncreated. 

28. That trident whirling round over the head of 
Sankhacuda for a while fell on the head of the Danava 
at the behest of Siva and reduced him to ashes. 

29. O brahmin, then it rapidly returned to Siva and 
having finished its work went away by the aerial path with 
the speed of the mind. 

30. The Dundubhis were sounded in the heaven. 
Gandharvas and Kinnaras sang. The sages and the^gods 
eulogised and the celestial damsels danced. 

31. A continuous shower of flowers fell over Siva. 
Visnu, Brahma, Indra, other gods and sages praised him. 

32. Sankhacuda the king of Danavas was released from 
his curse by the favour of Siva. He regained his original 
form. 

33. All the conches in the world are formed of the 
bones of Sankhacuda. Except for Siva, the holy water from 
the conch is sacred for every one. 

34. O great sage, particularly to Vi$nu and Lak§mi 
the water from the conch is pleasant. To all persons 
connected with Visnu it is so but not to Siva. 

35. After slaying him thus, Siva went to Sivaloka 
seated on his bull, joyously, accompanied by Parvatl, 
Karttikeya and the Ganas. 

36. Vi?nu went to Vaikuntha. Krsna became com- 
placent. The gods went to their abodes with great delight. 

37. The universe regained normalcy. The whole earth 
was freed of obstacles. The sky was pure. The whole world 
became auspicious. 

38. Thus I have narrated to you the delightful story 
of lord Siva that removes all misery, yields wealth and 
fulfils cherished desires. 

39. It is conducive to prosperity and longevity. It 
prevents all obstacles. It yields worldly pleasure and sal- 
vation* It confers the fruits of all cherished desires. 

40-41. The intelligent man who hears or narrates 
the story of the moon-crested lord, or reads or teaches it 
shall undoubtedly derive wealth, grains, progeny, happiness, 
all desires and particularly devotion to Siva. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


973 


42. This narrative is unequalled. It destroys all tor- 
ments. It generates great knowledge. It increases devotion 
to Siva. 

43. The brahmin listener attains brahminical splendour; 
the K?atriya becomes a conqueror; the Vaifya rich and the 
Sudra the most excellent of men. 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

(The curse of Tulasi ) 

Vydsa said : — 

1. How did the lord Narayana manage to deposit his 
semen in the vaginal passage of Tulasi? Please narrate the 
same. 

Sanatkumara said: — 

2. Narayana is the person who carries on the task of 
the gods. He is the goal of the good. It was in the guise 
of Sankhacuda that he indulged in sexual dalliance with his 
wife. 

3. Listen to the story of Visnu that causes delight, 
the story of Vi§nu who acts at the behest of Siva and 
Parvatl, the mother of the worlds. 

4-5. On hearing the aerial voice in the course of the 
war and urged by lord Siva, Visnu carried off the excellent 
armour of Sankhacuda assuming the guise of a brahmin, 
rapidly, by having recourse to his Maya. He then assumed 
the guise of Sankhacuda and went to TulasPs palace. 

6. Very near the entrance to TulasPs palace he caused 
the drum Dundubhi to be beaten and cries of victory to be 
raised. He thus made the beautiful woman wake up. 

7. On hearing it that chaste lady was highly delighted. 
Eagerly she peeped through the window into the high way. 

8. Knowing that her husband had returned she 
observed all auspicious rites and offered monetary gifts to the 
brahmins. She then beautified herself. 

9. After decending from the chariot, Vi?nu who 



974 Sivafmtdna 

assumed the guise of Sankhacuda by deceptive art for the 
sake of carrying out the task of the gods went to the apart- 
ment of the queen. 

10. On seeing her husband come before her she 
became delighted. She washed his feet, bowed to him and 
cried. 

11. She made him sit on the gemset throne of great 
beauty. She handed him the auspicious betel leaf rendered 
fragrant with camphor. 

12. ‘‘It is today that my life has become fruitful since 
I see my beloved lover who had gone to fight back in the 
abode again”. 

13. Saying so glancing at him with ogling eyes and 
smiling face she sweetly asked him about the events at the 
battlefield. 

Tulast said : — 

14-18. “O lord, how did you fare in the battle with 
Siva who renders help to the gods? You had gone to fight 
Siva who is the foremost of the gods, who is the annihilator 
of innumerable universes, whose behests are strictly adhered 
to and carried out by Visnu, Brahma and other gods 
always, who is the progenitor of the three deities, who is the 
soul of three attributes, who being devoid of attributes puts 
on the form of attributes at the request and wish of the 
devotees; who makes Vi?nu and Brahma work, who asrumed 
the form of Siva the resident of Kailasa at the request of 
Kubera, who is the lord of Ganas, the supreme Brahman, 
the goal of the good; in a single moment according to whose 
calculation a crore cosmic worlds undergo destruction; and 
in whose minutest time many Visnus, Brahmas and others 
pass away. It is with such a Siva that you had gone to 
fight. 

19. You have happily returned after defeating him, 
the great lord. How did you win? Please mention that 
to me.” 

20. On hearing these words of Tulasi, Vi$nu, the lord 
of Laksmi who had assumed the guise of Sankhacuda, 
laughed and spoke sweet words to her. 



Rudrasaifihitd 975 

Lord Vifnu said : — 

21. “When I, fond of war, reached the battle ground 
there was a great tumult. A great battle ensued. 

22. There ensued the battle between the gods and the 
Danavas both desiring victory. The daityas were defeated 
by the gods who were proud of their strength. 

23. Then I fought with the powerful gods. The gods 
defeated by me sought refuge in Siva. 

24. In order to help them Siva came to fight. Proud 
of strength I fought with him for a long time. 

25. My dear wife, we fought continuously for a year. 
O lovely woman, all the Asuras were destroyed. 

26. Brahma made us come to a peace. At the bidding 
of Brahma the powers of authority were re-assigned to the 
gods. 

27. I have returned home. Siva has returned to 
Sivaloka. Every one has resumed health and normalcy. 
The torment has receded.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

28. After saying this the lord of the worlds lay down 
on his bed. Then out of joy Visnu indulged in sexual 
intercourse. 

29. That lady began to suspect on observing a change 
in her happiness, endearment and attraction and asked him 
“who are you ? 

Tulast said : — 

30. Who are you ? Tell me quickly. I have been 
enjoyed by you deceptively. My modesty has been out- 
raged. Hence I am going to curse you.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

31. On hearing the words of Tulasi, Visnu became 
afraid of the curse. O Brahmin, sportively he re-assumed 
his own real beautiful form. 

32. On seeing the characteristic signs she guessed that 
it was Visnu. Infuriated by the violation of her chastity 
she said. 



976 


Tulasi said : — 

33. u O Visnu, you are ruthless. Your mind is like 
a rock. Since my chastity has been outraged my husband 
is doomed. 

34. O wicked one, being ruthless you are like a rock. 
Hence due to my curse you will become a rock. 

35. Those who call you ocean of mercy are erring. 
There is no doubt. How was a devotee killed for another 
man’s sake, even without any offence ?” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

36. After saying this, the chaste beloved of Sankhacucja, 
Tulasi lamented again and again in the excess of her grief. 

37. On seeing her crying, Visnu remembered lord 
Sankara, Paramesvara, by whom the universe is deluded. 

38. Then Sankara, favourably disposed to his devotees 
appeared in front of them. He was bowed to and eulogised 
humbly by Vi$nu. 

39. On seeing Visnu distressed and the beloved lady 
lamenting, Siva kind to the poor tactfully enlightened both 
of them. 

Siva said: — 

40. “O Tulasi, do not cry. Every one reaps the fruit 
of his actions. In the world that is an ocean of actions and 
rites there is no external entity that bestows happiness and 
sorrow. 

41. Listen to what is relevant to the context to get 
rid of misery. Let Vi?nu of good intentions too, listen. I 
shall mention what is beneficent to both and conducive to 
happiness. 

42. O gentle lady, penance had been performed by 
you. The fruit thereof has been attained now. How can 
it be otherwise ? 

43. Cast off this body. Take up a divine body and 
indulgence in dalliance with Vijnu for ever. Be equal unto 
Lakfhmi. 



Rudrasarhkitd 


977 


44. The body that you caste off shall become a river 
in Bharata. That will be a sacred river famous as Gandaki. 879 

45. O great lady, as a boon granted by me, Tulas! 
(holy basil) will be the most important constituent of the 
materials of worship of the gods some time. 

46. In heaven, earth and the nether worlds you will 
become the Tulasi plant more excellent than flowers. 

47. As the presiding deity of the plant you shall 
assume a divine form and shall for ever sport in secret with 
Vi?nu. 

48. The presiding deity of the river in Bharata, the 
consort of the briny sea and highly meritorious, shall be a 
part of Vi$nu. 

49. As a result of your curse, Hari shall assume the 
form of a rock on the banks of the river Gandaki and 
shall preside on the same in Bharata. 

50. Grores of terrible sharp-toothed germs shall 

penetrate and erode the rock and carve rings on it. 

51. Those pieces shall be known as Salagrama rocks 
and will be meritorious. Differentiated by the rings they 
shall be known as Lakgmlnarayana etc. 

52. O Visnu, Salagrama stone shall signify your 
contact with Tulasi. Similar in appearance they shall 
increase merit. 

53. O gentle lady, If anyone plucks the leaves of 
Tulasi lying on Salagrama he will be separated from his wife 
in the next birth. 

54. If any one plucks Tulasi leaves without using 
conch he will become a widower and a chronic patient for 
seven births. 

55. He who keeps Salagrama, Tulasi and Sankha in 
one place shall become wise and a favourite of Vi$nu. 

56. You have been the beloved of Sankhacuda for the 

279. The river Gai?daki issues from the Himalayan foothills, rises in 
Bihar and joins the Ganges near Sonepur in the Muzaffarpur District* Cp. 
MKP. Ch. 57 - 

farorr tflwr wjfaWftr <ptt i 

fa si n 

It is one of the most sacred rivers and is the source of Saiagrfcnatilas. 



period of a Manvantara. Your separation from Sankha 
cuda is really painful to you. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

57. After saying so, Siva narrated the greatness of 

Salagrama stone and Tulasi, that is highly meritorious. 

58. After delighting Visnu and Tulasi, Siva the 

benefactor of the good vanished from there and went to his 
abode. 

59. On hearing the words of Siva, Tulasi was 

delighted. She cast off that boJy and assumed a divine 

form. 

60. The lord of Laksmi went to Vaikuntfia with her. 
Immediately the river Gandaki took its origin from her 
cast off body. 

61. On its banks Visnu became a mountain conferring 
merit on men. O sage, germs make different kinds of holes 
therein. 

62. The pieces that fall into the water are highly 
meritorious. Those that remain on the dry land are 
known as Pingalas. They are harmful. 

63. Thus I have narrated everything in accordance 
with your enquiry. The story of Siva is meritorious and 
bestows all cherished desires on men. 

64. This narrative has been made in detail inter- 
mingled with the greatness of Visnu. It confers worldly 
pleasures and salvation. What is it that you wish to hear 
further ? 


CHAPTER FORT YT WO 

( Hiranyakfa is slain) 


Narada said : — 

1. I am not satiated by hearing the story of the 
mooon-crested lord Siva including the annihilation of 
Sankhacuda from you even as people are not satiated by 
drinking nectar. 



Rndrasamhitd 


979 


2. Please narrate another story of that great soul, lord 
Siva who indulges in divine sports delightful to the devotees, 
by resorting to magic practices. 

Brahma said : — 

3. On hearing the story of the annihilation of Sankha- 
cuda Vyasa the son of Satyavati 280 enquired of the excellent 
sage, son of Brahma, the very same matter. 

4. Sanatkumara narrated to Vyasa — the son of 
Satyavati — the auspicious and admirable story of lord Siva. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

5. O Vyasa, listen to the auspicious story of lord Siva 
in relation to Andhaka how the latter attained the leader- 
ship of Ganas from Siva, the great soul. 

6. O great sage, it was after a great fight with the 
gods and by propitiating lord Siva again and again with 
Sattvika devotion that he attained the leadership. 

7. It is wonderful indeed, the greatness of Siva is 
wonderful. Siva protects those who seek refuge in him. He 
is favourably disposed to his devotees. He indulges in 
different kinds of sports. 

8. On hearing about the greatness of the bull- 
bannered lord, the sage, son of Gandhavati bowed to the 
great sage, son of Brahma, with devotion and spoke these 
meaningful words. 

Vyasa said : — 

9. O holy one, O lord of sages, who is this Andhaka? 
In which warrior family on the earth was this powerful 
great Andhaka bom? What was his parentage ? What is 
his importance ? 

10. O son of Brahma, please let me know all this 
entirely along with its mystic secrets. You 281 have learnt this 
well from Karttikeya of immeasurable enlightenment, the son 
of lord Siva. 


alio. Satyavati, mother of Vyasa, was also called Matsyagandh&, 
Minagandha or Gandhavati. See V. 8 bdow 

281. The reading c^TT for suits the context. 



11. How did he obtain the leadership of the Ganas 

from Siva of great splendour ? Really that Andhaka wag 

blessed since he became the lord of the Ganas. 

Brahma said : — 

12. On hearing the words that son of Brahma spoke 
to Vyasa the father of Suka 282 who desired to hear about 
the wonderful sports of lord Siva which give prosperity to 
the hearer. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

13. Formerly Siva, the Emperor of the gods, kind to 

his devotees came to Ka$I 283 from Kailasa accompanied by 

Parvati, the daughter of the mountain and his Ganas 
because he was desirous of sporting there. 

14. He built his capital there. He appointed the 
hero Bhairava as its protector. Then he performed many 
sports, pleasing to the people, in the company of Parvati 
the daughter of the mountain. 

15. Once he went to the mountain Mandara 284 to see 
its excellent grandeur. He sported much in the company 
of Siva and the various principal heroic Ganas. 

16. While sporting on the eastern ridges of the 
Mandara mountain, Parvati sportively and playfully closed 
the eyes of Siva of fierce exploit. 

17. She closed the eyes with her lotus-like hands 
which had the lustre of coral and golden lotus. When 
Siva’s eyes were closed, a great darkness spread immediately. 

18. By this contact with lord Siva the rapturous 
rutting juice exuded from her hands became hot by the fire 
of the eye on his forehead and flowed out in copious 
drops. 

19. Conception took place and a terrible inhuman 
being manifested itself. It was furious, ungrateful, blind 286 , 

289. Suka was the son of Vyasa. He is said to have narrated the 
Bbigavatapurana to king Parik?it. 

983. See Note 227 P. 266 

284. Sec Note 36 P. 48 

285. For the conflict between the blind Asura Andhaka and lord 
Siva, Cp. Matsya P. Ch. 179. For the symbolical interpretation of this 
episode sec Matsyapur&na — A Study, PP. 275-277. 



RudrasashUtd 981 

deformed, and black in colour. It had matted locks of hair 
and fine hair all over the body. 

20. It sang, cried, laughed, danced, put out its tongue 
like a serpent and thundered fiercely. When this curious 
creature arose, Siva smilingly spoke to Parvati. 

Lord Siva said : — 

21. “You did it yourself by closing my eyes. O my 
beloved, why are you afraid of it now? On hearing these 
words of Siva, Parvati smilingly took off her hands from 
the eyes. 

22. When light spread everywhere the blind being 
appeared even more terrible. On seeing such a being, 
Parvati asked her lord Siva. 

Parvati said:— 

23. O lord, what is this ugly hideous being that is 
born in front of us. Please tell me the truth. Why was it 
created ? By whom ? Whose child is it ? 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

24. On hearing these words of his beloved, the spor- 
tively inclined mother of the three worlds and the cause of 
creation of the blind creatures, lord Siva himself indulging 
in sports smilingly said: — 

Lord Siva said : — 

25. O Parvati of mysterious activities, listen. When 
my eyes were closed by you, this being of wonderfully 
fierce might was born of my sweat. He shall be named 
Andhaka. 

26. You are the cause of his creation though not in 
the natural way. He shall be guarded by the Ganas lovingly 
as well as by you along with your friends. His well being 
rests with you. O noble lady, pondering over this intelli- 
gently you shall do every thing. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

27. On hearing the words of her lord, P&rvatl was very 
compassionate. Accompanied by her friends, she made 



982 Sivafwrdna 

arrangements for his safety in diverse ways and means as if 
he were her own son. 

28. At that time, the Asura Hiranyaksa desired to 
obtain a son at the pressure of his wife who was envious at 
the sight of many sons of her husband’s elder brother, 886 
Accordingly he set out in the season of late winter. 

29. He resorted to forest and performed penance for 
obtaining son. In order to see lord Siva he performed a 
rigorous penance conquering the passions of anger etc. and 
remaining insensible to external sensation as does a log of 
wood. 

30. The trident-bearing lord was pleased at his penance. 
O great brahmin he went there in order to grant him the 
boon. After reaching that spot, lord Siva, the bull-bannered 
lord, spoke to the leading Daitya. 

Lord Siva said : — 

31. “O lord of Daityas, do not curb your senses so 
much. Why have you taken up this sacred rite ? Speak out 
what you desire. I am Siva, the gran ter of desires. I shall 
grant whatever you desire.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

32. On hearing the pleasing words of lord Siva, the 
Daitya Hiranyaksa was delighted. He joined his palms in 
reverence and humbly bowed his head. Eulogising and bow- 
ing in various ways he spoke to lord Siva. 

Hiranyaksa said : — 

33. O moon-crested lord, I have no powerful son be- 
fitting the race of Daityas. It is for this purpose that I have 
resorted to penance. O lord of gods, give me a powerful 
son. 

34. My brother has five sons of infinite valour, 
Prahlada being the eldest. I don’t have any son. My family 
is likely to be extinct. Who will inherit my kingdom after me? 


286. It refers to Hirapyakasipu, the elder brother of Hira?yik$a. 
The former had five sons while the latter had none. See V. 34 below. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


983 


. f* onc mer its to be the son who enjoys either 

the inherited kingdom of his father or the kingdom of another 
taken by force. That father alone can call himself possessed 
of a son with such a son. 

36. An abode in heaven is enjoined only for those 
who have sons as mentioned by the learned and the virtuous. 
All living beings are active in that respect. 28 * 

37. A person whose family is extinct cannot have 
higher regions. 288 It is for obtaining the son that people 
worship the deities. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

38. On hearing these words of the king, the kind- 
hearted Siva was satisfied and spoke thus — “O ruler of 
Daityas, there may not be a son born of your semen. But 
I shall grant you a son. 

39. My son Andhaka has a prowess equal to yours. 
He cannot be defeated by any. You choose him as your son. 
Cast off your distress and accept him as your son.” 

40. After saying this, the delighted lord gave the son 
to Hiranyaksa. 289 Siva, the great soul, the primordial lord of 
Bhutas, the distroyer of Tripuras, the fierce god went away, 
ac gmpanied by Parvati. 

41. After getting a son from Siva that Daitya circum- 
ambulated Siva and worshipped him with many hymns. 
Joyously the noble Asura returned to kingdom. 

42. Having obtained a son from Siva, the demon of 
great and fierce valour conquered all the gods and took the 
earth to Patala. 

43. Then the gods, sages and the Siddhas propitiated 


287. The fourth Pada of the Sanskrit text is obscure. Hence the 
present English translation of the relevant portion is conjectural. 

2 8* I . The ancient Indian scriptures hold that a person cannot enter 
into heaven without having a son. The present context shows that this 
view prevailed even among (he Asuras. 

2»y. The custom of adopting sons prevailed in ancient India. The 
adopted son enjoyed all the prerogatives of the natural son.' He could 
offer oblations to his adopted father when he expired and legally inherit 
his property. It is evident from the present context that the practice was 
in vogue even among the Asuras. 



984 Swaputtya 

Visnu of infinite vigour in the form of a Boar that constituted 
all sacrifices and all beings and was terrific in form. 

44-46. He split the earth by beating and striking with 
his snout and entered Patala. He powdered hundreds of 
Daityas with his nose and the formidable curved fangs. He 
smashed the armies of the Asuras by kicking with his legs daz- 
zling like lightning. He had a wonderfully fierce refulgence. 
With his Sudar£ana dazzling like a crore of suns he chopped 
off the burning head of Hiranyak$a and reduced the wicked 
Daityas to ashes. He was then delighted to crown his son 
Andhaka as the king of Daityas. 

47. He returned to his abode. He lifted up the earth 
from the Patala by means of his fangs. He sustained the 
Earth as before. 

48. Eulogised by the gods, the delighted sages, and 
Brahma, lord Visnu of huge body who had assumed the form 
of a Boar finished the task and returned to his abode. 

49. When Hiranyaksa the king of Asuras was killed 
by Visnu assuming the form of a Boar, 290 the gods, sages 
and other living beings became happy. 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

( HiranyakaHpu is s lain) 


Vydsa said : — 

1. O Santakumara of great intellect, when that Asura 
was killed what did his elder brother, the great Asura, do? 

2. O great sage, I am eager to hear this. O son of 
Brahma, please narrate the same. Obeisance be to you. 

Brahmd said : — 

3. On hearing these words of Vyasa, that great sage, 
Sanatkumara spoke after remembering the lotus like feet of 
Siva. 


290. It refers to the Daitya Hiranyfiksa who dragged the earth to 
the depths of the ocean. Vi$nu incarnated himself as the Boar, slew the 
Daitya and restored the earth to its original position. 



Rudrasarhhitd 985 

Sanatkum&ra said : — 

4 . When his brother was thus killed by Visnu in the 
form of a Boar, O Vyasa, HiranyakaSipu was distressed with 
grief and excited by anger. 

5. Always fond of enmity with Visnu that he was, he 
instigated heroic Asuras, fond of havoc, to work havoc among 
the people. 

6. Receiving the command of their lord with bowed 
heads, the Asura fond of havoc worked havoc among the 
gods and the people. 

7. Thus when the universe was utterly disturbed by 
the evil-minded Asuras, the gods abandoned heaven and 
roamed on the Earth unobserved. 

8. After performing the obsequies and water obla- 291 
tions to his departed brother, the distressed Hiranyakasipu 
consoled his wife and others. 

9. Then the emperor of the Daityas desired to make 
himself invincible, undying, unageing, unrivalled and sole 
ruler. 

10. He performed a severe penance in the ravine of 
the Mandara mountain. Keeping his arms lifted up he fixed 
his eyes on the sky. He stood on the Earth on his big 
toes alone. 

11. When he was perfoming penance, the gods accom- 
panied by their forces defeated the Daityas and regained 
their lost seats. 

12. The smoking fire of penance springing from his 
head, spreading all round scorched the worlds all round, 
above and below. 

13. The gods scorched by that, abandoned heaven and 
went to Brahma’s region. With their faces turned pale and 
deformed by his penance they informed the creator of every 
thing. 

14. O Vyasa, thus informed by the gods, the self-born 
Brahma went to the hermitage of the Daitya accompanied by 
Bhrgu, Daksa and others. 

2qi. A handful of water mixed with sesamum is offered to the 
departed soul. 



986 Siuapurina 

15. The Asura who had already scorched the worlds 
saw that the lotus-born deity had arrived. In order to grant 
him the boon Dhatf the grandfather of the worlds said — 
“Choose a boon.” On hearing the sweet words of the 
creator, the Asura of undismayed intellect spoke thus. 

Hiranyakafipu said : — 

16-17. “O creator, O lord of subjects, never may I have 
the fear of death from weapons, missiles, thunderbolts, dry 
trees, mountains, water, fire and onslaught of enemies — 
gods, Daityas, sages, Siddhas or in fact from any living being 
created by you. Why should I expatiate on it? Let there 
be no death for me in heaven, on earth, in the day time, 
at night, from above or below, O lord of subjects !” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

18. On hearing these words of the Asura, the merciful 
lotus-born deity bowed to Visnu mentally and spoke — 
“O lord of Daityas, I am delighted. Attain everything. 

19. Stop your penance which has already run on to 
ninetysix thousand years. You have realised your desires 
entirely. Stand up. Rule over the kingdom of the 
Danavas.” On hearing these words, the Asura was pleased 
and beaming in his face. 

20. He was coronated by Brahma the great grand- 
father of the worlds. He became inclined to destroy the 
three worlds. The highly elated Asuras disturbed all 
righteous activities and defeated all the gods in battle. 

21. Then the terrified Indra and other gods harassed 
by him got the permission of Brahma and went to the milk 
ocean 292 where Visnu was lying. 

22. Considering him the bestower of happiness, they 
propitiated and eulogised Vi?nu with various hymns. When 
he was pleased they told him their woeful tale. 

23-24. On learning their • misery in entirety, Visnu, 
the delighted lord of LaksmI granted them boons, Getting 
up from his couch, Visnu consoled the gods and the sages 
by means of different words befitting himself. The lord as 


292. See Note 200 P. 224 



Rudrasarhkitd 


987 


refulgent as the fire said — “O leading gods, I shall kill the 
Daitya with force. Return to your own abodes fully assured, 
all of you”. 

25. O great sage, on hearing the words of Vis^u, 
Indra and other leading gods, fully assured and satisfied, 
went to their abodes thinking that the younger brother 
Hiranyaksa was already killed. 

26-27. The noble soul Visnu assumed the form partly 
of lion and partly of man. His head was matted and full 
of manes. Sharp fangs were his weapons. The claws were 
keen and pointed. The snout was finely shaped. The 
mouth was wide open. The body was terrible and refulgent 
like a crore of suns, blazing and powerful like the fire at the 
time of dissolution. He was identical with the universe. 
More words need not be used to describe him. When the 
sun was about to set, the lord went to the city of the 
Asuras. 

28. The Man-lion fought with the powerful Daityas. 
He killed many of them. He held them up and whirled. 
Exhibiting wonderful prowess he smashed and crushed the 
various Asuras. 

29. On seeing that omniformed lion, the son of the 
lord of Daityas, Prahlada, 293 said to the king, his father. 

Prahlada said : — 

“Is it the universe-formed lord who has come as the 
majestic lion ? 

30. The infinite lord in the form of Man-lion 29 * has 
come within your city. Desist from fight and seek refuge 
in him. I see the terrible form of the lion. 

31. Since there is none to fight him in all the three 
worlds, it is better that you submit to him and continue to be 
the ruler.” 

293. Though son of the Asura Hiranyakasipu, Prahl&da was an 
ardent devotee of Vi?pu. He had to suffer much at the hands of his cruel 
father for devotion to Visnu It was to avenge Prahlada that Vi spu in- 
carnated as the man-lion and killed Hiranyakasipu. 

294. The story relates to Hiranyakgsipu the younger brother of 
Hirany&k$a. Hirapyaka£ipu was proud of his prowess and as blessed by 
Siva, could not be killed in an ordinary way. He struck terror in the hearts 
of the gods whom he had ousted from their vantage positions. He was killed 
by Vi$nu assuming the form of Man-lion, 



988 Sivapurdna 

On hearing the words of his son, the wicked Asura said 
u O son, why are you so afraid ?” 

32. Thus addressing his son, the king of the Daityas 
ordered the heroes among the Daityas — “O ye heroes, catch 
hold of this lion of hideous brows and eyes.” 

33. At his behest the leading Daityas who desired to 
catch the lion approached him but they were burnt in a trice 
like the moths in the blazing fire attracted by its colour. 

34. When the Daityas were burnt the king himself 
fought with the lion with all kinds of weapons, missiles, spears 
swords, nooses, goads, fire and the like. 

35. O Vyasa, a day according to the calculation of 
Brahma 295 passed by even as they fought with weapons in 
their hands, roaring heroically and furiously at each other. 

36. Then suddenly the Daitya assumed many arms hold- 
ing weapons. He looked angrily at the fighting man-lion 
and pounced upon him in a rush. 

37. Then after a terrific battle fought by all sorts of 
weapons and missiles they were exhausted. Then the great 
Daitya himself seized up a spear and rushed at the man- 
lion. 

38. He was seized by the lord of beasts with hands as 
powerful as mountains. He was placed on the knee, torn and 
scratched in the chest by the claws piercing every vulnerable 
joint in the body. 

39. His heart lacerated by his claws was filled with 
blood. He lay dead like a log of wood, his limbs being reduced 
to powder. 

40: When he was killed, the heroic Vi$nu was pleased. 
He beckoned to Prahlada who bowed to him. He crowned 
him king and then left for his abode that could not even be 
imagined. 

41. Then the gods were delighted. They bowed to 
lord Visnu who had finished their task and who deserved 
worship, O Brahmin. Thereafter Brahma and others returned 
to their abodes. 

42. Thus incidentally, I have narrated to you the 

295. A Brahma day consists of one kalpa equal to one thousand 
yugas or a period of four thousand, three hunored and twenty millions of 
years of mortals, measuring the duration of the world. 



Rudrasathhiti 


989 


story of Andhaka’s birth from Rudra, the death of Hiranyaksa 
at the hands of the Boar, the annihilation of his brother 
Hiranyaka£ipu by the Man -lion and the coronation of 
Prahlada. 

43. O foremost of brahmins, now listen to the prowess 
of Andhaka secured from the creator, his fight with Siva and 
his acquisition afterwards of the leadership of the Ganas. 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 

( Andhaka 9 s attainment of the leadership of Ganas) 
Sanatkumara said : — 

1 . Once Andhaka, the son of Hiranyaksa, was addressed 
jokingly by his haughty cousins in the course of their sports 
and games — “O blind fellow, what will you do with kingdom? 

2. Hiranyak?a was a fool who adopted you as son who 
are bereft of eyesight, fond of quarrel, ugly and hideous, 
after propitiating Siva by means of severe penances. 

3. You cannot lay claim to the kingdom. Can a 
person other than the son of a king ever aspire for the 
kingdom ? You yourself can ponder over it. At the most 
we can give you some share.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

4. On hearing their words Andhaka was distressed. He 
thought over the matter intelligently. He then appeased his 
cousins with various words. In the night he went to a deso- 
late forest. 

5. For ten thousand years he performed a severe pen- 
ance, repeating mantras. He stood on one leg, observed 
fast and lifted up his arms continuously. In short, he per- 
formed a penance that no god or Asura could do. 

6. Every day he cut a piece of flesh and consigned it 
to the sacred blazing fire along with his blood repeating the 
mantras all along. 29 ® This he continued for a year. 

296. The Asuras performed austere penance to acauire power Some- 
lime these were accompanied by the sacrifice of their flesh and blood in 
the fire. Such practices had almost become a cult with the Asuras. 



7. In the end only the bones and the nerves were left. 
The entire blood was exhausted. When there remained no 
flesh to offer he desired to offer his whole body into the fire. 

8. Then he was seen by the heaven-dwellers, all of 
whom became frightened and bewildered. Then Brahma the 
creator was immediately propitiated and eulogised by the 
gods. 

9. Brahma stopped him and said — “O Danava, choose a 
boon. Whatever is inaccessible in the universe, if you 
desire it, you can have it.” 

10. On hearing the words of Brahma, the Daitya 
piteously bowed to him and said — “May Prahlada and 
others who have cruelly usurped my share in the kingdom 
be my slaves. 

11. I am now blind but let me be endowed with 
divine vision. Let Indra and others pay me tax and tribute. 
Let no death come to me from gods, Daityas, Gandharvas, 
Yaksas, serpents or human beings. 

12. Nor shall I meet with death from Naray&na, the 
enemy of leading Daityas, or from the omniscient and omni- 
formed Siva”. 

On hearing these words of the demon, Brahma became 
suspicious. He told him: — 

Brahma said : — 

13. “O leader of Daityas, whatever you ask shall take 
pj^ce. But accept some cause of death because none who is 
born or who will be born can escape the jaws of death. 

14. Good men like you should rather avoid too long a 

life”. 

On hearing these pleading words from Brahma, the 
Daitya said again. 

Andhaka said : — 

15. “The most excellent of the ladies in the world for 
all time whether of mature, middle or young age shall be 
like a mother unto me. 

16. She may be the rarest in the world, unappro- 
achable to all men, bodily, mentally or verbally. O self-born 



Rudrasaihhitd 


991 

lord, should I covet her, let destruction befall me instantan- 
eously depriving me of the position of the ruler”. 

17. On hearing these words, Brahma was surprised. 
He remembered the lotus like feet of Siva. After receiving 
the directive from him, he spoke to Andhaka. 

Brahma said : — 

18. “O leader of Daityas, whatever you desire shall 
necessarily be realised. O king of Daityas, stand up. Realise 
your ambition. But always fight with heroic persons.” 

19. O great sage, after ‘listening to these words of the 
creator, and immediately bowing to him with devotion, the 
son of Hiranyak$a who had but sinews and bones left spoke 
to the lord. 

20. “O lord, how can I enter the hosts of the enemy 
with this body and fight ? Make me who am merely a 
skeleton with sinews left endowed with flesh. Touch me 
now with your holy hand.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

21. On hearing his words Brahma touched his body 
with his hand and returned to his abode accompanied by the 
great gods and worshipped by the sages and Siddhas. 

22. The moment he was touched, he became full 
bodied and strong. With eyes regaining sight he became 
beautiful and stout. Thus he entered his city. 

23. Considering him blessed with the boon, on his 
arrival Prahlada and other leading Danavas surrendered the 
entire kingdom to him and became his slaves. 

24. Then Andhaka went to the heaven to conquer it 
accompanied by his army and attendants. After defeating the 
gods in battle he made Indra pay him tribute. 

25. He conquered the Nagas, Suparnas, Rak?asas, 
Gandharvas, Yaksas, human beings, and became the lord of 
mountains, trees and quadrupeds such as lions etc. by his 
force. 

26-27. He made the universe including the mobile 
and immobile beings subservient to him. He acquired 
thousands of women beautiful in appearance amiable and 
faithful. He was accompanied by beautiful women of the 



nether regions 2 * 7 and of Earth and heaven. 298 He indulged 
with them in sexual dalliance on the beautiful banks of the 
rivers, mountains and other places. 

28. Sporting about in their midst joyously, he drank 
divine and superhuman beverages left over by them and 
became highly elated. 

29. He enjoyed among other excellent things, divine 
juices, fruits, fragrant flowers, fine conveyances very pleasant 
to drive in and excellent mansions erected by Maya. 

30. Thus indulging in sports he passed ten thousand 
years beautified and rendered pleasant and mysteriously 
wonderful by means of flowers, incenses, unguents and dietary 
stuffs. 

31. He did not know what would be auspicious and 
beneficent to him in the other world. He was deluded, 
blinded by pride and spoiled by his association with the 
wicked. 

32. The haughty fellow attacked leading scholars by 
using fallacious arguments. Posing as a great soul he roamed 
about with his Daitya friends destroying Vedic rites. 

33. Proud of his affluence he slighted the Vedas, gods 
and preceptors. He continued to indulge in sports, thereby re- 
ducing his longevity in a few days. 

34. Then many crores of years passed by. Once, 
roaming about on the Earth with his army, he joyously went 
to the Mandara mountain. 

35. The haughty demon roamed there along with his 
armies admiring its golden splendour. Having gone there 
ostensibly for some sport and pastime he finally resolved to 
stay there as destiny would have it. 

36. He built a wonderful stable and auspicious city 
on the ridges of the Mandara and forced people to settle there 
gradually. 

37. His three ministers Duryodhana, Vaidhasa and 

297. See Note 161 P. 760. 

298. Trivi?tapa or Tripisfapa is the heaven of Indra, said to be 
situated oa Mount Meru. 



Hasti once saw a beautiful woman in an excellent spot on 
the mountain. 

38. They hastened to their lord joyously and lovingly 
told him what they had seen there. 

The ministers said : — 

39. O lord of Daityas, in a mountain cavern we have 
seen a certain sage. His eyes are closed in meditation. He is 
handsome. The crescent moon adorns his head. He is wear- 
ing an elephant hide round his hips. 

40. Serpents twine round his body. A necklace of 
skulls adorns his neck. His hair is matted. He holds a trident 
in his hand. He has arrows and quiver. He is a great 
archer. He displays a rosary. 

41. He wields a sword. He holds a trident and a 
staff. This fair-complexioned four-armed sage of matted hair 
has smeared ashes over his body. His splendour is dazzling 
and his dress and features are wonderful. 

42. Not far from him, another person was seen. He 
has simian features, very terrible in face and demeanour. 
Equipped with weapons his hands are rough and brawny. He 
is the guard on duty. There is a white bull, too old but 
firm and steady. 

43. A woman of very auspicious features, young and 
beautiful was seen at the side of that sage. She is a gem 
under the sun. 

44. She is richly bedecked in corals, pearls, jewels gold 
gems and is dressed neatly. Her necklaces are fine and 
auspicious. He who has seen her can alone be called a man 
of sight. Of what awaits the sight of anything else ? 

45. O lord of Daityas, enjoyer of good jewels, that 
divine lady, wife and the beloved of that meritorious sage, 
is worthy of being seen and fetched here. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

46. On hearing their words, the Daitya became lustful. 
He shook with excitement. Immediately he sent Duryodhana 
and others to the sage. 

47. O great sage, those excellent ministers well versed 
in statesmanship approached the inscrutable sage of exalted 



994 Sivapurifya 

rites. After bowing they conveyed to him the behest of the 
Daitya. 

The ministers said : — 

48. “Andhaka the noble soul, son of Hiranyakga, the 
king of Daityas, the emperor of the three worlds, is camping 
here now at the instance of Brahma and is sportively in- 
clined. 

49. O great sage, we are his ministers possessed of 
great prowess. We have come to you at his behest. Listen 
with attention to what he says. 

50. Whose son are you ? O great sage, O intelligent 
one, why are you stationed here in a carefree manner ? 
Whose wife is this young beautiful lady ? O great sage, this 
auspicious lady be given to the lord of Daityas. 

51. Where this body of yours smeared with ashes, 
bedecked with necklaces of skulls and hideous in appearance! 
Why do you keep the quiver, the bow, the arrows, the sword, 
the missile Bhu€undi, the trident, the thunderbolt and the iron 
club? 

52. Where this sacred Gariga, this crescent moon, the 
matted hair, these pieces of bones from the corpse, the serpent 
with poisonous breath and protruding mouth, and where the 
close embrace of the lady of plump bosom ! 

53. Riding on a bull is despicable. No man on earth 
has seen such a thing. Bowing and kneeling is a virtue in 
some places. Why is this diet contrary to the way of the 
world ? 

54. Surrender your wife unto me peacefully. O foolish 
fellow, why do you perform your penance in the company of 
a lady ? It is improper and it does not behove you. I am 
the lord of jewels in the three worlds (It may suit me). 

55. Leave off your weapons, at my behest and carry 
on your penance. If my order is transgressed you will have 
to pay dearly with this very body”. 

56. Lord Siva following the worldly convention con- 
sidered Andhaka a leader of wicked men. On hearing the 
words of the emissaries he spoke smilingly. 



Rudrasarhhitd 995 

Siva said : — 

57. If I am Siva what do you gain from me ? Why do 
you utter false things. O lord of Daityas, listen to my 
prowess. It is improper on your part to speak like this. 

58. I do not remember any father of mine. Ignorant 
and hideous that I am, I do not know my mother. In a 
cavern I am performing this severe PaSupata 209 rite, the like 
of which none has yet performed. 

59. This is well known that I have no root. I cannot 
get rid of all these things. This wife of mine is young and 
beautiful. She bears everything patiently. She is the achieve- 
ment of one that has gone everywhere. 

60. O Raksasa, 300 whatever appeals to you at present 
you can take”. 

After saying this, Siva who wore the garb of an ascetic 
stopped, and stood quiet. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

61. On hearing his profound words, the Danavas 
bowed to him and returned to their leader Andhaka who had 
taken a bow to destroy the three worlds. 

62. The ministers of unafflicted disposition bowed to 
their haughty king and shouted cries of victory narrating every- 
thing that Siva had smilingly told him. Then they com- 
mented as follows. 


The Ministers said : — 301 

63. Where (on earth) is a Nisacara seen to be fickle 
in heroism and courage ? Where is a Danava miserable and 
powerless ? Where docs a ruthless, ungrateful and sinful 
Danava become afraid of death ? 


ooo. Piisupata or MahSpasupata was a terrible form of penance 
that Siva undertook to regain h.s lost power. 1 he performance required 
a complete- concentration of the mind for achieving the end, hence l&rvhU 
was kept away form the scene of his penance, under the care of Virata, 
in the cave of the Mandara mountain (See also verses n-12 of the next 

Chapt w. In giving the message Siva addresses Andhaka as RSk?a»a who 
is clscUne called Diuava, DaTtya or Asm a. A vc. ed co..iei„p«uou«,es. 
is intended to he conveyed by this word in the P»“ n * 

got. The Verses <*-67 though spoken by the ministers of Andhaka 
contain the substance of Siva's message 10 the Asui a Andhaka. 1 he message 
is full of irony and bespeaks the courage* and sell confidence of the speakei. 



64. O king, you are the emperor of all the Daityas. 
You have been mockingly disparaged by the sage, a pitiable 
penance-monger. Indeed he considers the three worlds in- 
significant by his poor understanding. He has Viraka as his 
bodyguard whom he thinks to be very strong. 

65. “Where am I ? Where are the terrible weapons ? 
Where is the fight that terrifies even Death ? Where is this 
Viraka of Simian facial features ? Where is this Nisacara 
(night-stalker) senile and rickety in limbs ? 

66. Where is this hideous man ? Where is this unfor- 
tunate wretch ? Where is your strength ? Where arc the 
spreading creeping plants ? If you are mighty, attempt to 
fight with him. Come, do something. 

67. Here we have weapons equal to thunderbolt ,fierce 
and capable of destroying people like you. Where is your 
body as tender as lotus ? Pondering over this do as you 
please.” 

68. O gentle lord of Danavas, these and similar words 
were uttered by that sage. O king, he says all this because 
he is proud and conceited. Is it not proper then to -fight 
with him ? 

69. If you are going to be enlightened by these words 
of no substance uttered by that sage and conveyed by us, 
you will think and act accordingly. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

70. On hearing these words crooked and piercing yet 
professing to be true and beneficial the dull-witted (Danava) 
blazed furiously like fire sprinkled with clarified butter. 

71. Proud of the boons granted to him he seized a 
sword. He emulated the fierce gust of wind. He got ready 
to go there smitten by the arrows of the cupid though fate was 
adverse to him. 



Rudrasathhitd 


997 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 

( The beginning of the war and the conversation 
with the messengers ) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1-3. Andhaka, the great Daitya king, deluded and 
smitten by Kama’s arrows drank wine and started from his 
palace. He walked like an elephant in rut. His eyes 
were roving. He was accompanied by many of his soldiers. 
He was fierce and walked majestically like heroes. He saw 
the cavern guarded by Vlraka, standing at the entrance. 
He exhibited the characteristic reactions of a moth approa* 
ching a lamp and glancing at it eagerly and lovingly. 
Already the burning fire of passion had scorched him and 
therefore afflicting hits from Viraka had no effect on him. 

4. He was attacked with stones, trees, thunderbolts, 
water, fire and serpents. He was threatened with weapons 
and missiles. He was afflicted by Viraka repeatedly but 
ineffectively and asked. “Who are you? Why have you 
come here?” 

5. On hearing his words, Andhaka made no reply but 
began to fight Viraka when surprisingly and unbelievably 
he was defeated by Viraka in the battle. 

6. When his sword was shattered to pieces he fled 
from the battlefield divested of his conceited pride. His 
throat was parched with hunger and thirst. He was 
aggrieved. 

7. Prahlada and other important Daityas then fought 
with Viraka. Though they were terrible themselves they 
were defeated by hundreds of weapons. Finally their minds 
were held in check by the goad of shame. 

8. Virocana, Bali, Bana, Sahasrabahu, Bhaji, Kujam- 
bha, Sambara, Vrtra and others of great valour, fought 
there. 

9. These were defeated by the Gana Viraka in the 
course of the battle and split into two. At the end of the 

302. It is incomprehensible how four gene ratio ns of the Asurag 

represented by fjpCWWfstJ, Sf&WW, and Wftl <»uW be eontem- 

poraneous, and fight together in the battle against the Ararat. 



998 Sivafntrtya 

fight when many Danavas were killed, the Ganas of Siddhas 
shouted ‘‘Victory.*’ 

10-11. When packs of Jackals began to dance in the 
midst of the putrefying suets, fat and flesh, when beasts of 
prey, ghosts and spirits began to roam in the terrible slough 
of slushy blood, when the Daityas were smashed thus, the 
trident-bearing lord consoled Parvatl and said. 

Siva said : — 

“O beloved, formerly I had performed the great Vrata 
called Mahapagupata. 

12. The strength that I derived therefrom is exhausted 
whence this fall of the immortals at the hands of the mor- 
tals. O goddess, merit has declined due to the physical 
contact with you. 

13. I will create a wonderfully divine and terrible 
forest and going there I shall perform still more severe 
vrata whereby, O beautiful lady, you shall be free from fear 
and sorrow.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

14. After saying this, the noble soul went to a holy 
and terrible forest. He proclaimed loudly his intention and 
performed penance highly illuminated. 

15. Siva performed penance for a thousand years the 
like of which could not be performed by the gods or Asuras. 
Parvatl stayed behind in Mandara mountain awaiting for 
the return of the lord. 

16. The chaste lady, endowed with good conduct 
remained alone in that cavern. She was terrified and 
distressed. Of course she was guarded by her son Viraka. 

17. Then the Daitya whose mental steadiness had 
been shattered by the arrows of Kama, became bold and 
haughty due to the boons that had been granted to him. 
He came to the cavern accompanied by his soldiers. 

18. Forsaking food, drink and sleep, the infuriated 
Daitya accompanied by his army fought with Viraka a very 
wonderful battle for five hundred, five days and nights. 

19-21. Various weapons were used by the Daityas — 
Swords, javelins, slings, maces, sharp missiles, arrows with 



RuirasaMiUl 


999 


crescent-shaped tips, arrows with prolonged iron pikes, 
tortoise-shaped heads with blazing steel pointed hooks, sharp 
spear, axes, iron clubs of diverse sorts, iron bails, rocks, 
branches of trees and various divine missiles. Viraka was 
attacked with these weapons and he fainted at the entrance 
to the cavern. His body w as pierced by the sharp weapons 
hurled by the Daityas. The various weapons barred the 
entrance to the cave. 

22-23. Viraka was covered by the weapons and could 
not be extricated. The goddess Parvati was afraid at the 
sight. From within the cave she remembered Brahma and 
Visriu. 

24. Thus remembered by the goddess, Brahma, Vi^nu, 
Indra and others assumed female forms and came there. 808 

25. Sages of great dignity, Siddhas, Nagas and 
Guhyakas became women and entered the cavern where 
Parvati was staying. 

26-27. Since it was not customary to enter the harem 
of kings they assumed female form of wonderful features 
and entered the cavern of Parvati for heroic activities. 

28. Thundering sounds of clouds, as at the end of a 
Kalpa, were produced by these thousands of women. Drums 
were beaten and conches were blown. 

29. Meanwhile Viraka of wonderfully fierce valour 
regained his consciousness and stood up. He seized the 
weapons of the warriors and hit the Daityas with them. 

30. Brahmi stood opposed to the Daityas with the 
staff in her hand. Gauri became very furious. Narayanl 
held conch, mace, sword, discus and bow in her hands. 

31. Bidaujasi set out holding the thunderbolt and the 
handle of the ploughshare in her hand. Her complexion 
was golden. The sky constituted her forelocks. In her fierce 
velocity thousands of streams of current were let loose. 

32. The goddess of thousand eyes, fought steadily in 
war, undaunted and invincible with hundreds of Daityas. 


303. The Sakti or Energy «f a god is represented as his female 
counterpart. Each energy is personified and functions individually. The 
Purftrias depict the gods and their Energies fighting against the Asuras. 
In fact the god and his Energy are identical. There is no characteristic 
mark distinguishing the two. 



1000 Swapurdna 

The goddess of fire was of none too gentle face and Yamya 
was fierce with staff in her lifted hands. 

33. Nairrti held a fierce bow and a sharp sword in 
her lifted hands. The female form' of Varuria set out for 
fight with noose in her hands. 

34. The famale form of fierce storm took up hunger 
for her physical body and held goad in her hand. The 
female form of Kubera held a mace in her hand, blazing 
like the fire at the end of a Kalpa. 

35. The female form of the lord of Yaksas was sharp- 
faced and hideous. The female form of Naga was terrible 
with claws for her weapons. These and hundreds of other 
goddesses set out for the battle ground. 

36. On seeing this limitless vast army, the Daityas 
were bewildered, pale in the face, excited and dismayed 
frightened and dejected in the heart. 

37. All these celestial damsels, the chief of whom was 
Brahma£akti and the general Viraka of terrible valour 
pacified the mind of Parvatl, the daughter of the lord of 
mountains and assured her. 

38. The important ones among the Daityas and others 
who possessed strength derived from the boons granted 
to them, thought, in their minds, of their death or retreat 
and fought an unprecedented great battle with the ladies. 

39. Making Viraka of terrible valour and wonderful 
intellect^ her general, Parvatl fought a wonderful battle in 
the company of her friends and allies. 

40. Thinking upon Visnu and looking towards the 
southern direction the Daitya king, the heroic son of 
Hiranyaksa, quickly made a fierce array of soldiers with 
Gila at the head. 

41. He made the frontal array terrific by the force 
of regular service. By the time this was done, the infuriated 
lord came there. Clad in hides he had the lustre of a 
thousand fiery suns at the end of a Kalpa. 

42. On seeing lord Siva arrived after the lapse of a 
thousand years, the delighted women in the company of 
Viraka fought a very great battle. 

43-44. Parvatl bowed her head to Siva. She exhibi- 
ted great valour to her lord. The delighted Parvatl fought 



Rudra&mhhitd 1001 

a terrific battle. Siva embraced her and then entered the 
cavern. The numerous women that had gathered were 
dismissed. Parvatl honoured Viraka by hundreds of gifts 
and appointed him as the keeper of the gate. 

45. Then the Asura chief, very clever in statesman- 
ship, unable to see either Parvatl or Siva sent his emissary 
Vighasa immediately to Siva. 

46. He was one whose limps were shattered by the 
weapons hurled by the gods and the Ganas. He entered 
the cavern, bowed to Siva and spoke these words haughtily. 

The messenger said : — 

47. “I have been sent by him and so I have entered 
this cavern. You have nothing to do with a woman. 
Surrender this young and beautiful lady. 

48. Usually you are an ascetic. Carry on that. 
Thinking "Should a sage be offended ?” I have observed 
forbearance within my tender mind. But O sage, you are 
not a real ascetic but only my enemy. 

49. You are extremely inimical to the Daityas. Show 
your might in fighting with me. O wicked ascetic, I shall 
send you to Yama’s abode befitting the nether worlds.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

50. On hearing these words conveyed by the emissary, 
the great three-eyed lord, the goal of the good, the destroyer 
of the pride of the wicked, the wearer of skull-garlands 
spoke furiously burning with grief. 

Siva said : — 

51. Manifestly your words are fierce. Hence hasten. 
Fight with me if you have the might. 

52. Of what avail are the wives and riches, bp they ever 
so beautiful, to a feeble man in the world ? Let the haughty 
Daityas proud of their strength come. I have already 
thought of this and acted accordingly. 

53. How can a feeble man maintain even his physical 
body? Let them do whatever they are ordained to do. I 



1002 


shall also do whatever [ have to do. There is no doubt 
in this. 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 

( Andhaka fights) 


Sanatkumara said : — 

1-2. The king of Daityas, skilled in interpreting what 
he hinted at, seized his mace and hastened along with his 
army to the entrance of the cavern. The terrible demon 
Gila who could not be overwhelmed even by the foremost 
among the gods, was placed ahead. After reaching the 
cavern of the lord Siva, the Daitya attacked with his 
weapons as refulgent as thunderbolt. The others showered 
weapons on Viraka and yet others on Parvatl, the daughter 
of the mountain. 

3-8. Some smashed the beautiful entrance, some des- 
troyed the flowers, leaves, fruits and roots, the hearty water 
sheds and the garden paths. A few stirred up joyously 
the sunny peaks of the mountain. Then Siva collected his 
army. The infuriated trident-bearing deity called them 
together, the terrible living beings, the gods with their armies 
including Visnu and others. Immediately after being called, 
the gods came to Siva and stood near him with palms joined 
in reverence. They came with chariots, elephants, horses, bulls, 
cows, camels, mules, excellent birds, lions, bhutas, tigers, 
deer, boars, Sarasa birds, fishes, crocodiles, other living beings, 
scattered flies, serpents rending cremation grounds along 
with ghosts and spirits, divine chariots, lakes, rivers and 
mountains. 

9 When the gods had taken adequate rest along with 
their vehicles, the trident-bearing lord Siva sent them to the 
battle ground with the steady and chief resolve on victory. 

10. They fought with the army of the lord of Daityas 
including Gila terribly and unrestrainedly as if the end of 



Rudrasarhhitd 1003 

Yugas had come but they were all devoured in the battle- 
field angrily. 

11. In a trice all of them including Brahma, Indra, 
Visnu, the sun and the moon were swallowed by Vighasa 
When the armies were devoured, only Viraka was left 
behind. 

12. Leaving off the battle front Viraka entered the 
cavern, bowed to Siva. The eloquent but distressed Viraka 
then acquainted the destroyer of Kama with all the details. 

13. O lord, your army has been devoured by the 
Daitya Vighasa. Visnu, the preceptor and elder to the three 
worlds and the destroyer of Daityas, has been devoured. 
The moon and the sun, Brahma and Indra, the bestowere of 
boons, have been devoured. All these, Yama, Varuna, Vayu 
and Kubera have been devoured. 

14. I, the humble one, alone am left behind. What 
is it that I have to do now? The lord of Daityas along with 
the Daityas is invincible and hence rejoiced. 

15. Visnu the lord who became invincible after tearing 
off Hiranyakasipu the son of Kasyapa with his claws, had 
the speed of wind and a terrifying demeanour. He opened 
his mouth wide and began to blow of the three worlds 
although the lord was subservient to the good. 

16. When the matter stood thus, he was cursed by the 
seven sages , 304 the virtual lords of the worlds — “You will be 
crushed by the Daityas for a long time. 

17-18. Then they were requested by Vi§nu through 
loving words conducive to his benefit— “O great sages, when 
will I get rid of this terrible curse?” Thereupon the infuri- 
ated sages said— “At the time of war you will be hit with 
fists and struck with terrible arrows. When swallowed by 
Vighasa with wide open mouth, you shall stabilise yourself 
in the Badarl forest 305 in the holy residence of Siva, the cavern 
and shall then be freed from sins.” Thereafter in accordance 
with the curse of the sages he roams everyday in the battle 
ground, very hungry and swallows the Daityas and becomes 

delighted. . , - 

19-20. By using the science of reviving the dead to 

304. Sec Note 164 P. 

305 . See Note 242 P. *,* 2 7- 



1004 


life and chanting verses of hymns, Sukra revives the Daityas 
killed by the gods, with full vigour and joy and cures them of 
their hundreds of wounds. It would rather be better to give 
upour lives at the battle than yield. You, the witness of every- 
thing, have been chosen by us as the guide in the accomplish- 
ment of our task. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

21. On hearing this from his excellent son, the lord of 
Pramathas, the lord of the three worlds meditated for a long 
time. He performed an incomparable miracle by chanting 
Saman songs. 306 He laughed assuming a body as resplendent 
as the sun and thereby dispelled the darkness. 

22-24. When the light spread, the sage Viraka fought 
again with the Daityas of deformed features. He who was 
created by the excellent sage after swallowing powdered rock 
and who had fought the battle and even conquered the Pura 
Asura previously was immediately swallowed by the Daitya 
together with Nandin who carried sharp arrows, spear and 
swords, who was the chief of warriors and hundreds of excel- 
lent sages, the great receptacle of lores, possessed of mental 
and physical restraint and great courage. On seeing this, lord 
Siva got on to his bull and faced the Daitya Vighasa. Repeat- 
ing the divine Mantra that compels the disgorging of what 
is swallowed, he stood there keeping the bow in readiness and 
the arrows as powerful as thunderbolts. 

25. Then the sage Viraka came out of the mouth of 
Vighasa accompanied by Visnu and his army. The lotus 
bom Brahma, Indra — the enemy of Bala, the moon and the 
sun were also disgorged. Thus disgorged the delighted army 
fought a great battle again. 

26. Thus the army of the Daityas was conquered. But 
Sukra revived the Daityas slain in the battle by the virtue of 
his 'science. The preceptor of Dinavas was then bound like 
an animal and brought by the Ganas before tord Siva, the 
destroyer of Tripuras, who swallowed him. 

27-28. When Sukra was no more, the entire residence 

306. A particular kind of Sacred verse intended to be sung is called 
S&maveda. 



RudrasarhhitS 


100$ 

of the Dflnavas was shattered and destroyed. Everything was 
suppressed by the gods. When the battle ground was strewn 
with plenty of Bhutas who eagerly devoured mouthfuls of the 
corpses of the Daityas, with headless trunks dancing holding 
sharp arrows and spears in their hands, with intoxicated 
VetSlas, with birds of firm claws and beaks and with wolves 
their jaws filled with dead bodies, the founder of the family 
Hiranyaka€ipu fought the battle for a long time and was de- 
feated by Vi$nu, Siva and Indra. 

29. When the exhausted army entered the nether 
worlds, nooks and corners in hills and seas, Andhaka the fore- 
most of the Daityas who in his height of fury had harassed 
the gods and who could split the universe was divested of 
his haughtiness by Visnu by terrible blows from his mace. 

30. Since he had secured boons he did not leave the 
battle ground although his body had been afflicted much by 
the lord of the gods by terrible blows and hits. Then by 
means of weapons and missiles, trees, mountains and waters 
he defeated the gods. Then he challenged the lord of 
Pramathas roaring loudly. 

31. Fighting steadily by means of various weapons that 
fell on the battle ground, they were exhausted. Then the 
Asura inflicted pain on Parvatl and Siva by means of 
uprooted trees, serpents, thunderbolts and other weapons 
and by indulging in deceptive practices. 

32. In order to conquer Siva, the Daitya of as great 
strength and intelligence as the destroyer of Tripuras, created 
another juggler, a cheat. The Daitya whose madness had 
helplessly been aggravated by hundreds of boons, could not 
be killed by the gods, though his body had been shattered by 
plenty of weapons and missiles. 

33. Many Andhakas originating from the exudations 
of his body, with hideous faces resembling his, pervaded the 
surface of the earth. He was terribly pierced with the Tri- 
dent by Siva, the enemy of the Tripuras, the lord of Bhutas 
whose body blazed like fire at the end of a Kalpa. 

34. When fresh army cropped up from the army slain 
by Siva from the hot drops of blood and cut pieces of flesh 
from the wounds of those killed, Vi$nu called away the 



lord of Pramathas and intelligently assumed a fierce form of a 
hideous woman employing his Yogic knowledge. 

35. It had a very terrible and hard aspect characteri- 
sed by several arms. Angrily the lord Visnu projected from 
the wings of the army and stood ahead of the Ganas. 

36. The goddess stood high in the battle field covering 
up the entire ground by her pair of feet. She was eulogised 
by the gods. Induced by the lord, the hungry female form 
devoured the army, drank the hot blood of the Daityas and 
made the battle ground marshy. 

37. Then, only the chief of the Daityas was left. Still 
he fought on with Siva, beating terribly with his palms, 
knees, legs, nails, face, arms and head. Although his blood 
had been sucked dry he remembered the traditional heroism 
of his race. 307 

38. Afterwards he was quietened by the lord of 
Pramathas. His heart was pierced. He was staked to the 
trident. He was held aloft in the sky like a long pole. Half 
of his body, the lower one, was dried up by the rays of the 
sun. The other half was drenched by clouds attended with 
gusts of wind and heavy downpour. His body was subjected 
to all sorts of torture. 

39. Shattered and scattered like flakes of snow in the 
rays of the sun, his limbs were torn asunder. Yet the fore- 
most of the Daityas did not die. He eulogised Siva. The 
delighted Siva, ocean of great mercy, joyously gave him the 
position of the chieftain of his Ganas. 

40. The lords of the worlds worshipped the lord of 
Pramathas, at the end of war, with different hymns pleasing 
and significant. Visnu, Brahma and others too eulogised him 
with stooping shoulders. They were delighted and happy 
and shouted cries of victory. 

41. Siva spent the time rejoicingly in the mountain 
cavern in their company. Honouring the great and excellent 
mountains by the bestowal of gifts he dismissed a few of his 
Amsas ( parts) . Regaining the delighted daughter of the lord 

, 3*?7- . T he Asuras followed the traditions of the warrior class which 

they inherited from their ancestry. Thus they Lelonged to the Ks&tra 
division of the fourfold Aryan society. * 



Rudrasarhhitd 1007 

of mountains and the sinless son from the terrible jaw of 
Vighasa, he sported. 


CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 

( Description of swallowing Sukra) 

Vyasa said : — 

1-2. This has been succinctly heard by me that in 
the great terrible battle that caused horripilation, Sukra the 
wise lord of the Daityas was swallowed by Siva, the enemy of 
the Tripuras. Please narrate in detail what that great Yogin, 
stationed in the stomach of the trident-bearing lord Siva 
did. 

3-4. How was it that the gastric fire of Siva, that ter- 
rible fire of dissolution at the end of Kaipa did not burn 
Sukra? How did the intelligent Sukra of bright refulgence, 
come out of the stomach of Siva. How long and in what 
manner did Sukra propitiate him ? 

5. How did he obtain that great knowledge that sup- 
presses death ? O dear one, what is that knowledge which 
prevents death. 

6. O sage, how did Andhaka get the position of the 
chieftain of Ganas after being released from the trident of 
Siva, the lord of the gods, indulging in divine sports. 

7. O highly intelligent one, please be merciful. Men- 
tion all these sweet sports entirely to me who listen with 
attention. 

Brahma said : — 

8. On hearing these words of Vyasa of immeasurable 
refulgence, Sanatkumara remembered the lotus-like feet of 
Siva and said. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

9. O Vyasa of great intellect, listen to the nectar-like 
sport of Siva. You arc the foremost of devotees of Siva and 
you delight me. 



1008 $wapvri$a 

10-1 1. When the battle began between Siva and 
Andhaka, the leaders who had formed their armies in the 
unpiercing arrays of thunderbolt and the mountain, the 
powerful Daityas became victorious at first but O sage, by the 
power of Siva, the Pramathas became victorious afterwards. 

12. On hearing that the Asura Andhaka was dejected. 
He began to think “How can I be victorious ?” 

13. Going away from the battle ground the heroic and 
intelligent Andhaka went immediately to Sukra, unattended 
by anyone else. 

14. Getting down from his chariot, he bowed to his 
preceptor. He was foremost among the politicians, pon- 
dered well and spoke with palms joined in reverence. 

Andhaka said : — 

15. O holy lord, after resorting to you we feel the 
respect due to a preceptor towards you. We are never van- 
quished. We are always victorious. 

16. Due to our power we consider all the gods and 
their followers including Siva and VisQu as insignificant as 
the useless blajjes of grass. 

1 7. Due to your blessings, the gods are afraid of us as 
the elephants of the lions and the serpents of Garu^as. 

18. By smashing the entire host of the Pramathas, 
by your grace, the Daityas and the Danavas have entered 
the impenetrable thunderbolt Vyuha. 

19. O Bhargava, by seeking refuge in you we roam 
about unhesitatingly in the battle ground, like the cows graz- 
ing in the field fearlessly. 

20. But now the Asuras are harassed by the heroic 
enemy. They are killed. Save, save us O, Brahmin, who 
have sought refuge in you. 

21. See Hunda and others, leading lieutenants of mine 
who have been slain or who have fallen. They have been 
attacked by Pramathas of terrible valour who can destroy 
even death. 

22. Formerly you did a great penance drinking the 
smoke of husks or eating bits of grain 308 for a thousand years 

30^ Kanadhuma is a kind of penance wherein the peiformer 
sustains himself on the grains of corn or balls of iron* ash (lohagulika) . 



kudrasartikiti loOd 

and secured a great lore. Now the opportunity has arrived 
to put it to a practical use. 

23. O Bhargava, let all the Pramathas see the fruit of 
your lore as you will kindly resuscitate the Asuras by that 
lore. 

SanatkumSra said : — 

24. On hearing the words of Andhaka, the perplexed 
Bhargava began to reflect sadly. 

25. “What shall I do ? What will benefit me ? Any 
living being has various activities to be performed. It may 
seem improper to me. 

26. This Vidya has been derived from Siva and I am 
going to use it on the heroes suppressed by the heroic 
Pramathas, the followers of Siva. 

27. It is my duty to protect those who seek refuge 
in me.” After thinking like this, the proposal of Andhaka 
was accepted by Sukra. 

28. Smiling slightly and thinking upon the lotus like 
feet of Siva with a peaceful mind, Bhargava spoke to the 
ruler of Danavas. 

Sukra said : — 

29. O dear, what has been mentioned by you is 
entirely true. I have acquired this lore just for the welfare 
of the Danavas. 

30. Drinking the unbearable smoke of husks or eating 
bits of grains for a thousand years, this lore has been acqui- 
red from Siva. It is pleasing and beneficent to you my kins- 
men. 

31. With this lore, I shall revive the Daityas destroyed 
in the battle by the Pramathas just like the cloud that re- 
vives scorched plants. 

32. Within a Muhurta you will see these Daityas as 
if waking from sleep, healed from wounds, devoid of pain 
and very healthy. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

33. After saying this to Andhaka, Sukra repeated the 



1010 Sinaputdna 

mantra once for each of the Daityas after thinking upon lord 
Siva. 

34. As soon as the mantra was repeated, the Daityas 
and Danavas rose up simultaneously as if from sleep, with 
the weapons lifted in their hands. 

35. They rose up like the merit of men who give 
water to the thirsty during the fight or like charity given to 
brahmins at the time of distress in the spirit of faith. 

36. On seeing Hunda and other Asuras revived to life, 
the Asuras shouted loudly like clouds laden with water. 

37. Roaring with awful sounds the fearless valorous 
Asuras got ready to fight with Pramathas. 

38. On seeing the Daityas and Danavas resuscitated to 
life by Sukra , Nandin and other Pramathas, very haughty 
and invincible were surprised. 

39. After pondering intelligently they consulted one 
another — “This activity shall be mentioned to Siva the lord of 
gods”. 

40. When the sacrifice of war was going on like that, 
kindling the surprise of the leading Pramathas, Nandin, the 
son of Silada who was infuriated on seeing the work of 
Bhargava approached lord Siva. 

41-42. After saying “Be victorious” to Siva, the cause 
of victory and golden-complexioned, Nandin said — “O lord, 
the warlike activities of leading Ganas, which are difficult 
even for the gods including Indra, to perform, have been 
rendered futile by Bhargava. O lord, after repeating the 
lore that revives the dead to life, one for each, all the dead 
enemies have been playfully resuscitated. 

43. The great Asuras, viz., Tuhunda, Hunda, Kumbha, 
Jambha, Vipaka, Paka and others have returned from 
Yama’s abode. They are routing the Pramathas and are 
roaming about. 

44. O lord Siva, how can we be victorious if he were 
to revive to life all the Daityas killed by us, again and 
again? How can there be peace to the leading Ganas? 

Sanatkumara said : — 

45. On being thus addressed by the leading Pramatha, 



RudraSwtihttA 


1011 


Nandin, the lord of leading Pramathas laughingly spoke to 
Nandin, the chief of all lords of Ganas. 

Siva said : — 

46. O Nandin, go very quickly and seize that great 
brahmin from the midst of the Daityas and brine him here 
like a vulture bringing the bird quail. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

47. Thus commanded by the bull-bannered deity 
Nandin bellowed like a bull and roared like a lion. Moving 
fast through the army he reached the place where the bright 
scion of the family of Bhargavas was sitting. 

48. Harassing and exciting the Daityas, Nandin snatched 
off Sukra well guarded by all the Daityas who had in their 
hands, nooses, swords trees, boulders and mountains, like 
the mythological animal Sarabha snatching off an elephant. 

49. The demons followed him roaring like lions to 
get him released even as his cloth became loose, his orna- 
ments fell off and his tuft of hair got untied as he was 
caught tightly by the strong Nandin. 

50. The leading Danavas showered on Nandisvara, 
thunderbolts, spears, swords, axes, staffs, discus and other 
missiles like clouds making a fierce downpour. 

51. When the combat between the Asuras and gods 
deepened, the chief of Ganas burnt hundreds of the weapons 
of the enemy by the fire originating from his mouth and 
reached Siva taking Bhargava with him. 

52. “O lord, here is Bhargava”, saying this he handed 
him over to Siva immediately. The lord of gods caught 
hold of Bhargava like a present offered by a devotee. 

53. Without saying anything, the protector of the 
Bhutas, thrust Bhargava into his mouth like a fruit. The 
Asuras shouted loudly k< A!as ! Alas.” 



CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 

(Swallowing of Sukra ) 

Vydsa said : — 

1. O Great sage, when Bhargava was swallowed by 
Rudra what did the heroic Danavas headed by Andhaka, 
do ? Please narrate. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

2. When Bhargava was swallowed by the lord of 
Parvatl, the Daityas gave up hopes of victory, like lordly 
elephants bereft of trunks or cows and bulls devoid of 
horns. 

3. They were as futile as headless trunks, as brahmins 
who have forsaken the study of the Vedas, as the living beings 
who have given up efforts and as the efforts of those who 
are not favoured by good fortune. 

4. They were lustreless and ineffectual like women 
devoid of husbands, like the arrows devoid of feather, like 
longevity devoid of meritorious actions and like learning in 
the Vedas without the observance of sacred rites. 

5. They were as powerless as innumerable activities 
rendered fruitless without the support of wealth, or as 
K?atriyas devoid of heroism or as the assemblage of virtue 
without truth. 

6. When Bhargava was taken away by Nandin and 
swallowed by Siva as he had swallowed poison, the Daityas 
became grief-stricken and their pride and jubilation for battle 
became curbed. 

7. On seeing Tuhu$<Ja, Hurnja and other Daityas, 
devoid of enthusiasm, the courageous and valorous Andhaka 
replied. 

Andhaka said : — 

8. By seizing Bhargava forcibly from our midst we 
have been duped by Nandin. Our bodies have been 
rendered lifeless. 

9. With the taking away of Bhargava from us, our 



Rudrasarhhitd 1013 

courage, valour, achievement, fame, strength, splendour and 
exploit have been simultaneously taken away. 

10. Fie upon us by whom the .sole and excellent 
preceptor of the family worthy of the respect of the whole 
race, the virtual protector of all of us and very efficient, 
has not been saved at the time of adversity. 

1 1 . Hence do not waste time. Fight with the enemy, 
the heroic Pramathas, after remembering the lotus-like feet 
of the preceptor. 

12. After remembering the beneficent lotus-like feet 
of the preceptor, I shall slay all the Pramathas along with 
Nandin. 

13. After killing these along with the gods including 
Indra I shall obtain the release of Bhargava like the Yogin 
who releases the soul from the bondage of action. 

14. Bhargava too is a lordly Yogin. If he himself 
comes out of Siva’s body, the rest of us are saved. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

15. On hearing the words of Andhaka, the powerful 
Danavas, fearlessly roaring like the rumbling clouds, spoke 
after resolving to do what was then to be thought of. 

The Ddnavas said : — 

16. If we are destined to live, the Pramathas cannot 
overwhelm us. If it is otherwise what avails running from 
the battle ground leaving our master behind. 

1 7. Those who leave their masters and run away 
professing to be honoured and desiring to be rich will surely 
fall into hell Andhatamisra. 

18. After sullying their fame with the darkness of 
ignominy they will forfeit their pleasure both here and here- 
after. They will be slain in the battle. 

19. Of what avail are charitable gifts, austerities and 
dips in holy waters if one takes bath in the holy tract of 
the battlefield that removes the dirt of re-birth ? 

Sanatkumara said: — 

20. After saying these words and deciding in accordance 



1014 SivapurSna 

with them, those Daityas and Danavas pounded the Prama- 
thas in the battle. They sounded the war-drums. 

21-22. By means of arrows, # swords, thunderbolts, 
hard rocks, Bhusundis, Bhindipalas and other missiles, 
spears, javelins, axes, skull-headed clubs, tridents, maces, 
staffs and other weapons they bit one another and wrought 
a great havoc. 

23. There was a great noise everywhere, produced 
by the drawn bows, flying arrows, the missiles, Bhusundis, 
Bhindipalas and leonine roars. 

24. There was great tumult caused by the war drums, 
trumpets, the trumpeting sounds of elephants and the 
neighing sounds of the horses. 

25. The vast space between heaven and earth was 
filled with loud reports causing horripilations to the coura- 
geous as well as the cowardly. 

26-27. The thirsty armies on either side fainted with 
their ears bursting by the loud sounds of elephants and 
horses, with the flagstaff and banners broken and torn, 
with their weapons exhausted, vomitting diverse kinds of 
blood and bereft of horses, elephants and chariots. 

28. O sage, the heroic Nandin and other Pramathas 
slew all Asuras and won the victory. 

29. On seeing his army being shattered here and there 
Andhaka rushed at the Ganas driving in his chariot. 

30. Like the mountains hit with the thunderbolt by 
Indra, the Pramathas perished. Like the clouds devoid of 
water they sank low. 

31. Glancing at the in-coming or out-going Prama- 
thas, far off or at close quarters, Andhaka hit them severally 
with as many arrows as the hair on their bodies. 

32-33. On seeing the army shattered and smashed by 
the powerful Andhaka, Skanda, Vinayaka, Nandin, Soma- 
nandin and other heroic and powerful Pramathas, and 
Siva’s personal Ganas became furious and fought in diverse 
ways and very valorously. 

34-35. By Vinayaka, Skanda, Nandin, Somanandin, 
Viraka, Naigameya, the powerful VaiSakha and other 
terrible Ganas, Andhaka was rendered blind as they 
showered tridents, spears and arrows incessantly. 



Rudrasathhitd 


1015 


36-37. Then a great tumult arose in the midst of the 
armies of Pramathas and Asuras. At that great noise, 
Bhargava who was within the belly of Siva began to 
wander seeking an outlet like the unaboded wind. In 
Siva’s body he observed seven worlds 309 including Patala. 

38. He saw the diverse worlds of Brahma, Visiiu, 
Indra, Aditya and celestial damsels as well as the battle 
between the Pramathas and Asuras. 

39. Wandering round and round in the belly of Siva 
for a hundred years he failed to see any outlet as a wicked 
person fails to see a vulnerable point in a good person. 

40-41 Taking recourse to the Yoga of Siva he repea- 
ted the following mantra and assumed the form of Siva’s 
semen. He thus emerged out of the belly of Siva through 
his penis. Thereafter he bowed to Siva and was accepted as 
a son by Parvati. He was made a lord of the Ganas. 

42. On seeing Bhargava come out of the path of 
the semen, lord Siva, the storehouse of mercy, laughed and 
said. 

Lord Siva said : — 

43. O son of Bhrgu, since you came out of my penis 
in the form of the semen you will be called Sukra hence- 
forth. I accept you as my son. You may go if you 
please. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

44. Thus advised by the lord, Sukra who had the 
refulgence of the sun, bowed to Siva again and eulogised 
him with palms joined in reverence. 

Sukra said : — 

45. You are of infinite feet, of infinite forms and of 
infinite heads, the destroyer and the auspicious. You are of 
infinite arms. How can I eulogise you of such form adequ- 
ately? You are worthy of eulogy and of the bowing of our 
heads. 


309. The seven regions below the earth are called STefft, 

tTOTcis* and I Cp. Umft S. ch. 15 V. 22-23. 



1016 


Stvapttrtb* 

46. You are the eight- formed, 3,0 the infinite-formed, the 
bestower of the desires of all gods and Asuras. You are the 
wicked and the undesirable. How can I adequately eulogise 
you of such a nature ? 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

47. After eulogising Siva thus and bowing to him 
again, Sukra took leave of Siva and entered the army of the 
Danavas as the moon does the cluster of clouds. 

48. Thus I have narrated to you how Bhargava was 
swallowed by Siva. .Now listen to the mantra which was 
repeated by Bhargava from within the belly of Siva. 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 

{The acquisition of the position of a Gana by Andhaka) 
Sanatkumdra said : — 

Om obeisance to you, the lord of the gods, the one 
bowed to by the gods and Asuras, the great lord of the 
beings past and future, the one of green and tawny-coloured 
eyes, the strength, the intellect-formed, the one having the 
tiger hide as his covering cloth, the one springing from the 
flint sticks of sacred fire, the lord of the three worlds, ISvara, 
Hara, the bay-eyed, the cause of the dissolution of the Yugas, 
the fire, the lord of Ganas, the protector of the worlds, the 
one of great arms, of great hands, the trident-bearing, of 
great fangs, the Kala, MaheSvara, the imperishable, the Time- 
formed, the blue-necked, the one of huge belly, the presiding 
deity of Ganas, the soul of all, the purifier of all, the all- 
pervading, the destroyer of the death, the one observing 
sacred rites on the Pariyatra 311 mountain, the Brahmacarin, 
the one knowable through Vedanta, the one reaching the 
limits of austerities, Pa£upati, the bodiless, the one armed 
with trident, the bull-bannered, Hari, the one with matted 

310. For the eight forms ef Siva, see Note No* 89 P. ig2t 

311. For Pariy&tra or P&rip&tra, see Note 77 P. 629 



Rudrasarhhitd 


1017 


hair, the tufted, the staff-bearing, the one of great fame, the 
lord of Bhutas, the dweller in a mountain-cave, the one 
beating time to VinS. and Pagava, the deathless, the comely, 
the one like the early morning sun, the dweller in the 
cremation ground, the lord consort of Parvati, the 
suppressor of enemies, the one who felled the eyes of 
Bhaga, the one who broke the tooth of Pu$an, the 
one who cuts the cruel ones, the one armed with noose, 
the hour of dissolution, the meteor-mouthed, the fire- 
bannered, the sage, the blazing, the lord of subjects, the 
leader, the father, the fourth one, the most excellent 
one in the world, Vamadeva, the chivalrous in speech, 
the Bhiksu of the left wing, the Bhik$u-formed, the 
one with matted hair, the complicated, the one who 
benumbed the hand of Indra, the one who benumbed the 
Vasus, the sacrifice, the performer of sacrifice, Kala, the 
intelligent, the bee, the moving one, the one originating 
from the hedges of the trees, the one adored by the name 
Vajasana by the people of all stages of life, the creator of 
the universe, the sustainer of the universe, the eternal 
Purusa, the stable one, the presiding deity of Dharma, the 
one of three-fold paths, the conceiver of all living beings, 
the three-eyed, the multi- formed, the one as refulgent as 
ten thousand suns, the lord, the one sounding all musical 
instruments, the one who releases from all hindrances, the 
binding one, the supporter of all, the most excellent of all 
virtuous ones, the Puspadanta, the part, the face, the 
destroyer of all, the golden-eared, the deity at the door, the 
terrible, the one of terrible exploit, Om, Obeisance, Obeisance. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. It is by repeating this mantra that Sukra came 
out of the belly of Siva through the penis, like the powerful 
semen. 

2. He was accepted as son by Parvati and made 
unaging and undying by Siva, the lord of the universe, as 
glorious as himself and second to him. 

3. Sukra the sage, the storehouse of the Vedas, was 
reborn of lord Siva when three thousand years elapsed on 
the earth 



4. He saw Andhaka the lord of Danavas, staked to 
the trident, performing a penance courageously and medi- 
tating on the supreme lord. He was completely dried up. 

5-18. He was meditating on the hundred and eight 
forms of the great Atman as follows : — the great god, of 
misformed eyes, the moon-crested, the nectarlike, the 
permanent, the stable, the blue-necked, the trident-bearing, 
the bull-eyed, the great unknowable, the Purusa, the bestower 
of all desires, the enemy of Kama, the destroyer of Kama, 
assuming forms at his will, wearing matted hair, the hideous, 
the GiriSa, the terrible, long-lipped, the red-robed, the 
Yogin, the destroyer of Kala, the destroyer of Tripuras, the 
bearer of skull, the performer of secret rites, the one of 
secret formulas, the grave, the conceivable, the support of 
Anima and other qualities, the bestower of riches to the 
three worlds, the heroic, the destroyer of the heroes, the 
terrible, the awful, the fleshy, the clever, the consumer of 
great flesh, the mad, the awful, the great ISvara, the router 
of the three worlds, the miserly, the hunter, the destroyer 
of sacrifice, the one with Kartdkeya, the highly elated, 
clad in elephant’s hide, covered with hide, the agitated, 
wearing serpents as ornaments, the lender of support, the 
spirit, the heroic, worshipped by SakinI, the Aghora (the 
gentle), the destroyer of terrible Daityas, sounding awfully, 
the vegetation- formed, smearing ashes on the body, with 
matted hair, the pure, served by hundreds of Bherundas, 
the lord of Bhutas, the ruler of Bhutas, the refuge of the 
five elements, the sky-sojourning, the furious, the ruthless, 
the fierce, the lord of Can<JI, the beloved of Candika, the 
fearful, the lofty, the Garutman (the winged one), the 
permanent, the partaker of spirituous liquor, the serpent- 
formed, the extremely terrible, the death, deathless, death 
of death, of great army, residing in the forest of the crema- 
tion ground, the attached, the unattached, blind with 
passion, adored by hundreds of passionless devotees, possessed 
of the Sattva, Rajas, Tamas attributes, as also of the Dharma, 
and Adharma, younger brother of Indra, the truth, the 
untruth, the existent, the non-existent, the uncaused, the 
lord with half-female form, the sun, as refulgent as crores 
and hundreds of suns, the sacrifice, the lord of sacrifice, 



Rudrasarhhitd 


1019 


Rudra, I Sana, the bestower of boons and Siva. The 
Danava Andhaka meditating on these hundred and eight 
forms of the supreme soul became free from that great 
fear. 

19. He was drenched with the divine shower of nectar 
by lord Siva who was perfectly satisfied. He was brought 
from the top of the trident and released. 

20. He spoke to the Asura Andhaka, the great 
Daitya. The great lord forgave what the demon had done 
before. 

The great lord said : — 

21. O lord of Daityas, I am pleased by your res- 
traints and observances, your valour and courage. O you of 
good rites, choose a boon. 

22. Propitiated by you I grant the boons. Free 
from sins you deserve a boon, O excellent Daitya. 

23. For the merits you have acquired by retaining 
your life for three thousand years you shall attain happiness. 

Sanatkumdra said: — 

24. Oh hearing this, Andhaka joined his palms in 
reverence. He knelt on the ground and spoke to the lord 
consort of Parvati trembling with awe. 

Andhaka said : — 

25-26. O lord, what you had been told by me before 
was done with the words choked by excess of pleasure. 
You the greater than the greatest were addressed as an 
ordinary poor person. What had been done by me in the 
battlefield due to delusion was the most despicable in the 
world. It was because I did not realise you then. O lord, 
please do not keep that in mind. 

27. O great lord, the wicked thing I committed 
towards Parvati was due to my base lust. It may kindly 
be forgiven. I am the most miserable and unhappy. 

28. A miserable person shall be pitied. If he be in 
a pitiable plight, he shall be all the more treated kindly. I 
am miserable but always devoted to you. 

29. I am miserable and devoted. I have sought 



1020 Sivapur&na 

refuge in you. I shall be saved. I have joined my palms 
in reverence. 

30. May this goddess, the mother of the universe, be 
pleased with me. Let her leave off her anger entirely and 
glance at me delightedly. 

31. O moon-crested lord, where is her anger and 
where am I a pitiable Daitya? O crescent-crested lord, 
O Siva, O supreme lord, I cannot bear it. 

32. Where are you, the most liberal? Where am I 
the wretched, rendered helpless by passion, fury and faults 
by old age and death? 

33. Let not your son Viraka, a powerful fighter and 
warrior, be angry on seeing me the miserable creature. 

34. Let me see Parvatl always as mother with 
reverence due to elders, O lord who are as white as snow, 
necklace, moon, conch and the Kunda flower. 

35. Let me be always devoted to you both. Let me 
be free from enmity towards the gods. Let me be calm in 
heart and think of Yogic ways. Let me thus stay with your 
Ganas. 

36. Let me not remember again the adverse qualities 
of the Danavas, thanks to your mercy, O lord. Please grant 
me this excellent boon. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

37. After saying this, the lord of the Daityas became 
quiet meditating on the three-eyed lord and seeing Parvatl 
as mother. 

38. Then glanced at by Siva, with delighted eyes, 
he remembered the entire story of his previous wonderful 
birth. 

39. When he remembered the incident his ambition 
was fulfilled. Bowing to his mother and father — Siva and 
Parvatl — he became contented. 

40. He was kissed and sniffed on the head by Parvatl 
and Siva. From the crescent-crested lord Siva he secured 
everything he desired. 

41. Thus I have narrated to you everything connected 
with the early story of Andbaka and his acquisition of the 



Rudrasmhhitd 


1021 


lordship of Ganas by lord Siva’s grace, yielding the greatest 
happiness. 

42. The mantra of Mrtyuftjaya that bestows im- 
mortality has also been mentioned to you. It yields the 
fruits of cherished desire. It should be strenuously read and 
recited. 


CHAPTER FIFTY 

( Sukra learns Mrtasafljioani lore) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. O Vyasa, listen how the lore of warding off death 
was gained by the sage Bhargava from Siva who is called 
the conqueror of Death. 

2. At first this scion of the family of Bhfgu went to 
the city of Varanasi 312 and performed penance for a long time 
meditating on lord Vi4ve6vara. 

3. There itself he fixed a phallic emblem of Siva, the 
great Atman. O Vedavyasa, in front of it, he dug a very 
beautiful well. 

4. Assiduously he performed the ablutions of the lord 
of the gods for a hundred thousand times with Pancamrta 313 
using a Drona measure each time. Fragrant unguents he 
also used with them for the ablutions. 

5. He offered sandal-paste and Yaksakardama 314 to the 
lord of the gods, thousands of times. Gladly he smeared 
fragrant unguents on the phallic image. 

6-11. With care and devotion he offered flowers and 
leaves in the course of his worship— Raja Campaka, 
Dhattura, Karavira, Kusesaya, Malati Karnikara, Kadamba, 
Bakula, Utpala, Mallika, Satapatri, Sindhuvara, Kimsuka, 
Bandhuka, Punnaga, Nagakesara, Kesara, N&vamalli, 
Cibilaka, Kunda, Mucukunda, Mandara, Bilva leaves, 

3* -2* VS rapasi— ancient Kaii. It came to be so called because it was 
situated between the two rivers, Barn& and Asi. 

313. See Note 95 P. 136. 

314. It is an ointment or perfumed paste consisting of camphor, 
agallochum, musk, sandal wood and kakkola* 



1022 Sivafiutfya 

Drona, Maruvaka, Vfka, Granthiparija, Damanaka, the 
beautiful mango sprouts, TulasI leaves, Devagandhari leaves, 
Brhatpatri leaves, Darbha grass, Nandyavartas, Agastyas, 
^SLla, Devadaru, Kaficanara, Kuravaka, Durva grass, Kurun- 
taka, and lotus petals of various auspicious kinds. 

12. He eulogised Siva with various hymns and repea- 
ted a thousand names. He sang songs of Siva’s glory. He 
danced and made offerings. 

13. Sukra worshipped lord Siva in various ways for 
five thousand years. 

14. When he did not see the lord, the least inclined 
to grant the boon, he took up still more unbearable and 
terrible observances and restraints. 

15-16. He washed off the dirt of fickleness from his 
mind by the waters of pure conceptions many times as well 
as from the sense-organs. After purifying the gem of the 
mind, he offered the same to the trident-bearing lord. He 
drank the smoke of powdered husks or bits of grains or balls 
of iron-ash 315 for a thousand years. 

17. On seeing him performing the terrible penance 
thus by keeping the mind steady, lord Siva was delighted. 

18. Coming out of the phallic image, lord Siva the 
consort of DaksayanI appeared before him with a brighter 
refulgence than that of a thousand suns and said. 

Lord Siva said : — 

19. “O great sage* O son of Bhrgu, O fortunate 
saint, by your perpetual penance I have been delighted. 

20. O Bhargava, choose anything that you wish as your 
boon. I shall lovingly bestow on you all your desires. 
There is nothing that cannot be granted to you.” 

Sanatkumara said : — 

21 On hearing these pleasing words of Siva, Bhargava 
was very much delighted. He was immersed in the ocean 
of happiness. 

22. The brahmin bowed to Siva with his eyes 


315. See Note 308 P. 1008. 



Rudrasartihita 


1023 


blooming like a lotus with pleasure and his body excited 
with horripilation by the surging waves of joy. 

23. With the palms raised and joined on the head 
in reverence and repeating “Victory, Victory”, the delighted 
sage eulogised the eight-formed 31 * Siva with the blooming 
eyes. 

Bhargava said : — 

24. O lord of the universe, Obeisance to you. O 

jewel of heaven, you shine brilliantly in the firmament for 
the benefit of the three worlds. With these lustrous rays 

you subdue all darkness and the desires of the Asuras. 

25. O eye of the world, you shine in heaven, on the 

earth and in the sky, brilliantly lit by your excessive reful- 

gence. You have driven away darkness. You are filled by 
the nectar of the moon. Obeisance to you. 

26. You are the wind, the goal in the holy path. 
You are worthy of being adored. O enlivener of the worlds, 
who can live here without you ? O all-pervasive, benumber 
of storms, nourisher of creatures, delighter of the race of 
serpents, obeisance to you. 

27. O sole purifier of the universe, O protector of 

those who bow to you, O wielder of the power of fire, you 
are the fire, bestowing calmness at every step. Obeisance 
to you. 

28. O water-formed one, O great Isa, the whole 
universe is holy. Really you make it variegated. O lord 
of the universe, this universe is free from dirt by diving into 
the water. Hence 1 bow to you. 

29. O sky-formed one, because you give space 
within and without, that this universe evolves and expands; 

O merciful one, it always breathes in you and naturally 
merges in you Hence I bow to you. 

30. O earth-formed one, O lord, you support and 
hold the universe. O lord of the universe, who else can be 
the enemy of darkness? You of this nature destroy my 

316. Bhargava eulogises Siva in his eight forms represented by ether, 
air, fire, water, earth, the sun, the moon and the Atman. The concept is 
popular with most of the poets in Sanskrit literature. Cp. Kali. Salt. 
Verse 1. 



1024 


Sivapurtya 

darkness. O you having serpents for ornaments, you are 
beyond all that deserve eulogy. Hence I bow to you. You 
are greater than the greatest. 

31. O soul-formed one, O Siva, this universe of the 
mobiles and immobiles is pervaded by these series of your 
forms. O eight-formed lord, having the form of the 
immanent soul, I always bow to you. 

32. O kinsman of those devoid of kinsmen, O you of 
the form of universe, equipped with the eight forms, you 
make all expand. O lord, you make all objects available to 
those who bow to you. Hence I bow to you. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

33. Eulogising the eight formed Siva by reciting the 
eight verses, Bhargava touched the ground with his head and 
bowed again and again. 

34-35. When he was eulogised by Bhargava of great 
brilliance, the great god stood up and lifted the brahmin 
from the ground where he was bowing to him. Holding 
him up, the lord spoke in a rumbling voice like that of the 
cloud but gentle in effect, illuminating the quarters with 
the moonlight-brilliance of his teeth. 

Thr. great lord said : — 

36-38. O excellent brahmin, O Bhargava, O dear, 
you are my faithful devotee. By your severe penance in 
this life, by the merit of installing my phallic image, and the 
adoration of it, by the offerings made with concentrated 
devotion, your unshaken purity and holy conduct in this 
Avimuktaksetra, 817 I see you as my other two sons. There 
is nothing which cannot be given to you. 

39. With this body you shall enter the cavity of my 
belly and you will be born as my son through my excellent 
organ — the penis. 

40. I am giving you now the boon inaccessible to 
even my attendants and which I have kept away even 
from Vi$nu and Brahma usually. 

317. The Avimukta-Ksetra is the same as VfiraiiasI region It derives 
its name from the installation of the phallic emblem of Siva called 
Avimuktesvara. 



Rudrasahhitd 


1025 


41-42. O pure one, O pure sage, I am giving unto 
you the lore in the form of Mantra, which is called 

Mftasafijivani. It is pure and it has been formulated by 
me alone through the power of the penance. You have the 
capacity to receive that lore. 

43. Whoever he may be if you were to repeat this 
mantra in respect of anyone he will truly return to life. 
This lore is the most excellent one. 

44. Your brilliant stellar lustre will excel the sun 

and fire. You will become the foremost of the planets. 

45. If any man or woman were to proceed on a 
journey in your direction, their work will perish by your 
glance. 

46. O you of good rites, all virtuous actions like 

marriage etc. when performed while you rise shall be 

beneficent to those people. 

47. All the Nanda tithis are auspicious by your con- 
junction. Your devotees will be prolific in progeny and 
profuse in the production of semen. 

48. The phallic image installed by you is called 
&ukresa. Those who worship it shall achieve success. 

49-50. Those who perform Vratas for every night 
throughout the year and offer water oblations in the Sukra 
well on your day and worship Sukresa shall derive these 
fruits. They will have semen unfailing and profuse in 
secretion. They will have sons. 

51. They will have the good fortune of manliness. 
There is no doubt. Those people will have good learning 
and enjoy happiness. 

52. After granting him boons, the lord vanished in 
the phallic image. The delighted Bhargava too returned to 
his abode. 

53. Thus O Vyasa, I have narrated how the Mrtyufi- 
jaya lore was acquired by Sukra through power of penance. 
What else do you wish to hear ? 



1026 SivapurSna 

CHAPTER FIFTYONE 

( The story oj Ufa) 


Vydsa said : — 

1-2. O omniscient Sanatkumara, a wonderfully excellent 
story has been narrated with love and blessings by you. It 
is full of Siva’s benediction. I wish to know more of the 
story of the moon-crested lord wherein he gave the Asura 
Bana the position of the chieftain of his Ganas. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

3. O Vyasa, listen with reverence to the story of Siva, 
the great Atman wherein it is explained how he bestowed 
the chieftainship of his Ganas on the Asura Bana. 

4. Here is the good story of Siva, the great lord. Here 
too is the story of Siva’s fight with Kr$na when the former 
blessed Bana. 

5. Listen from me the most befitting and the highly 
meritorious legend of the sports of Siva. It is pleasing to 
the mind and to the ears. 

6. Marici, the sage of great intellect, was the mentally 
created eldest son of Brahma. He was a Prajapati too. 

7. His son KaSyapa was a noble soul. He was the 
most excellent of all sages. He made the creation flourish 
well. He was devoted to his father and to Brahma. 

8. O Vyasa, thirteen daughters of Daksa were his 
wives. They were of good conduct and very faithful to their 
husband, the sage Kasyapa. 

9. The eldest of the wives was Diti. The Daityas were 
her sons. The gods and others including the mobile and 
immobile beings were born to others. 

10. The eldest Diti had the heroic sons HiranyakaSipu 
the elder and Hiranyaksa the younger. 

1 1 . Hiranyaka£ipu had four sons. They were in order 
Hrada, Anuhrada, Samhrada and Prahlada. 

12. Prahlada was a great devotee of Visnu. He had 
full control of his sense-organs. The Daityas were unable 
to destroy him. 

13. His son Virocana was the most excellent of 



Rudrasarh hitd 1027 

donors. He gave even his head to Indra who requested for 
the same in the guise of a brahmin. 

14. His son was Bali who was a favourite of Siva 
and a liberal donor. The earth was given by him to 
Visnu who assumed the form of a dwarf. 

15. His son Bana became a devotee of Siva. He was 
highly respected and intelligent. He was truthful and a 
liberal donor making thousands of charitable gifts. 

16. Staying in the Sonita town 818 he ruled over the 
three worlds after defeating several rulers forcefully. 

17. As a result of the grace of Siva, the gods became 
the virtual servants of Bana, the devotee of Siva. 

18-19. They were distressed by his enmity although 
he practised high virtues. In accompaniment of the instru- 
mental music played by his thousand arms, by means of 
the Tandava dance he propitiated Siva. 

20. Siva favourably disposed to his devotees was 
highly delighted and satisfied by his dance and he glanced 
at him with sympathetic eyes. 

21. The lord of the worlds, worthy of being sought 
refuge in, the bcstowcr of the desires of the devotees asked 
the great demon, the son of Bali, to choose a boon he 
liked. 

Siva said : — 

22. The great Daitya Bana, son of Bali, the fore- 
most among the devotees and highly intelligent, bowed to 
lord Siva with devotion and eulogised him. 

The Asura Bana said : — 

23-24. O great god, lord of the gods, favourably dis- 
posed to those who seek refuge in you, O great Siva, if you 
are pleased with me, be my guardian for ever. Be present 
with me as the lord of my city along with your sons and 
Ganas. O lord, be delightful to me in every respect. 

'{i 8. Sonitapura was the capital of Bai)£sura, the ruler of Tripura. 
Dey identifies it with the town of that name on: the bank of the river 
Kedara Gariga (See Note 23 P. 532) . Avasthi identifies it with Banagarh 
in the Dinajapura district of East Bengal, The above identifications are 
merely tentative, for Ban a is said to have ruled in Tripuri (Mod. Tewar) 
on the Narmada river in Madhya Pradesa, far away from the locus sug- 
gested by the scholars. 



1028 Sivapwrtya 

Sanatkumara said : — 

25-26. Bana son of Bali, deluded by Siva’s decep- 
tion, did not request anything else from lord Siva who would 
have bestowed even salvation if asked though he is hard to 
please. Siva, who is favourably disposed to his devotees, 
granted boons to him and stayed there lovingly along with 
his sons and his Ganas. 

27. Once Siva performed divine sports in Sonita, the 
beautiful city of Bana, in the company of the gods and 
Asuras, on the banks of a river. 

28. The Gandharvas and the celestial damsels danced 
and laughed. The sages performed Japas, bowed to, wor- 
shipped and eulogised him. 

29. The Pramathas jumped and shouted; the sages 
performed sacrifices. The groups of Siddh&s came and saw 
the divine sport of Siva. 

30. Mlecchas, 319 adversaries and evil-intentioned 
wranglers perished. The mothers 320 (Brahmi etc.) sat facing 
him. The terrifying imps perished. 

31. The worldly faults of those who had the good 
conception of devotion to Siva were forgotten. 

32. The sages and the Siddhas leapt and bounced on 
seeing the activities of the women. The seasons displayed 
their power and nourished it. 

33. Gentle winds blew wafting the grey pollen dust. 
The flocks of birds eager after honey chirped on the trees. 

34. The cuckoo cooed sweetly in the forests and 
parks, generating love, on the branches heavily laden with 
flowers. 

35. Then being glanced at by Kama who was not 
vanquished, the crescent-crested lord Siva highly indulgent 
in sports spoke to Nandin. 

319. Mlecchas were wild ferocious tribes whose acts of violence 
caused vast devastations and destructions, struck terror in the social life 
of the country. They are said to have been repulsed and destroyed by 
lord Siva. 

320. Mfitrs are the divine mothers or personified energies of the 
principal deities reckoned variously as seven, eight, nine or sixteen in 
numbers. They are closely connected with the worship of Siva and are 
described as attending on his son kfirttikeya to whom at first only seven 
M&tp were assigned. 



Rudrasarhhitd 1029 

The crescent-crested Siva said : — 

36. Go quickly from this forest and tell the dark- 
complexioned Parvatl everything and bring her here from 
Kailasa after she has bedecked herself. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

37. “So be it** answered the secret messenger of Siva 
who started on journey. Reaching there, with palms 
joined in reverence he bowed to Parvatl and said. 

NandUvara said : — 

38. “O goddess, the great lord of the gods wishes to 
see you, his beloved, well-dressed. It is at his bidding that 
I say this”. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

39. O excellent sage, then, at his importunity, Parvatl, 
devoted to her husband, began to bedeck herself ardently. 

40. “I am coming. You return and so inform the 
lord at my bidding”. The Nandin approached Siva with 
the velocity of mind. 

41. Siva who was extremely agitated told Nandin 
again. “Dear, go again and fetch Parvatl from there”. 

42. “Yes, sir”, said he. He went to Parvatl of sweet 
appearance and said: “Your lord wishes to see you beautifully 
and gorgeously dressed. 

43. O goddess # Siva is eagerly waiting for various 
sports. O daughter of the mountain, please go since the lord 
is distressed with passion.”. 

44-46. All the celestial damsels told one another — 
“Since lord Siva is very eager to see Parvatl being passio- 
nate, the lady whom this enemy of Kama may woo will 
certainly be the queen of celestial damsels. She may sport 
with lord Siva in the form of Parvatl accompanied by the 
Ganas of Kama. Kama is indeed victorious over his foe. 

321. The printed edition* read Kufm&pqla for Kumbhind*. In 
fact, Chitralekha, companion of was the daughter of Kumbh^d**— * 
reputed minister of B&pa. Cp- Verse 38 of the next chapter. 



1030 Sivapur&na 

47. If any lady, save Parvati, is able to touch Siva, let 
her go there unhesitatingly and fascinate him. 

48. The daughter of Kumbhanda, 321 Citralekha said — 
‘*1 desire to attract Siva in the form ‘of Parvati. 

49. Just as Visnu, by taking recourse to his yogic 
powers assumed the form of Enchantress ( Mohini) ”. 

50. On seeing the change of form of UrvaSi, Ghrtaci 
adopted the form of Kali and ViSvaci that of Cai^ika. 

51. Rambha assumed the form of Savitri, Mcnaka 
that of Gayatri; Sahajanya that of Jaya and Puftjikasthali 
that of Vijaya. 

52. The unnamed celestial damsels assumed the forms 
of unnamed mothers with effort by employing their art. 

53. On seeing their forms, the daughter of Kum- 
bhanda, taking recourse to the Vaisnava and her own Yoga, 
knew everything and emulated the same. 

54. Osa, daughter of the Asura Bana efficient in divine 
Yoga, assumed the wonderfully auspicious and divine form 
of Parvati. 

55. Her feet were of excellent lustre. They shone 
like the great red lotus. They had all the divine charac- 
teristics bestowing every desired object. 

56. Knowing that she wanted to indulge in love-sport 
with Siva, the omniscient and omnipresent Parvati spoke. 

Parvati said — 

57-59. O friend Osa, chaste and honourable lady since 
you have adopted my form out of passion, so you will 
have the monthly course in the appropriate time in the 
Karttika month. On the twelfth day in the bright half of 
Vai$akha, you will undertake a fast. During the night 
while you are asleep in the harem, a man will come there 
and enjoy you. He has been made your husband by the 
gods. You will sport with him. 

60. This is because you have been devoted to Visnu 
ever since childhood without sinking into lethargy. She 
then mumbled to herself. “Let it be so” and was very 
bashful. 

61. Then the goddess Parvati bedecked herself zealous- 
ly and went to Siva, She then sported with him. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


1031 


62. O sage, at the end of the dalliance Lord Siva 
vanished from the place accompanied by his wife, the Ganas 
and the gods. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTWO 

( The story af UfS) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. Listen to another story of Siva the great soul which 
bestows the highest pleasure and wherein his endearment to 
his devotees can be seen. 

2-3. Formerly the Asura Ban a had pleased Siva by 
performing the Tarujava dance. By adverse fate he became 
haughty. On realising that Siva, the lover of Parvatl, was 
delighted in mind, the Asura Bana joined his palms* in 
reverence, bent his shoulders and spoke. 

BSna said : — 

4. O great god, lord of the gods and crest-jewel of 
all the gods, 1 am very strong, thanks to your favour. 

5. A thousand hands have been given to me by you. 
They are only a burden to me, since except you I do not 
find any match to oppose me having an equal strength. 

6. O bull-bannered lord, what can I do with these 
thousand mountain-like hands without a fight. 

7. When my hands itch for war I desire to fight the 
elephants of the quarters. By hitting the cities and moun- 
tains I reduced them to powder. Being frightened they fled 
away. 

8. Yama has been made a combatant with me and 
the great fire-god too, similarly. Varnna has been made a 
cowherd looking after my cows. 

9. Kubera has been made the in-charge of' couches, 
Nirj-ti a chaperon. Indra has been defeated and forced to 
pay tribute. 

10-11. Please suggest a fight unto me wherein my 
hands may fall shattered by the weapons hurled by the 



1032 Sivapuf&Qa 

enemy or cause him to fall in thousand pieces. O lord Siva, 
please fulfil this desire of mine. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

12. Becoming furious on hearing that, Siva laughed 
boisterously and in a wonderful manner; Siva the remover 
of the distress of devotees became very angry and said. 

Siva said — 

13. Fie upon you, O haughty basj Daitya, such a 
talk as this does not behove the son of Bali and a devotee. 

14. Very soon, you will meet a terrible challenge to 
your bluff by fighting a great battle against person equal to 
me in strength. The battle will be sudden. 

15. Therein your mountain-like hands will be cut off 
by weapons and missiles. They will fall off like reeds or 
stumps of plantain trees. 

16-18. “O wicked soul, when this flagstaff of yours, 
with the emblem of a peacock with a human head, which is 
installed in your armoury, falls without being blown off by 
a gust of wind, you can decide within your mind that a 
terrible battle is at hand. Go to that terrible war accomp- 
anied by all your generals. Now return to your abode 
where Siva is present. 

19. O wicked one, you will see the great evil por- 
tents.” After saying this, the lord who is favourably disposed 
to the devotees and is the dispeller of pride stopped. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

20. After hearing that, Bana worshiped Siva with 
palms joined in reverence in the form of buds and bowed to 
lord Siva. He then went to his abode. 

21. On being asked, the delighted Asura mentioned 
everything to Kumbhan<Ja in the manner it had happened. 
The Asura Bana awaited the particular conjunction of 
circumstances eagerly. 

22. Once, by chance he saw the flagstaff broken and 
fallen. On seeing it, he was delighted and he set out for war. 

23-24. He called together his entire army. He was 



Rudrasaihhitd 


1033 


accompanied by his eight lieutenants. He performed the 
sacrifice for success in war. He surveyed the wine 8 * 2 prepared 
for use in the course of war. He observed the auspicious 
signs in the quarters and set off. He, the son of Bali, 818 the 
heroic warrior capable of fighting with ten thousand persons, 
was very enthusiastic. 

25-26. He thought within himself— “Who can be that 
warrior fond of battle, a master of the art of using weapons 
and missiles who will cut off my thousand hands like reeds 
or whom I shall cut into hundred pieces ?” 

27-28. In the meantime, in the month of Vaisakha 
after her monthly course, the daughter of Bana had her aus- 
picious bath and auspicious rites after worshipping lord Siva. 
At night she lay asleep in the well-guarded harem. It was 
then that Kama entered the place with lord Siva. 

29-30. She was seized by Krsna’s grandson 884 sent by 
Parvatl of divine Maya. She began to cry helplessly. He 
enjoyed her forcibly. Within a moment he was carried to 
Dvaraka 385 by Parvati’s attendants by means of their divine 
Yogic power. 

31. Rubbed and squeezed thus, she got up crying. She 
mumbled various words to her female attendants. She even 
decided to give up her life. 

32. O Vyasa, she was then reminded by her friend of 
the fault she had committed previously. She then came to 
realise the entire incident that had occurred formerly. 

33. O sage, Osa, daughter of Bana, spoke sweetly to 
Citralekha, daughter of Kumbhanda. 

Ufa said — 

34. “Dear friend, if he is the person ordained as my 
husband by Parvatl, how can I obtain him duly ? 


322. Cp. Note 277 P. 963. 

323. Bana was the son of Bali also called Mabibali. He ruled at 
&onitapura while his father's capital was Mab&baiipura We can construct 
the ancestry of Baga from Sivapurana : Hiranyakasipu— -PrahUda— 
V i rocana — Bal i — Ba na . 

324. Aniruddha was the son of Pradyumna and grandson of Krsoa. 

325. There were two Dv&rak&s connected with Ki$na. The one 
was situated near Kodinar on the sea-shore between the mouths of the 
rivers : Somat and Sing&vara. Krsra is said to have resided here and 
later on transferred himself to DvArakd in OkhA mafldala in Kathiawfcf. 



35. In what family is he bom who has fascinated 
my mind thus ?” On hearing the words of 0?a, the friend 
told her then. 

Citralekhd said : — 

36. “O gentle lady, how shall I bring that man who 
was seen by you in the dream and whom I do not know.” 

37. Thus said by her, the daughter of the Daitya 
blinded by passion was ready to end her life. She was 
saved thus by her friend on the first day. 

38. O excellent sage, again that daughter of Kum- 
bhanda, Citralekha, of great intellect spoke to 0$a the 
daughter of Bana. 

39. I can dispel your grief if such a man could be 
anywhere in the three worlds. I shall bring him who has 
captivated your mind. Please mention the details of his 
features. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

40. After saying this, she painted all the gods on a 
canvas together with the Daityas, Danavas, Gandharvas, 
Siddhas, Nagas, Yak?as and others. 

41. Similarly she painted men, the Vr?nis among them, 
the heroic Anakadundubhi, Balarama, Krsna and Pradyumna 
the excellent among men. 

42. On seeing Aniruddha the son of Pradyumna 
painted, she became bashful. Osa’s heart was filled with 
delight. She stood with downcast face. 

Ufa said — 

43. u O, this is the thief who has stolen my heart. 
This is the man whom I secured in the night. 

44. By his very contact I became fascinated. I wish 
to know about him. O beautiful woman, mention everything 
to me. 

45. In whose family is he born ? What is his name ? 
On being thus asked by her, the lady, expert in yogic 
practice, mentioned the name of the family. 

46. O excellent sage, on hearing about his family, 
the eager and passionate daughter of Sana said. 



Rudrasarhhitd 1035 

U$d said — 

47-48. O my friend, ascertain some means lovingly so 
that I shall regain my beloved husband in a trice. Without 
him, my friend, I am not at all eager to live even for a 
moment. Please bring him here strenuously. O my friend, 
make me happy. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

49. On being thus requested by the daughter of Ba$a, 
O excellent sage, the daughter of the minister was surprised 
and began to think seriously. 

50. Then taking leave of her friend, and knowing 
him to be the grandson of Kf?na, Citralekha got ready to 
go to Dvaraka with the velocity of the mind. 

51-53. When the third day after the fourteenth day in 
the dark half of the month of Jyestha elapsed, a Muhurta 
before the dawn, she reached the city of Dvaraka within a 
moment by the aerial path because she was a YoginT. Then 
in the park of the harem the son of Pradyumna was seen by 
her playing with women and drinking wine. He was dark- 
complexioned but beautiful in every limb, smiling and in the 
prime of youth. 

54-55. When he lay on the cot she encompassed him 
with the shroud of darkness by employing her Tamasa Yoga. 
Thereafter she carried the cot on her head and within a 
moment reached the city of Sonita where the daughter of 
Bana eagerly awaited her. 

56. Passionate that she was, she made various mad 
pranks displaying her emotions. On seeing that he was 
actually brought she became frightened too. 

57. When they began their sexual dalliance in that 
fresh contact in the well-guarded harem, it became known 
to all in a moment. 

58-59. The man with a divine body who carried 
on illegitimate affairs with a virgin was found out by the 
persons appointed at the doorway to the harem with cane- 
sticks in their old and emaciated hands, by means of gestures 
and inferences. They understood that he was a young man, 
very comely in features, daring and fend of battle. 



1036 SivapurdQa 

60. On seeing him, the heroic men who guarded the 
harem went and told Bana, son of Bali, everything. 

The gatekeepers said : — 

61. O lord, no one knows how this was done. Indra 
has entered your harem in secret and forcibly. He has 
outraged the modesty of your daughter by seizing her 
himself. 

62. O lord of Danavas, of great arms, see, see him here. 
Do whatever is proper. We are not at fault. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

63. O excellent sage, on hearing their words, on hear- 
ing of the defilement of his daughter, the lord of Danavas of 
great strength, became surprised. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 

( The dalliance of Ufa and Aniruddha) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. The infuriated Asura Bana went there and saw 
Aniruddha who was in the fresh years of youth and who 
seemed to have been born especially for divine sports. 

2. The infuriated Bana, very efficient in war, was a 
bit surprised on seeing him and wondered why he had done 
like that and therefore said mockingly. 

3. “Oh this man is really handsome, bold and daring. 
Who can this unfortunate deluded person be? His death is 
imminent. 

4. O angry ones, with terrible weapons immediately 
kill the fellow who has outraged the traditional purity of my 
family and clefiled my dear daughter. 

5. O heroic ones, bind the terrible fellow of evil 
conduct. Put him in a frightful prison for a long time”. 

6. After saying this, the Asura Bafla thought within 
himself intelligently. “It is not known who this fearless fellow 
is. Certainly he is a man of terrible exploit”. Thinking 
thus Bana hesitated to act. 



Rudrasarhhitd 1037 

7. Then gradually the evil-minded Daitya ordered ten 
thousand men from his army for slaying him. 

8. Commanded by him those heroic terrible fellows 
encircled the harem saying. “Cut him, pierce him”. 

9-10. On seeing the army of the enemy, Aniruddha 
the scion of the Yadava family, roared. He seized the big 
iron club from the harem-gate and came out of the apart- 
ment like the god of death armed with thunderbolt. With 
that iron club he killed the servants and returned to the 
harem. 

11. O excellent sage, thus Aniruddha strengthened by 
Siva’s splendour, with eyes turned red by anger, killed all 
the ten thousand men of the army. 

12-14. With the sword captured in the course of the 
battle he killed ten thousands of horses and charioteers of 
the lord of Daityas. When a hundred thousand soldiers had 
been killed, the Asura Bana furiously entered the fray 
taking with him Kumbhanda, expert in war. He then 
challenged Aniruddha for a duel in the course of that war — 
Aniruddha the highly intelligent son of Pradyumna, of 
refulgent body and protected by Siva’s brilliance. 

15. Aniruddha then seized a spear blazing like the 
fire of death, for killing him and hit him with that. 

16. Bana was hit with the spear even as he was seated 
in a chariot. In a trice the heroic demon vanished along 
with his horse. 

17. When he vanished, Aniruddha, the unvanquished 
son of Pradyumna, stood steady like a mountain observing 
all the quarters. 

18. Remaining invisible, that Danava Bana, practising 
deceptive fight, hit him again and again with thousands of 
weapons. 

19. That powerful son of Bali, the heroic devotee of 
Siva, the Asura Bana deceitfully bound him with 
Serpent-nooses. 828 

20. After binding him and putting him in a cage he 


326. NSgapftsa was a sort of magical noose used in battle to 
entangle an enemy. Formerly it was the exclusive weapon of Asura 
Vanina. 



1038 iivapurd#d 

stopped the battle. The infuriated B&$a then spoke to the 
very powerful son of the charioteer. 

The Asur a Bdna said : — 

21. O son of the charioteer, cut off the head of this 
wicked fellow who has defiled my family. 

22. After chopping off the limbs, give them to the 
Raksasas. Or let the beasts of prey swallow his flesh and 
blood. 

23. Or kill this sinner and put him in a grassy well. 
O son of the charioteer, what more shall I say ? By all 
means he must be slain. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

24. On hearing his words, the Asura Kumbhanda, 
the most excellent of the ministers and righteous in thought, 
spoke to Bana. 

Kumbha# da said : — 

25. O lord, this is not a proper thing to do. Please 
consider. I think by killing him we will be killing 
ourselves. 

26. O lord, he seems to be equal to Visnu in exploits. 
His strength has been increased by the brilliance of the 
moon-crested lord, your favourite. 

27. Moreover, in daring he is equal to the moon- 
crested lord; though he is reduced to this plight he main- 
tains his manliness. 

28. It is by the grace of Siva that he, the grandson 
of Kf 9 Qa, considers us insignificant as the blades of grass. 
Although he is bitten by serpents cruelly he is still very 
strong. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

29. After saying thus to Bana, the Danava, the most 
excellent among statesmen, spoke to Aniruddha. 

Kumbhdnda said : — 

30. “O hero, who are you? Whose son are you? Tell 



Rudrasarhh iid 1039 

us the truth. O meanest of men, of evil conduct, by whom 
have you been brought here ? 

31. Repeat piteously “I am vanquished 9 . Eulogise 
the heroic lord of the Daityas. Join your palms in reverence 
and bow to him. 

32. If you do like this, you may get release. Other- 
wise this captivity and tortures will continue 99 . On hearing 
this Aniruddha replied. 

Aniruddha said : — 

33. O friend of the basest of Daityas, O you that 
sustain yourself with the balls of rice offered in the hands, 
O demon of evil conduct, you do not know the laws of 
adversaries. 

34. I think that for the valorous person humble 
supplications and running away from the battlefield are 
worse than death. These are adverse and painful to him 
like a dart. 

35. For a Ksatriya, death while fighting face to face 
with the enemy is commendable rather than joining the 
palms in reverence like a man in humble condition professing 
to be valorous. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

36. These and many other heroic words he uttered, on 
hearing which Bana was surprised and angry too. 

37. Then a celestial voice was heard for the pacifica- 
tion of Bana which all the heroes, Aniruddha and the 
minister, stood listening to. 

The celestial voice said : — 

38. <c O Bana, O great hero, you shall not be angry. 
“O devotee of Siva, O intelligent one, you are the son of 
Bali. Ponder over this. 

39. Siva, the lord of all, the supreme lord, is the 
witness of all activities. This entire universe including the 
mobile and immobile beings is subservient to him. 

40. He alone is the creator, maintainer and the 
destroyer of the worlds, always taking up the attributes of 



Rajas, Sattva and Tamas in the form of Brahma, Visnu and 
Siva. 

41. The lord is omnipresent. He is the inducer, 
greater than all. He is free from aberrations, unchanging, 
eternal, the lord of illusion and devoid of attributes. 

42. Even a weak person becomes strong, thanks to his 
will, O excellent son of Bali. O intelligent one, realise 
this in your mind, be normal and complacent. 

43. The lord who quells pride, who is an expert in 
various sports and who is favourably disposed to his devotees 
will destroy your arrogance.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

44. O great sage, having spoken thus, the celestial 
voice stopped. On hearing these words the Asura Bana 
did not kill Aniruddha. 

45. Then he went to his harem and drank excellent 
beverages. His intellect was adversely affected, he forgot 
those words and began to sport. 

46. Aniruddha was bound by serpentine bodies emitting 
poison powerfully. His passion for his beloved had not 
been satiated fully. He remembered Durga then. 

Aniruddha said : — 

47. O goddess, you are worthy of being resorted to. 
I have been bound by serpents. O goddess bestowing fame, 
O goddess of fierce fury, come and save me. 

48. O great goddess, devotee of Siva, O cause of 
creation, sustenance and dissolution, there is no other saviour 
except you. O Siva, save me. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

49. Propitiated by him, Kali, lustrous like the split 
collyrium, arrived there in the dark night of the fourteenth 
day in the dark half of the month Jyestha. 

50-51. With the heavy blows of her fists she broke 
the cage. She reduced the serpentine arrows to ashes. She 
released Aniruddha and let him enter the harem and then 
vanished from the scene. 

52. O great sage, thus, thanks to the grace of the 



Rudrasaihhxtd 


1041 


goddess — the Energy of Siva, Aniruddha got rid of the 
difficulty, became free 'from pain and obtained happiness, 

53. Securing success by means of Siva’s Energy, 
Aniruddha the son of Pradyumna gained access to his 
beloved, the daughter of Bana and rejoiced. 

54. In the company of his beloved — the daughter of 
Bana, he carried on dalliance and was happy drinking the 
beverages till his eyes became red. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 

(The fight among Bana , Siva , Krfna and others) 

Vyasa said : — 

1. O excellent sage, when Aniruddha the grandson 
of Krsna was abducted by the daughter of Kumbhanda 
what did Krsna do? Please narrate it to me. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

2. O excellent sage, on hearing the woeful cries of 
his women when Aniruddha had gone off suddenly, Kfr?na 
too became vexed. 

3. The four months of the rainy season thus went by 
when his relatives and Visnu could not see Aniruddha and 
so they bewailed. 

4. On hearing from Narada about the imprisonment 
and activities of Aniruddha the Vf$nis, followers of Kr?na, 
became dejected. 

5. On hearing everything, Krsna immediately called 
Garuda and went to the city of Sonita eagerly for 
fighting. 

6. Pradyumna, Yuyudhana, Samba, Sarana, Nanda, 
Upananda, Bhadra and others following Rama and Kf?na 
went there. 



7. They were accompanied by twelve Ak$auhini8. 
They, the chief of Satvatas 827 laid a siege all round the city 
of Bana. 

8. On seeing the parks, fortresses, ceilings and 
minarets of the city thus broken, Bana became infuriated 
and set forth with an equal number of armies. 

9. In order to help Bana, lord Rudra accompanied by 
his son and the Pramathas rode on the bull Nandin and 
arrived there to fight. 

10. A tumultuous fight, wonderfully causing horripi- 
lation ensued between Krsna and his followers on the one 
hand and the supporters of Bana, Rudra etc. on the 
other. 

11. The fight was between Krsna and Siva; Pradyumna 
and Karttikeya; Kumbhandaka and Kupakarna, Bala and 
Samyuga. 

12. Samba fought with Bana’s son; Satyaki with Bana; 
Garu(jia with Nandin and groups of one side fought with 
the groups of the other. 

13. Brahma and other gods, sages, Siddhas, Garanas, 
Gandharvas and celestial damsels came there in aerial 
chariots to witness the affray. 

14. O best of brahmins, a terrible fight ensued between 
the members of the Yadu family with the groups of 
Pramathas ending with “Revatis”. 

15. Krsna, his brother Rama and the intelligent 
Pradyumna, fought an unequalled fight with the Pramathas. 

16-17. The fight continued with Agni, Yama, Varuna, 
Vimukha, Tripada, Jvara and Karttikeya and groups of 
Pramathas with the Vr§nis. It was terrible and frightful 
causing horripilation. 

18. There was fight with the shameless women too, 
several groups of terrifying Ko{aris at every step, not far 
from one another. 

19. Kf$na routed the Bhutas, Pramathas and 

327. S&tvatas were a family of Yadava race whose founder was 
Yadu, son of King Yayati. King Satvata founded a branch of the 
Yadavas after his name. He had four sons : (1) Bhajin Bhajamana (a) 
Devavfdha (3) Andhaka mahabhoja and (4) Vw.ii Kf^na, the celebrated 
hero of the Mahabhirata was born in the SStvaia-Vrsi.d family- 



1043 


AudrasarfAitd 

Guhyakas, the followers of Siva with sharp-pointed arrows 
discharged from his bow. 

20. The heroes Pradyumna and others jubilant over 
the war destroyed the armies of the enemies and fought 
terribly. 

21. On seeing his army being scattered, Siva became 
highly infuriated and roared terribly. 

22. On hearing that, Siva’s Ganas too shouted and 
fought. They suppressed the opponents with their strength 
increased by Siva’s brilliance. 

23. Krsna discharged separate types of missiles from 
his bow towards the trident-bearing lord Siva who without 
showing any dismay quelled them directly. 

24. They discharged Brahma-missile in counter to 
Brahma missile; the mountain-missile to the wind-missile; 
the cloud-missile to the fire-missile and Siva-missile to the 
Narayana missile. 

25. Defeated by the opponents, the army of Kr^na 
fled, O Vyasa; it could not face the full refulgence of 
Siva. 

26. O sage, when his army was routed, lord Kr?na, 
the scorcher of enemies, discharged terrible fever missile 
named ‘cold’. 8 * 8 

27. O sage, when the army of Kf$na was routed, the 
cold fever missile of Knna rushed at Rudra blazing the 
ten quarters. 

28. On seeing that coming, lord Siva discharged his 
own fever missile. The two fever missiles fought each 
other. 

29. Oppressed by the fever missile of lord Siva, the 
fever missile of Siva cried aloud. Unable to secure succour 
elsewhere, it eulogised the bull-bannered lord. 

30. The delighted lord Siva, favourably disposed to 
those who seek refuge, eulogised by Vi?nu’s fever missile, 
spoke to the cold fever missile of Vifriu. 

328. The mention of the missile of cold fever and of the counter 
missile to ward it off indicates the heights that India had attained in 
military science. 



1044 &ivapurS$4 

Lord £iua said : — 

31. “O cold fever, I am delighted. Leave off your 
fear from my fever. There is no fear from fever to him 
who remembers this anecdote. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

32. Thus advised, the fever missile of Visnu went away 
after bowing to Siva. On seeing that activity, Kfsna was 
surprised and dismayed. 

33. When attacked by the arrows of Pradyumna, the 
infuriated Karttikeya, the slayer of Daityas, hit Pradyumna 
with his spear. 

34. When hit by Karttikeya’s spear, Pradyumna, 
though very strong, shed blood from his limbs and fled 
from the battle ground. 

35. Hit with various missiles by Kumbhanda and 
Kupakarna, Balabhadra though strong did not stay there. 
He fled from the battle-field. 

36. Garu^a, took up a thousand bodies and drank up 
the water from the great sea. He then began to work 
havoc by showering the sea- waters through Avarta 
clouds. 

37. Then the infuriated bull, the powerful vehicle of 
lord Siva, hit him with great force by means of his 
horns. 

38. When his limbs were shattered by the blows of 
his horns, Garuda was dismayed. He forsook Visnu and 
fled from the battle ground immediately. 

39. When the situation was like this, lord Krsna, 
dismayed by Siva’s refulgence spoke to the charioteer 
suddenly. 

Lord Krsna said : — 

40. O charioteer, listen to my words. Drive the 
chariot immediately to lord Siva so that I shall speak to 
him. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

41. Thus commanded by Vi?nu, the charioteer Daruka, 



Rudrasarhhitd 1045 

the foremost of persons of good qualities, drove the chariot 
immediately to lord Siva. 

42. Lord Kfsna resorted to Siva, favourably disposed 
to his devotees, bowed to him with devotion with palms 
joined in reverence and submitted as follows. 

Lord Kr$na said : — 

43. O lord Siva, lord of the gods, favourably dis- 
posed to those who seek refuge in you, I bow to you the 
great lord, the soul of all and of infinite power. 

44. I bow to you, the cause of the origin, sustenance 
and dissolution of the universe, the sole form of perfect 
knowledge, the symbol of Brahman, the highly quiescent, 
the supreme lord. 

45-46. The time, the divinity, the activity, the indivi- 
dual soul, the nature, the solid objects, the vital airs, the 
soul, the groups of created beings, the series of seeds and 
sprouts everything is your illusion, O lord of the universe. 
I resort to you the cause of those things, the great lord. 

47. By the different forms assumed by you sportively, 
you, the lord of the worlds, support the gods and others and 
destroy those who go astray. 

48. You are the Brahman, the great light that is 
hidden in the Sabda Brahman which the purified souls see 
like the sole firmament. 

49. You are the primordial Purusa without a second. 
You are the fourth being,* 2 ® the vision of the soul. You 
appear as undergoing change though you are the lord, the 
cause without another cause unto you. 

50. O lord, for the manifestation of all the attributes, 
you appear different through your illusion, O supreme lord, 

51. O lord, just as the unconcealed sun illuminates 
many of his reflections by his brilliance, so you too do, being 
the great illuminating light. 

52. O great one, O self-illuminated lord Siva, you 


38). Siva represents the fourth (Turya) state of the soul, the pure, 
impersonal ami unconditioned. The other three states of the soul viz. 
the state of wakefulness dream ( ) and unconsciousness 

) are impure, personal and conditioned by physical envelope. 



1046 Sivapurdna 

brighten the attributes by means of the attribute itself, 
though you are not encompassed by the attribute. 

53- People whose intellects are deluded by your 
illusion become attached to sons, wives, abodes etc. and 
sink and float in the ocean of sin. 

54. After deriving this divinely bestowed human 
habitation, if a person does not control his sense-organs and 
respect your feet he is to be pitied. He deceives his own 
self. 

55. O lord, it is at your bidding that I have come 
here to cut off the hands of Bana. This haughty Bana 
was cursed by you who are the destroyer of haughtiness. 

56. O lord, please return from the battle-ground. 
Let not your curse go in vain. O lord, command me to cut 
off the hands of Bana. 

Sanathimara said : — 

57. O great sage, on hearing these words of lord 
Krsna, Siva the supreme lord who was propitiated by 
Krsna’s eulogy, replied : — 

Lord Siva said : — 

58. O dear, what you say is true; the lord of the 
Daityas has been cursed by me. It is at my bidding that 
you have come here to cut off the hands of Bana. 

59. O lord of LaksmI, what can I do? O Visnu, I 
am subservient to my devotees always. How can there be 
the chopping of Bana’s arms while I am watching? 

60. Hence at my bidding make me benumbed by means 
of your Jrmbhana missile. 880 Thereafter you can do as you 
please and be happy. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

61. O great sage, thus urged by Siva, lord Krsna 
was surprised. He returned to the battlefield and rejoiced. 

62. O Vyasa, Vi$nu an expert in the use of various 
missiles fixed the Jrmbhana missile to the bow and dis- 
charged it at Siva. 

330. Jrmbhana missile is said to possess the potency of benumbing 
the activities of the person against whom it is used. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


1047 


63. After enchanting Siva, and making him benumbed 
by means of the Jrmbhana missile, Vi?nu slew the army of 
Bana by means of swords, daggers and clubs. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE 

( The chopping of Band's arms and his humiliation) 

Vyasa said : — 

1. O dear sage, Sanatkumara, O omniscient son of 
Brahma, obeisance be to you. A wonderful story has been 
narrated to me by you. 

2. When Siva was made to yawn and lie flat by Visnu 
through the Jrmbhana missile, in the course of the war and 
when the army of Bana was slain, what did Bana do? 
Please narrate. 

SQta said : — 

3. On hearing these words of Vyasa of immeasurable 
refulgence, the great sage, the delighted son of Brahma, 
replied. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

4. O Vyasa of great intellect, listen to the highly 
wonderful story of Krsna and Siva who indulge in sports 
in accordance with the worldly conventions. 

5. When Siva sportively lay flat on the ground along 
with his sons and Ganas, Bana the king of Daityas came 
out to fight with Krsna. 

6. With the horses mobilised by Kumbhan^a, and 
holding various weapons and missiles, the powerful son of 
Bali performed an incomparable fight. 

7. On seeing his army destroyed, the lorpl of the 
Daityas became infuriated. The powerful son of Bali 
fought an incomparable battle. 

8. Lord Krsna the great hero with additional strength 
derived from Siva roared loudly in the battlefield consi- 
dering Bana as insignificant a$ a blade of grass. 



1048 §wapw8$a 

9. O great sage, he made the twanging sound on his 
wonderful bow called Sarnga and frightened what little 
remained of Bana’s army. 

10. The intervening space between heaven and Earth 
was filled with the great sound originating from the twang 
on his bow. 

1 1. Drawing the string of his bow upto the ear, the 
infuriated Vi$nu discharged sharp arrows, as furious as 
serpents, on Bana. 

12. On seeing the arrows coming, Bana the son of 
Bali, split them even before they reached him, by means 
of arrows discharged from his bow. 

13. Lord Bana, suppressor of enemies roared again. 
The Vrsnis thinking of Krsna were afraid and dejected. 

14. Thinking upon the lotus-like feet of Siva, the 
haughty son of Bali discharged his arrows at Krsna the 
most valorous. 

15. Thinking upon the lotus-like feet of Siva, the 
powerful destroyer of Asuras, Krsna split them before they 
reached him by means of his own arrows. 

16. Rama and other Vrsnis, the powerful ones agitated 
by anger, slew their respective opponents. 

17. Thus the tumultuous fight between the two strong 
armies went on for a long time aggravating the wonder of 
the spectators. 

18. In the. meantime the infuriated king of birds 
suppressed the army of Bana striking all with his wings. 

19. Seeing his army routed and himself oppressed^ 
Bana, the powerful lord of Daityas, son of Bali, foremost 
among Siva’s devotees, was infuriated. 

20. Thinking upon the lotus-like feet of Siva, the 
thousand-armed Bana displayed his valour unbearable to 
his enemies. 

21. The destroyer of heroes discharged simultaneously 
an unlimited number of arrows on Garuda, Kr?na and 
Yadus separately. 

22. O sage, he hit Garu<Ja with an arrow, Kr?na 
with another, Bala with a third. The powerful hero hit 
others too. 

23. Then Kr$na the great lord, of great valour, of the 



RuJrasathhitd 1049 

form of Vi$ 9 U, the destroyer of demons, became angry and 
roared in the course of the battle. 

24. Thinking upon Siva he hit Bana and his terrible 
army simultaneously with the good arrows discharged with 
force from his 'bow. 

25. Vi$nu split his bow and umbrella as well as 
other things. Without being excited he killed and felled his 
horses by means of his arrows. 

26. Bana the great hero roared furiously. He hit 
Krs^ia with his iron club and Kr$na fell on the ground. 

27. O celestial sage, Krsna got up immediately and 
fought with Bana, the great devotee of Siva. It was to 
keep up the worldly sport that he fought thus. 

28. A great battle went on for a long time between 
Krsna who was Visnu or Siva himself and that strong 
Asura who was the most excellent devotee of Siva. 

29. O great sage, the powerful Krsna fought for a 
long time with Bana. Deriving strength at the instance of 
Siva he became furious. 

30. At the bidding of Siva, lord Krsna, the destroyer 
of heroic enemies, chopped off several arms :>f Bana by 
means of Sudar£ana. 

31. Only his four beautiful arms were left. Thanks 
to the grace of Siva, the demon too was freed from pain. 

32. Forgetting himself, Krsna who assumed a great 
prowess, attempted to cut off the head of Bana. Then Siva 
got up. 

Siva said : — 

33. O lord, son of Devaki, O Visrm, what was 
ordained by me formerly has been accomplished by you who 
always follow my dictates. 

34. Do not cut off the head of Bana. Withdraw 
your weapon Sudarfona. At my bidding the disous shall 
always be rendered ineffective with regard to my people. 

35. O Visnu, this unfailing discus and victory in 
battle were formerly bestowed on you by me. Hence you 
withdraw from the battleground. 

36. O lord of Lak$mi, you did not hurl this discus at 



Dadhica, 331 Ravana, Taraka, Tripuras and others without 
my consent. 

37. You are a great Yogin, the supreme soul and the 
exciter of men. Hence you ponder over this yourself. You are 
cn g a g e d in the welfare of all living beings. 

38. I have granted him a boon that he will not fear 
death. These words of mine shall remain true for ever. 
I am pleased with you. 

39. O Visnu, sometime back he became haughty 
enough to say “Give me battle** while he scratched his arms 
and forgot his goal. 

40. Then I cursed him — “Ere long, the person will 
arrive and cut off your arms. You shall be cured of your 
haughtiness”. 

41. ( Turning to Bdna) At my bidding Visnu has cut 
off your arms. Now withdraw from the battlefield. Go 
back to your abode along with the married couple. 

Sanatkum&ra said : — 

42. Saying this and uniting them in friendship, lord Siva 
returned to his abode along with his sons and Ganas. 

43. On hearing the words of Siva, Kr$na withdrew 
Sudarsana. With his body unwounded, the victorious Kr$na 
entered into the harem. 

44. He consoled Aniruddha and his wife. He accep- 
ted the jewels given in plenty by Bana. 

45. They took Osa’s friend Citralekha the great 
YoginT also with them. Kr§na who accomplished his task 
at the bidding of Siva was immensely pleased. 

46. After mentally bowing to Siva, Visnu took leave 
of Bana and returned to his city along with his followers. 

47. On the way he conquered Varuna who had 
opposed him in various ways. After reaching Dvaraka he 
celebrated the event jubilantly. 

48. After reaching Dvaraka he dismissed Garucja. 
Seeing his friends and joking with them he roamed about 
as he pleased. 

331. It refers to the incident of the battle between V19911 and 
Dadhfca. Cp. £P. RS II Ch 39. 



RudrasaMntd 


1051 


CHAPTER FIFTYSK 

(Bdnasura attains the position of Siva's Gana) 
jVdrada said : — 

1. O great sage, when Kysna left for Dvaraka along 
with Aniruddha and his wife, what did Bana do? Please 
narrate the same to me. 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

2. When Kr$na left for Dvaraka with Aniruddha and 
his wife, Bana was distressed thinking on his previous ignorance. 

3. Then Nandin, a gana of Siva, spoke to the grief- 
stricken Daitya Bana whose limbs were smeared with blood 
and who repented repeatedly. 

Nandiivara said : — 

4. O Bana, devotee of Siva, do not repent. Siva is 
compassionate towards his devotees. Hence he is called 
Bhaktavatsala (i.e. favourably disposed to the devotees). 

5. O foremost among devotees, whatever has happened, 
has happened at his will. Consider this and remember Siva 
again and again, 

6. Fixing your mind in the primordial being, Siva 
who is compassionate towards the devotees, you celebrate his 
festival again and again. 

7. At the suggestion of Nandin, Bana who had been 
like Rahu unto his enemies immediately went to Siva’s 
temple with lofty mind and great courage. 

8. After going there he bowed to the lord and 
lamented in great agitation. Bana who had been divested of 
his haughtiness became overwhelmed with love and devotion. 

9-10. He eulogised him with various hymns. He bowed 
to the lord in the course of his worship. With proper steps 
and gestures of hands he performed the Tarujava dance 
assuming various poses and postures — Pratyalidha, Sthanaka, 
Ali«Jha 33a being the chief among them. 

332. Alisha is a kind of pose in dance, with the right foot advanced 
anu the left retracted. The opposite of this is the pose of PratySlf^ha in 
which the left foot is advanced and the right is drawn back. Sthfinaka is a 
particular attitude of the body in dance 



1052 


Sioafmrd^a 

11-14. He produced thousands of gestures through his 
mouth. He knit and bent his brows and shook his head 
in various ways. He kept thousands of attendants in rows. 
He showed various gestures gradually. Much of his blood 
was shed on the ground. By all these means be propitiated 
the trident-bearing moon-crested lord. Banasura the great 
devotee of Siva forgot himself and his activities in the 
course of his worship. Siva who is fond of dance and 
music and is favourably disposed to his devotees spoke to 
Bana. 

Siva said : — 

15. "Dear Sana, son of Bali, I am delighted by your 
dance. O lord of Daityas, you choose the boon whatever 
be in your mind*’. 

Sanatkumdra said: — 

16-20. O sage, on hearing the words of Siva, Bana 
the lord of Daityas asked for the healing of wounds, the 
skill in duels, everlasting position of Ganahood, the kingship 
for U?a’s son at the city of Sonita, absence of enmity with 
the gods and Visnu in particular, absence of rebirth as a 
Daitya defiled by the attributes Rajas and Tamas, special 
devotion to Siva without any aberration for ever, friendship 
with the devotees of Siva and kindness to all living beings. 
After requesting for these boons, the son of Bali, the great 
Asura joined his palms in reverence and eulogised Siva with 
tears of love in his eyes. 

Bdna said : — 

21. O great lord, lord of the gods, favourably dis- 
posed to those who seek refuge in you, O great lord, I bow 
to you, O kinsman of the distressed, O storehouse of 
mercy. 

22. O Siva, O ocean of sympathy, you have taken pity 
on me. O lord, being delighted with me you have removed 
my arrogance. 

23. You are Brahman, the great soul, the all-pervad- 
ing lord. Your body is the whole cosmos. You are Ugra, 
Ha, Viraf, the great, accompanied by everything. 



Rudrasarhhitd 


1053 


24. O lord, your navel is the sky, mouth is the fire, 
semen is the water, ear the quarters, head the heaven, foot 
the earth and mind the moon. 

25. Your eye is the sun, the stomach the ocean, the 
arm Indra, and the intellect Brahmi. Your excretion is 
Prajapati and your heart is Dharma. 

26. O lord, your hairs are the herbs and plants, your 
tresses the clouds, your eyes the three attributes. You are 
the Purusa, the soul of all. 

27. They call Brahmana your mouth, Ksatriya your 
arms, Vaifya your thighs and Sudra your feet.* 38 

28. O lord Siva, you alone deserve to be adored by all 
living beings. A person worshipping you certainly derives 
liberation. 

29. O lord, the man who forsakes you, the favou- 
rite Atman, for the adverse objects of sense, swallows poison 
forsaking nectar. 

30. Visnu, Brahma, the gods and the sages of pure 
mind, in every respect resort to you, the favourite lord. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

31. After saying this, the Asura Bana, son of Bali 
stopped with all the limbs blooming with love and bowed 
to lord Siva. 

32. On hearing the request of his devotee Bana, lord 
Siva said “You will get everything*’ and vanished there 
itself. 

33. Then through the grace of Siva, Bana attained the 
immortality of the eternal time and becoming one of the 
attendants of Siva he rejoiced much. 

34. Thus I have narrated by means of words pleasing 
to the ears, the excellent story of the trident-bearing lord 
Siva, who is the preceptor of the preceptors and who sports 
about always in the middle of the worlds. His story includes 
his activities in relation to Bana. 


333- It refers to the fourfold classification of ancient Indian society 
as mentioned in the PurusasOkta of the Rgveda. 



CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN 

[Gajasura is slain) 


SanatkumSra said : — 

1. O Vyasa, listen with great devotion to the story 
of moon-crested lord, how he killed Gajasura, the lord of 
D&navas, by means of his trident. 

2. Formerly when the Asura Mahisa 384 was killed in 
battle by the goddess for the welfare of the gods, they be- 
came very happy. 

3-4. O great sage, his son the great hero Gajasura 
could not forget the slaying of his father by the goddess at 
the request of the gods and hence remembered that enmity. 
He therefore went to the forest for undertaking penance. 
Interestingly he performed penance meditating on Brahma. 

5. “I shall not be killed by men or women over- 
whelmed by lust.” Thinking thus in his mind he directed his 
attention to austerities. 

6. He performed a severe penance in a valley on the 
Himalaya mountain. He kept his arms lifted. He fixed his 
eyes at the sky. He stood on the ground on the two big toes. 

7. With plenty of matted tresses of hair the benevolent 
Gajasura, the son of Mahisa shone with his refulgence like 
the sun at the time of dissolution. 

8. The fire in the form of penance originating from 
his head filled with smoke spread all round to the worlds 
aboye, below and on the sides scorching them. 

9. The rivers and the seas were agitated by the fire 
originating from his head. The stars fell along with the 
planets. The ten quarters blazed. 

10. The gods scorched by the fire left heaven and 
went to Brahma’s world along with Indra and submitted to 
him. The earth quaked. 

The gods said : — 

11. O Brahma, we are agitated on being scorched by 

334. The Asura Mahisa, father of Gaja, was slain in battle by 
Galilei He should be ditlinguished from the Asura Mahisa who was 
killed by k&rttikeya. 



Rudtasmhhitd 1055 

the penance of Gajasura. We are unable to stay in heaven. 
Hence we seek refuge in you. 

12. Make it subside and find out a merciful remedy 
to enliven others. Otherwise the worlds will perish. Truth. 
It is the truth that we speak. 

13. Thus informed by the gods including Indra and 
others the selfborn deity Brahma went to the hermitage 
of the excellent Daitya along with Bhrgu, 835 Daksa 33t and 
others. 

14. On seeing him scorching the heaven and the worlds 
by his penance, the surprised creator laughed and said. 

Brahmd said : — 

15. “O lord of Daityas, stand up, stand up. O son 
of Mahi?a, you have achieved perfection in penance. O dear 
one, I, the granter of boons, have come. Choose your boon 
as you wish.” 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

16. Getting up in a hurry, the son of Mahisa, the 
lord of Daityas glanced at the lord and praised him lovingly 
with choking words. 

Gajasura said : — 

17-18. O lord, O lord of the gods, if you are going 
to grant me a boon let me be immune from death by men or 
women overwhelmed by lust. Let me be very powerful, 
valorous and invincible to the gods, the guardians of the 
worlds 387 and others for ever. Let me enjoy all prosperities. 

33 V Bhrgu was a Prajapati and a great sage who pounded the race 
of the Bhrgus in which Jamadagni and ParasurAma were born According 
to the present Purina lie was the son of Brahma, born out of his heart. 
(Sec RS I 164). 

336. Daksa, son of BrahmA, born out of his breath (Ibid 1.16.5) 
was a Prajapati. His daughter Saii was married to Sivar. For details see 
Ibid. II section. 

337. LokapAlas are the regents of the four cardinal and four inter- 
mediate points of the world. They aie : 

&r: f?stt 11 



Stmatkum&ra said : — 

19. Thus requested by the Danava, Brahma 8 * 8 who 
was delighted by his penance granted him the rare boon. 

20. Securing the boons thus, the Daitya Gajasura the 
son of Mahisa, returned to his abode with a happy mind. 

21-22. The great Asura conquered all the quarters, the 
three worlds, the gods, Asuras, human beings, kings, Gandh- 
arvas, Garuda, serpents and others. He made them subser- 
vient to him. He became the conqueror of the universe. He 
usurped the places of the guardians of the worlds and took 
away their glory. 

23. He occupied heaven 838 possessing the glory of the 
celestial garden and the palace of lord Indra built by 
ViSvakarman. 340 

24. The powerful Daitya of a lofty mind who reigned 
as the sole ruler after conquering all the worlds sported in 
the palace of lord Indra. The gods and others who were 
overwhelmed by his power worshipped the pair of his feet. 
He exercised a stern and fierce authority. 

25. Thus conquering the quarters and reigning as the 
supreme overlord he enjoyed pleasures to the maximum 
extent. Since he had not conquered his senses he was never 
satiated in his enjoyment of pleasures. 

26. He was haughty, puffed up with prosperity. He 
slighted and transgressed the injunctions of the sacred scri- 
ptures. After the lapse of some time he became evil- 
minded. 

27. The Danava, the suppressor of the gods, the son 
of Mahi$asura harassed the excellent brahmins and the sages 
on the earth very much. 

28. The wicked Daitya harassed the gods, the human 
beings, and all the Pramathas. He tortured all righteous 
people particularly recollecting the previous enmity. 

29. O dear, once this Danava of great strength, 

338. Brahm& assumed the name Satadhrti after completing a hundred 
sacrifices. This name he shares with Indra, the performer of a hundred 
horse-sacrifices. 

339* See Note 298 P. 992. 

340. Visvakarman was the founder of the science of architecture 
and mechanics among the gods. He is credited with the construction of 
the royal palace for lord Indra. 



Rudrasaxhhitd 


1057 


Gajasura came to the capital city of Siva. 

30. O sage, when the lord of Asuras came there, 
there was a great tumult among the residents of Anandavana, 
They shouted “Protect, Protect.” 

31-32. When this son of Mahisasura haughty of his 
valour entered the city suppressing the Pramathas, Indra 
and other gods previously vanquished by him sought refuge 
in Siva. After bowing to him they eulogised him with a 
great respect. 

33. They mentioned to him the arrival of the Danava 
at Ka£i, the height of distress of the people there, especially 
of the rulers. 

The gods said : — 

34. O great gods, O lord of gods, the Asura has gone 
to your city. He is inflicting pain on your people. O 
storehouse of benignity, please slay him. 

35. Wherever he sets foot on the earth he shakes the 
ground there by his great weight. 

36. By his great velocity trees fall down with roots 
and branches. Hit by his brawny arms, big mountains are 
reduced to powder. 

37. The clouds leave the sky hit by his head. Still 
they do not lose their blueness due to the contact with his 
hair. 

38. When he breathes out, the mighty oceans surge 
up with their billows. Even the rivers are filled with waves 
as though with whales. 

39. His height is nine thousand Yojanas. The girth 
of this Asura who wields Maya is also of that proportion. 

40. The tawny colour and the tremulousness of his 
eyes is not borne' even by the lightning. Thus he has come 
there all of a sudden. 

41. Whichever quarter he approaches, the^ Danava is 
unbearably oppressive. “I am not to be killed by men or 
women overwhelmed by lust” he shouts. 

42. O lord of the gods, we have thus mentioned 
humbly the activities of that Danava. Please protect your 
devotees, O lord, desirous of protecting Ka£i. 



SivapvrS$a 


1058 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

43. Thus requested by the gods, Siva desirous of pro- 
tecting the devotees came there quickly with the desire of 
slaying him. 

44. On seeing that Siva, favourably disposed to his 
devotees, had come roaring with the trident in his hand, 
Gajasura too roared. 

45. A wonderfully terrible and great battle was fought 
between them roaring heroically and hitting with various 
weapons and missiles. 

46. The brilliant Gajasura of great strength and val- 
our pierced Siva, the slayer of the Danavas, with sharp 
arrows. 

47. O sage, Siva who assumed a terrible body, split 
with his terrible arrows, the arrows of the Daitya to small 
pieces like gingelly seeds, even before they reached him. 

48. Then the infuriated Gajasura rushed at the lord 
Siva roaring loudly with a sword in hand “You are slain 
now by me.” 

49. Then the lord armed with the trident, realising 
that the leading Daitya who was rushing at him could not be 
killed by anything else or any one else, hit him with his 
trident. 

50. When the trident pierced through his body, the 
Daitya Gajasura thought that he was raised up like an um- 
brella. He then sang the glory of Siva. 

Gajasura said : — 

51. O great lord, lord of the gods, I am in every 
respect your devotee. O trident-bearing lord, I know you as 
the lord of heaven and destroyer of Kama. 

52. O enemy of Andhaka, O great lord, O slayer 
of Tripuras, O omnipresent, my death at your hands is con- 
ducive to my great glory. 

53. I desire to submit something. O merciful lord, 
please listen to it. O conqueror of death, I am speaking 
the truth, not a lie. Please ponder. 

54. You are the only person deserving the worship of 
the worlds. You stand high above the universe. Everyone 



Rudrasamhitd 


1059 


should consider a death like this conducive to glory in due 
course. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

55. On hearing his words, lord Siva, the storehouse 
of mercy, laughed and replied to Gajasura, the son of 
Mahisa. 

Lord Siva said : — 

56. O Gajasura, O excellent Danava, O depository of 
great valour, O well-intentioned one, I am delighted. Choose 
the boon favourable to you. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

57. On hearing the words of lord Siva, the gran ter 
of boons, the lord of Danavas, the delighted Gajasura 
replied. 

Gajasura said: — 

58. O nude one, if you are delighted, O lord Siva, 
wear this hide of mine sanctified by the fire of your trident. 

59. It is of your size, it is gentle to the touch, it has 
been kept as a stake in the battlefield, it is worth seeing, it 
is of divine nature and it is always pleasing. 

60. Let it ever emit an agreeable smell, let it be 
soft for ever, let it be ever free from dirt, let it be your best 
ornament always. 

61. O lord, even after being scorched by the flames of 
the fire of penance for a long time, this hide was not burnt, 
hence it is the storehouse of holy fragrance. 

62. O nude one, if my hide is not meritorious how did 
it get into contact with your limbs in the battlefield? 

63. O Siva, if you are satisfied, please grant me 
another boon. Beginning from today let your name be 
Krttivasas (one clad in elephant-hide). 

Sanatkumara said : — 

64. On hearing his words, Siva who is favourably dis- 
posed to his devotees, was pleased and replied to Gajasura, 
the son of Mahisa “Let it be so”. 



65. Lord Siva, the favourite of his devotees, be- 
coming delighted spoke again to the Danava Gajasura whose 
mind had been purified by devotion. 

Lotd Siva said:— 

66. “In this holy place, a means to the achievement 
of liberation, let your meritorious body become phallic image 
yielding liberation to all. 

67. It will be the foremost of all phallic images yield- 
ing salvation, destroying great sins and named “Krttivase- 
Svara”. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

68. After saying this Siva, the lord of the gods, accep- 
ted the hide of Gajasura and wore it. 

69. O great sage, there was a great jubilation on that 
day. All the people staying at Kasi and the Pramathas 
were delighted. 

70. Visnu, Brahma and other gods were delighted in 
their minds. With palms joined in reverence they bowed to 
lord Siva and eulogised him. 

71. When Gajasura the lord of the Danavas, and 
the son of Mahisa was killed, the gods returned to their 
original place and the universe attained normalcy. 

72. Thus I have narrated to you the story of Siva 
which shows his affection to his devotees, which is conducive 
to the attainment of heaven, fame and longevity and which 
increases wealth and food-grains. 

73. He who listens to this with devotion, or narrates 
this observing pure rites, enjoys great happiness and attains 
salvation, the greatest bliss hereafter. 



RudrasathhM 


1061 


CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT 

( Dundubhi Nirhrada is slain) 

Sanatkum&ra said : — 

1. O Vyasa, listen. I shall narrate the story of the 
moon-crested lord Siva how he slew the Daitya Dundubhi- 
nirhrada. 

2. When the Daitya Hiranyaksa, son of Diti, 341 of great 
strength was killed by Visnu, Diti remained griefstricken for 
a long time. 

3. The wicked Daitya named Dundubhinirhrada, the 
uncle of Prahlada, the oppressor of the gods, consoled the 
dejected mother with the words. 

4. After consoling Diti, the king of Daityas, an expert 
in using Maya began to think of the ways and means of 
conquering the gods easily. 

5. “The great Asura Hiranyaksa along with his brother 
has been killed through Visnu by the gods, the enemies of 
Daityas, employing deceitful means. 

6. What is the strength of the gods ? What is their 
diet ? What is their support ? How can the gods be easily 
vanquished by me?” Thinking like this he tried to find out 
the ways and means. 

7. Thinking deeply in diverse ways the Daitya came 
to the conclusion that the brahmanas were the cause of the 
trouble. 842 

8. The Daitya Dundubhinirhrada, the most wicked 
enemy of the gods, ran after the brahmins to kill them. 

9. Since the gods maintain themselves on sacrifices, 
sacrifices are born of the Vedas and the Vedas are the cus- 
tody of the brahmanas, so the brahmanas constitute the 
strength of the gods. 

<14 1. Diti was the daughter of Dak$a and wife of Kasyapa. Her 
sons obtained the designation 4 Daitya’ after her name. 

343. The anti-Br&hmana activities of the Daityas mentioned here 
and elsewhere in the Pur&nas were due to the fact that the Br&hmanas 
performed sacrifices wherein offerings were made to the gods. But this 
tradition of Br&hraana— Daitya animosity is ol late origin. Originally 
Daityas were devoted to Brahmapas. The Bhargava* were purohitas to 
Hiranyakasipu. Vasi$]ha was his hotf. Vrtra and Namuci, the tuo famous 
D&navas were Br&hmapas themselves. For details see AIHT. Ch XXVI. 



1062 


10. Certainly the gods including Indra are supported 
by the brahmanas. The gods gain their strength from the 
brahmanas. There is no doubt about this. 

11. If the brahmanas are destroyed the Vedas will 
perish. If they are destroyed the gods will also perish. 

12-13. If the sacrifices are destroyed, the gods will lose 
their food. They will grow weaker and be easily conquered. 
When the gods are conquered I shall become the sole hono- 
urable lord of the three worlds. I shall then confiscate the 
everlasting riches of the gods. 

14. I shall enjoy happiness in my kingdom freed 
of thorns.” After thinking like this the wicked Daitya thought 
again. 

15. “ Where are these brahmanas in plenty — the brah- 
manas strengthened by the splendour of the Brahman, well 
versed in the study of the Vedas and possessing the strength 
of penance ? 

16. It is Varanasi indeed that is the place of many 
brahmanas. I shall finish that first and then go to other holy 
centres. 

17. In holy centres or hermitages wherever these brah- 
manas live they shall be devoured by me.” 

18. After thinking thus in accordance with the nature 
of his race, Dundubhinirhrada went to KasI and he, the wicked 
wielder of Mayas, killed the brahmanas. 

19. When the excellent brahmanas went to the forest 
to fetch sacrificial twigs and the Darbha grass, the wicked 
Danava used to eat them there. 

20. After that he used to lie hidden so that nobody 
could detect him. In the forest he used to roam about like 
a forest-dweller and in the waters he used to take the 
form of an aquatic animal. 

21-22. He was invisible in form. He wielded the art 
of deception. He could not be seen even by the gods. Dur- 
ing the day he stood in the midst of sages engaged in medi- 
tation but observing the ingress and egress of persons in the 
hut. But at night he took the form of a tiger and ate many 
of them. 

23. He used to eat unhesitatingly never leaving even 



Ruirasmhhitd 1063 

a bone behind. Thus many brahman as were annihilated by 
him in this way. 

24. Once on the Sivaratri 848 day a certain devotee 
performed the worship of Siva, the lord of the gods and was 
engaged in meditation in his own hut. 

25. The lord of Daityas Dundubhinirhrada, proud of 
his strength, assumed the form of a tiger and wanted to seize 
him. 

26. As the devotee was in meditation with a mind 
concentrated on Siva and as he had fixed the Astramantra, 
the Daitya could not attack him. 

27. Siva, the omnipresent lord, knew his evil intention 
and decided to slay the Daitya. 

28. While the Daitya in the form of the tiger was 
about to snatch the devotee, Siva appeared before him. The 
three-eyed lord Siva is very keen in intellect in saving the 
devotees, nay in protecting the universe. 

29. On seeing Siva coming out of the phallic image 
worshipped by the devotee, the Daitya m the form of a 
tiger increased in size like a big mountain. 

30. The Danava glanced with a contemptuous look at 
Siva but the lord caught him and pressed him under his 
armpit. 

31. The five-faced lord favourably disposd to his 
devotees hit the tiger on its head with his fist harder than 
thunderbolt. 

32. By the blow of the fist and the pressure at the 
armpit the tiger groaned aloud in great distress filling heaven 
and earth with the sound and died. 

33. Agitated in their minds by the loud sound the 
ascetics came there in the night itself following the track of 
the sound. 

34. On seeing the lord there with the lord of the beasts 
in his armpit they bowed to him. They eulogized him with 
the words of “Victory, Victory.” 

343. Sivar&tri or Siva-caturdasI is the fourteenth of the dark half 
of Magha (January-February) on which a rigorous fast is observed during 
the day and night. 



1064 


Sivapur&na 


The brahmins said : — 

35. Wc are saved, O, we are saved from this terrible 
obstacle. O lord, please bless us. O preceptor of the uni- 
verse stay here alone. 

36. O great lord, in this self-same form in the name of 
the lord of the tiger offer protection. Let this place remain 
sacred always. 

37. Save us the dwellers in this holy centre from other 
mishaps too. O lord of Parvatl, leaving the wicked ones 
offer fearlessness to your devotees. 

Sanatkumara said : — 

38. On hearing the words of the devotees, the moon- 
crested lord who is favourably disposed to the devotees said 
affirmatively and told the devotees again. 

Lord Siva said : — 

39. “If any one sees me here in this form with faith, I 
will undoubtedly remove his torments and mishaps. 

40. After hearing this story of mine and after remem- 
bering my phallic image in the heart if a man enters the 
battlefield he will certainly win. 

41. In the meantime the gods came there along with 
Indra shouting slogans of victory jubilantly.” 

42. After bowing to Siva with love, the gods joined their 
palms in reverence, drooped their shoulders and eulogised lord 
Siva who is favourably disposed to his devotees. 

The gods said : — 

43. O lord Siva, lord of the gods, remover of the dis- 
tress of your devotees, be victorious. We the gods have been 
saved by killing this demon. 

44. O fond of devotees, you shall protect them always. 
O lord of the gods, wicked men shall be slain by you, O 
lord of all. 

45. On hearing these words of the gods, lord Siva 
became delighted. After saying ‘yes' he merged into the 
phallic image. 

46. The gods, thus surprised returned to their respec- 



Rudrasarhhitd 1065 

tive abodes and rejoiced. The brahmins too in great delight 
returned the way they came. 

47-48. He who reads this sacred narrative about the 
origin of the lord of the tiger, hears, narrates or teaches this 
shall obtain all desires. After death he will attain salvation 
becoming free of all miseries. 

49. This narrative is incomparable as it contains the 
nectar-like words of the divine sports of Siva. It is condu- 
cive to the attainment of heaven, fame and longevity. It 
increases sons and grandsons. 

50* It yields great devotion and bliss. It is auspicious 
and increases the pleasure of Siva. It yields supreme know 
ledge. It is beautiful and removes all aberrations. 


CHAPTER FIFTYNINE 

( Vidala and Utpala are slain ) 

Sanatkumdra said : — 

1 . O Vyasa, listen with pleasure to the story of the 
great lord how he killed through his beloved a Daitya 
whom he indicated by a sign. 

2. Formerly there were two great Daityas Vidala 
and Utpala. They were great heroes, puffed up by the boon 
from Brahma that they could not be slain by a man. 

3. O Brahmin, the gods had been defeated in the 
battle by the two Daityas who by the strength of their arms 
considered the people of the three worlds as insignificant as 
the blade of grass. 

4. Defeated by them, the gods sought refuge in Brahma. 
After bowing to him duly they submitted to him respectfully. 

5-6. On hearing their account Brahma said. “They will 
surely be slain by the goddess. Be bold. Remember Siva and 
Parvati respectfully. Siva is auspicious, benevolent favourably 
disposed to his devotees. The supreme god will bring about 
welfare ere long.” 



1066 


Sanatkumdra said : — 

7. After saying this, Brahma kept quiet remembering 
Siva. The gods too returned to their respective abodes 
rejoicingly. 

8. Then at the behest of Siva, the celestial sage Narada 
went to the abode of the Daityas and sang the glory of the 
beauty of Parvati. 

9. On hearing his words the two Daityas were delud- 
ed by deception. Afflicted by the god of lust they desired 
to abduct the goddess. 

10. They thought to themselves where and when they 
would obtain Parvati at the rise of their good fortune. 

11-12. Once Siva was engaged in sports. Parvat! too 
was playing with a ball along with her friends in the pre- 
sence of Siva. 

13. At times she looked up. At times she displayed 
the lightness of limbs. At times when she took deep breaths, 
bees hovered round her enticed by the fragrance. At times 
the bees made her eyes agitated. 

14. Flowers from her tresses fell on the gronnd in 
front of her. Her cheeks were perspiring. Drops of sweat 
dripping from the paintings on her cheek brightened up. 

15. The lustre of her body spread all round through 
the partings of her gown. By exerting her too much in 
beating the ball her Ted hand became redder than the red 
lotus. 

16-17. When the ball bounced, her eyes too followed 
it making the brows to dance thereby. As the goddess 
mother of the universe was playing, she was seen by the 
Daityas who were going by the aerial path. They were, as 
it were, held in the lap by the imminent death. 

18. They were the Daityas Vidala and Uptala who 
had become haughty by the boon of Brahma and by the 
might of their arms thought the people of the three worlds 
as insignificant as the blades of grass. 344 

19. Desirous of abducting the goddess as they were 
tormented by the god of lust, they descended from the sky 
quickly after adapting the Sambari magic skill. 

344. This verse is the repetition of fragments of verses 2 and 3 of 
this chapter. 



Rudrasarhhitd 1067 

20. The two wicked ones of fickle mind approached 
Parvati in the guise of Siva’s attendants. 

21. By the excessive tremulousness of their eyes they 
were in a trice recognized by Siva, the chastiser of and con- 
temptuous towards the wicked. 

22. The lord shot a significant glance at Parvati the 
destroyer of miseries denoting that they were Dai tyas and not 
Ganas. They could assume any form. 

23. O dear, she understood the sign of the eyes of her 
lord Siva, the great lord who indulges in fancies. 

24. Realising the significant glance, the goddess, the 
sharer of half the body of Siva 346 hit both of them simul- 
taneously with the ball. 

25. The powerful wicked Daityas hit by the ball 
whirled and whirled and fell on the ground. 

26-27. After making the two Daityas fall like two ripe 
fruits from the palmyra tree when shaken by the wind, or 
like the two peaks of a great mountain struck by the thun- 
derbolt, as they had attempted to do an evil action, the 
ball changed itself into the phallic image. 

28. That phallic image came to be known as 
Kandukesvara. It is very near Jye$the£vara. It removes all 
the wicked things. 

29. At the same time, knowing the manifestation of 
Siva, Visnu. Brahma, other gods and the sages came there. 

30. Then all the gods received boons from Siva and 
at his bidding returned to their respective abodes delightedly. 
So were the residents of KaSI blessed with the boons. 

31. On seeing Siva with Parvati they bowed to him 
with palms joined in reverence and eulogised him with devo- 
tion and pleasing words. 

32. O Vyasa, Siva and Parvati too, went delightedly 
to their abode. The lord favourably disposed to his devotees, 
an expert in divine sports, had already had his game. 

33. The Kandukesvara phallic image at Ka$i destroys 
the wicked, yields worldly pleasures and salvation. Upon the 
good it bestows desires always. 

34fj. In the Ardhan&risvara form of Siva, Parvati occupies one half 
and Siva the other half. The form suggests the divine origin of men and 
women. 



34. Where is the cause of fear to him who hears this 
incomparable narrative with joy, narrates or reads it? 

35. He enjoys pleasures of various kinds and of excellent 
nature. Hereafter he attains the divine goal inaccessible even 
to the gods. 

36. 0 dear, I have thus narrated to you the wonderful 
story of Siva and Parvati. It indicates their favouritism to 
the devotees. It bestows welfare to the good. 

Brahma said:— 

37. After narrating the story of the moon-crested lord, 
my excellent son, Sanatkumara took leave of Vyasa. Duly 
honoured by him he then went to Ka$I by the aerial path. 

38. Thus the section called “Yuddha” has been nar- 
rated to you, 0 excellent sage. In the Compendium called 
Rudra, it bestows all cherished desires. 

39. Thus the whole of Rudrasamhita has been explain- 
ed by me. It is pleasing to Siva always. It yields enjoyment 
here and liberation hereafter. 

40. The man who reads this Samhita that wards off 
harassment from enemies shall attain all desires. Thereafter 
he shall attain liberation. 

Ssta said:— 

41. Thus Brahma’s son Narada heard from his father 
the great glory of Siva. Satanama too was satisfied and be- 
came a follower of Siva. 

42. I have completely narrated the conversation bet- 
ween Brahma and Narada. Siva is the most important of 
all deities. What else do you wish to hear about him? 




