




THE 

^IVAPURANA 


PART III 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE UMITED • DELHI 



First Edition: Delhi, 19^0 

Rffnint: Delhi, 1974. 1978, 1982, 1988, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2002 


Also available at: 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026 
41 UA Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
120 Royapciuih High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
236, 9tli Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011 
Saiias Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


Mntedin India 

BYJAINENDRA PRAKASHJAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAIN'A, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028 
AND PUBUSHED BY NARENQRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTIIAl B,\NARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNQALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 



CONTENTS 


$atarudrasamhitA 


1. 

Five incarnations of Siva 

• • 

Pages 

1069 

2. 

Eight forms of Siva 

• • 

1074 

3. 

Half'female incarnation of Siva 

• • 

1075 

4. 

Story of Rfabha 

• • 

1078 

5. 

Nineteen incarnations of Siva 

• • 

1081 

6. 

Incarnation of Nandiivara 

• • « 

1086 

7. 

Coronation and the nuptials of NandiiSvara 

• • 

1092 

8 . 

Incarnation ofBhairava 

• • 

1097 

9. 

Sports of Bhairava 

# • 

1103 

10. 

Narrative of Man-lion 

• • 

1110 

11. 

Incarnation of Sarabha 

• • 

1113 

12. 

’* *’ (continued) 

• • 

1119 

13. 

” Grhapati 

• • 

1123 

14. 

** ” (continued) 

0 0 

1129 

15. 

” ** (continued) 

m m 

1138 

16. 

” Yak^esvara 

» m 

1139 

17. 

Incarnations of Siva 

0 0 

1143 

18. 

Eleven incarnations of Siva 

0 0 

1145 

19. 

Narrative of Durvasas 

0 0 

1148 

20. 

Incarnation of Hanumat 

0 0 

1154 

21. 

*’ Mahcsa 

0 0 

1157 

22. 

Harassment by Vi 9 nu*s sons and the 
incarnation of Bull 

0 0 

1159 

23. 

Incarnation of Bull (continued) 

0 0 

1163 

24. 

Pippalada 

0 0 

1167 

25. 

’* ” (continued) 

0 0 

1172 

26. 

** Vaiiyanatha 

0 0 

1174 

27. 

’* Dvije^vara 

0 0 

1180 

28. 

** YatinUthahamsa 

0 0 

1186 

29. 

” Kff^adar^ana 

0 0 

1190 

30. 

** Avadhuteiivara 

0 0 

1195 

31. 

** Bhikfuvarya 

0 0 

1199 

32. 

** Sure^vara 

0 0 

1206 





33. 

Incarnation of Brahmacarin 

1212 

34. 

” ” Sunartakanafa 

1218 

35. 

’* Saintly brahmin 

1221 

36. 

” ” A^vatthaman 

1224 

37. 

” ” Kirata 

1228 

38. 

Description of Arjuna’s penance 

1234 

39. 

Slaying of the demon Muka 

1240 

40. 

Kirata-Arjuna dialogue 

1244 

41. 

Incarnation of Kirata (continued) 

1248 

42. 

Twelve Jyotirlihga incarnations 

1253 

KOTIRUDRASAMHITA 


1. 

Glory of Jyotirlingas and their Uplihgas 

1259 

2. 

Greatness of Sivalingas 

1263 

3. 

Penance of Anasuya and Atri 

1265 

4. 

Greatness of Atrisvara 

1268 

5. 

Death of the Brahmin lady and the greatness 



of NandikeiSvara 

1273 

6. 

Brahmin lady attains Heaven 

12/6 

7. 

Greatness of Nandike^vara 

1282 

8. 

** ” Mahabala 

1285 

9. 

Attainment of the supreme goal by an out- 



caste woman 

1287 

10. 

Greatness of Mahabala (continued) 

1290 

11. 

*’ ” Pasupatinatha 

1294 

12. 

Why Siva assumed the phallic form 

1296 

13. 

Origin of Vafuka 

1301 

14. 

” ” Somanatha 

1307 

15. 

” ” the second Mallikarjuna Jyotir¬ 



lihga 

1312 

16. 

Glory of Mahakala 

1314 

17. 

” (continued) 

1319 

18. 

” ** Oihkire^vara 

1325 

19. 

” ” Kedare^vara 

1327 

20. 

** ** Bhime^vara and the havoc 



perpetrated by Bhimasura 

1326 

21. 

Origin of Bhime^vara 

1335 

22. 

Greatness of Vi^veivara, the arrival of Rudra 



at Ka«i 

1340 

23. 

Greatness of Vi^veivara (continued) 

1343 





24, Greatness of Trymbakeivara and 


Gautama 

• a 

1348 

25. Planned arrangement of Gautama 

• • 

1351 

26. Greatness of Tryambake^vara (continued) 

• • 

1356 

27. ” ** ** (continued) 

« • 

1362 

28. ” ” Vaidyanathelvara 

• t 

1366 

29. Havoc created by Rak^asas of DarukSvana 

• • 

1373 

30. Greatness ofNageivara 

• • 

1377 

31. *’ *’ RameSvara 

• • 

1381 

32. Narrative of Sudeha and Sudharma 

• • 

1385 

33. Origin and glory of Ghulmelvara 

• • 

1389 

34. Acquisition of Sudar^ana by Vi^^u 

9 • 

1394 

35. Thousand names of l§iva 

• ■ 

1397 

36. Efficacy of the thousand names of Siva 

• • 

1414 

37. Devotion to lord Siva 

• • 

1417 

38. Greatness of Sivaratri 

• • 

1422 

39. The rite ofSivarStri 

« • 

1429 

40- Glory of Sivarctri 

• • 

1431 

41. Review of salvation 

• • 

1439 

42. Difference between Sagu^a and Nirguna 

• • 

1441 

43. Review of knowledge 

• • 

14 H 

umAsamhita 



1. Kf^na meets Upamanyu 

• • 

1450 

2. Upanianyu’s instruction 

• • 

1456 

3 Greatness of Siva 

• • 

1461 

4. Exhibition of Siva's skill 

• • 

1468 

5. Great sins 

• • 

1471 

6. Different types of sins 

• ■ 

1475 

7. Pathway to hell and the emissaries of Yama 

• • 

1479 

8. Description of hell 

• • 

1484 

9. Pangs of hell 

• • 

1488 

10. Mode of suffering in hell 

• a 

1491 

11. Glory of the gift of food 

• a 

1495 

12. Glory of penance 

• a 

1500 

13. Glory of Puraijas 

a a 

1504 

14. General charitable gifts 

a a 

1508 

15. iDescription of the Nether Worlds 

a a 

1511 

16. Uplift from heU 

a a 

1514 

17. Description of the Jambudvipa 

a a 

1518 




18. Seven continents .. 1522 

19. Worlds and planets .. 1529 

20. A special Mantra ... ^ 1533 

21. Fruits of righteous war ... 1537 

22. Origin & development of the body ... 1541 

23. Infancy & other stages; impurity of the body ... 1545 

24. Women’s nature ... 1551 

25. Ascertainment of the time of death ... 1555 

26. Dodging of Kala ... 1560 

27. Escaping death & realisation of Siva ... 1565 

28. Chayapurusa ... 1568 




sivapurXna 

^ATARUDRASAMHltA 

CHAPTER ONE 

{Th five incarnations of the supreme Brahman) 

I bow to lord Siva of great bliss and of endless divine 
sports, who is great and omnipresent, who is the beloved 
consort of Parvati, who is the progenitor of Karttikeya and 
GaneiSa, and who is the primordial lord of the universe. 

Saunaka said :— 

1. O Suta, O great fortunate disciple of Vyasa, O 
storehouse of wisdom and mercy, please narrate the incarna* 
tions of lord Siv<i by means of which the lord enhanced the 
welfare of the good. 

Suta said '.— 

2. O sage Saunaka, with great devotion I shall narrate 
the incarnations^ of l§iva to you a sage. Listen to it with 
attention and control over the senses. 

3. O sage, formerly, Nandin, a form of iSiva and goal 
of the good, when asked by Sanatkumara, told him the 
narrative with devotion to Siva. 

1. The concept of Rudrasr$ti can be traced as far back as the 
Vcdic Literature. According to Yv i6- 4 one Rudra created many 
Rudras out of his own body. The PurSnas too have recorded the 
tradition of many Rudras evolved out of a single Rudra. The present 
Saiiihita desct ibes one hundred incarnations (T Siva and is therefore 
called fSatarudra. 

But according to (ij.i.i.y), ^atarudriya means a single 
hundred-headed .< 5 iva . This state- 

ment of Sampatha BrAhmaria abiogates the ronrrpt of many Rudras evolved 
out of a single Rudra . But it is not conobotaUd by (he evidenre of the 
present SaihhitA whiih ciiuniaaieii the (ounile&i. fcip s of Rudra. 



Sivapurltifa 


1070 

Pfandiivara said :— 

4. The incarnations of the omnipresent lord Siva are 
countless in the different aeons.* Yet I shall narrate them 
as far as I know. 

5. The nineteenth Kalpa is known as Svetalohita. The 
first incarnation is glorified as the incarnation of Sadyojata. 

6. In that Kalpa, Svetalohita, endowed with a tuft, 
was born as the son of Biahma as he meditated upon the 
supreme Brahman. 

7. On seeing that Being in the form of Brahman and 
realising that to be I^vara, Brahma meditated on him in his 
heart and saluted him with palms joined in reverence. 

8. Knowing that Sadyojata to be Siva, Brahma, the 
lord of the worlds became delighted. With pure intelligence he 
pondered over that great Being again and again. 

9. As he thus meditated, sons white in colour and 
famous for valour, were born to him. They were of great 
wisdom and had the form of the Supreme Brahman. 

10. They were Sunanda, Nandana, ViSvananda and 
Upanandana. They were the disciples of that noble soul. 
By them the Brahman was encircled. 

11. The delighted great lord, the Sadyojata incarna¬ 
tion of Siva, lovingly bestowed on Brahma the perfect wisdom 
and the power of creation. 

12. The next Kalpa, the twentieth one is named and 
glorified as Rakta (red) wherein Brahma assumed a great 
splendour red in hue. 

13. As Brahma desirous of sons meditated, a son ap¬ 
peared in front of him wearing red garments and garlands. 
His eyes were red and his ornaments too were red. 

14. On seeing that noble-souled son, he resorting to 
meditation knew him as the Vamadeva incarnation of Siva 
and so bowed to him with palms joined in reverence. 

15. Your sons wearing red garments were bom of 
him Viz, Virajas, VivSha, Vi^oka and Vi^vabhfivana. 

2 . A kalpa is a day of Brahmk or one thousand yugas equal to a 
period of four hundred thirty two millioti years of mortals. Each kalpa 
is {^resided over by a particular form ofRudra. For instance, the Sveta- 
lohita kalpa has SadyojSta as the presiding deity, Rakta has VSmadeva, 
Pltavisas has Tatpuru|a, Sivfi has Aghora and Visva*rQpa has liina. 



Satarudrasarhhitd 


1071 


16. The delighted ParameSvara, the Vamadeva incar¬ 
nation of Siva bestowed on Brahma lovingly, the power of 
creation and perfect wisdom. 

17. The twenty-first Kalpa is said to be Pitavasas 
wherein Brahma of great achievement became yellow-robed. 

18. As Brahma desirous of sons meditated, a son was 
born unto him mature, of great arms and great splendour 
and wearing yellow garments. 

19-20. On seeing him engrossed in meditation and 
realising that Being as Siva, the Creator bowed to him after 
performing the Japa of Siva-Gayatri, who is the great god¬ 
dess, bowed to by all the worlds. The gpreat god was delighted 
with the mind in contemplation. 

21. Then from his sides sons of divine features issued 
forth. All of them had yellow garments and they were the 
instigators of the Yogic path. 

22. When that Kalpa of yellow colour of the selfborn 
lord elapsed, another Kalpa set in and it was named Siva. 

23. After a thousand divine years had elapsed and the 
entire universe had become one vast ocean,* Brahma desirous 
of creating subjects thought in sorrow. 

24. That lord of great splendour saw a son coming 
into view. He was black in colour, possessed of great strength. 
He was shining in his own splendour. 

25. He was clad in black clothes and a black turban. 
He wore a black sacred thread. He had a black coronet, 
black toilet and unguent articles. 

26. On seeing that noble soul of terrible exploits, 
(named) Aghora (non-terrible), he worshipped him—the lord 
of god, of wonderful black and tawny colour. 

27. Brahma then contemplated on Aghora in the form of 
Brahman. He eulogised that unperishing Being favourably 
disposed towards his devotees, by means of pleasing words. 

28. Then from his sides sprang up four noble-souled 
sons all of whom were black in colour and had black toilet 
and unguent articles. 

29. These brilliant beings in the form of iSiva had the 

3. EkSrnava symbolises the state of the universe during the period of 
dissolution when the divided units are drawn together forming a single 
watery mass. For details sec MP—A Study Pp 9‘io* 



1072 SivapurdJ^ 

clear names Kr^i^a, Krsna^ikha, Kf^nasya and Kr^nakantha- 
dhrk 

30. The noble-souled beings of this nature initiated 
the great and wonderful Yoga called Ghora for the purpose 
of Brahma's creation. 

31. O great sages, then another extremely wonderful 
Kalpa of Brahma, named ViSvarupa began to function. 

32. As Brahma, desirous of sons, meditated on Siva 
mentally, Sarasvati (Goddess of speech) of great sound mani¬ 
fested herself. She was Vi^ pa (Universe-formed). 

33. Isanu of such renowned features, supreme lord of 
crystal-like pure brilliance and bedecked in all ornaments 
manifested himself. 

34. On seeing the unborn lord, an pervading, 

all-bestowing, the all-in-all, of good forms as well as formless, 
Brahma bowed to him. 

35. Lord liana after instructing the path of the good 
to Brahma, created four auspicious sons in collaboration with 
his Energy. 

36. There were born Jatin, Mundin, Sikhandin and 
Ardhamunda. By means of Yoga they imparted good virtue 
and attained the goal of Yoga. 

37. Thus I have succinctly narrated the origin of 
Sadyojata and others, O Sanatkumara, O omniscient one, 
being desirous of the welfare of all the worlds. 

38. Then, O intelligent one, their dealings arc bene¬ 
ficial to the three worlds and everything that is existent in 
the universe. 

39. The five famous forms of Mahela* are thus named 


4- The five forms of Siva viz Isina, Tatpuru^a, Aghora, VSmadeva 
and Sadyojata arc creative. They ara symbolical of the scheme of creation 
evolved out of twentyfive constituents viz. five gross and five subtle 
elements, five organs of action and five of knowledge, besides mine, ego, 
intellect, nature and the individual scnil. Each form stands in relation to 
a particular element or organ as follows. 


Namg 

Isina 

Tatpuru^a 

Aghora 

Vimadeva 

Sadyojata 


Form 

Organ of action 

Organ oj 
knowltdqt 

fubtle 

tlenunls 

gross 

slcmmts 

soul 

cars 

speech 

sound 

ether 

nature 

skin 

hand 

touch 

wind 

intellect 

eye 

feet 

form 

fire 

ego 

tongue 

anus 

taste 

water 

mind 

, hose 

organ of 
generation 

smell 

earth 



Satarudrasarnhitd 


1073 


l^ana, Puru^a, Aghora, V§ma and Brahman. 

40. ISana form of Siva is the first and the principal 
one* It directly occupies and presides over the individual 
soul, the cnjoyer of Prakrti. 

41. Tatpuru?a form of Siva is the second. It occupies 
and presides over every object of enjoyment, the support of 
the attributes. 

42. The third form of Siva is Aghora that stands within, 
occupies and presides over the principle of intelligence with 
all its ramifications for the sake of Dharma. 

43. The fourth form of Siva is Vamadeva who pre¬ 
sides over the ego and is engaged in many incessant activities. 

44. The liana form of Siva is the permanent lord of 
the organ of hearing, speech and the all-pervading sky. 

45. Intelligent and wise persons call Tatpurusa as the 
lord of Tvac (orgin of touch perception), hand, sense of 
touch and the wind element. 

46. Intelligent persons call the form Aghor^, the sup¬ 
port of the physical body, the sense of taste, of colour and 
of fire as well. 

47. Vamadeva form of Siva is remembered as the lord 
of the organ of taste, of the organ of excretion, of taste itself 
and of waters as well. 

48. They know the form of Sadyojata as the lord of 
the organ of smell, of smell itself, of the earth and of the 
generative organ. 

49. These forms of Siva, the source of all glory shall 
be honoured and bowed to strenuously by those who seek glory. 

50. He who reads and listens to the origin of Sadyojata 
and others, enjoys all desires and attains the ultimate goal. 



1074 



CHAPTER TWO 

( The eight forms of ^iva) 


NandiSvara said :— 

1. O dear sage, listen to the great incarnations of 
lord l§iva that carry out all worldly activities and bestow 
happiness on all. 

2. The 'iniverse consists of the eight forms of lord Siva.® 
Pervading that the universe subsists like the pearls in the 
string. 

3. The eight presiding deities are Sarva, Bhava, Rudra, 
Ugra, Bhima, Pa^upati, liana and Mahadeva. They are well 
known. 

4. By these eight forms of Siva, viz. Sarva etc, the 
earth, the waters, the fire, the wind, the sky, the individual 
soul, the sun and the moon are presided over. 

5. The conclusion of all sacred lore is that the form 
of lord Siva consisting of the earth that holds the entire 
universe of the mobile and immobile beings is called Sarva. 

6. The form of the Supreme Soul, consisting of water 
that enlivens the entire world, is called Bhava. 

7. The form of the great lord Siva that holds the outer 
and inner universe and throbs by itself is called Ugra by 
the noble. 

8. That form of lord Siva consisting of the firmament 
that pervades everything and affords space to all is called 
Bhima and it splits and differentiates the group of elements. 

9. That form of Siva shall be known as Paifupati which 
is the support of individual souls, and abiding therein splits 
the bondage that encircles them. 

10. Brightening the entire universe in the form of the 
sun, the form of Siva, IiSana, moves about in the heaven. 

5. The eight forms of lord Siva constitute the five gross material 
elements, the soul, the sun and the moon. Each form stands is relation to 
iu constituents as follows t— 

(i) Sarva-—earth (ii) Bhava—^water (iii) Rudra—fire (iv) Ugra— 
wind (v) Bhima—ether (vi) Paiupati—soul (vii) Xiftna—sun (viii) 
Mabftdeva—moon. 



^atamdrasathhitS 


1075 


11. The moon of ncctarlike rays that strengthens and 
fattens the universe to satiety, is the form of lord iSiva called 
Mahadeva. 

12. The eighth form of Siva, the great soul, is the 
Atman, more pervasive than the other forms. The universe 
is pervaded by that fbroi. 

13. By watering the root of a tree the branches of the 
tree blossom. Similarly the body of the universe develops by 
means of worshipping Siva. 

14. Just as a father is delighted at the pleasures of 
sons, grandsons and others, so also Siva is delighted at the 
pleasures of the universe. 

15. Should the slaughter or captivity of a person be 
carried out, undoubtedly it is an offence committed against 
the eight-formed lord Siva. 

16. Worship Siva who presides over the universe in the 
eightfold forms with all devotion. Worship Rudra, the great 
cause. 

17. O son of Brahma, thus the well known eight forms 
have been explained to you. These forms engaged in helping 
everyone shall be resorted to by those who seek glory. 


CHAPTER THREE 

{The kalf-femaU incarnation of Lord ^iva ) 

Nandiivara said :— 

1. O dear one of great intellect, please listen to the 
description of Siva’s form half-male and half-female,* than 
which there is nothing more excellent and which completes 
the work of the Creator. 

6 . The half-male and half-female (ardhanarisvara) form of Siva 
is symbolical of the process of creation by copulation. The concept is 
comparable to the Siihkhya doctrine of Purusa (cosmic soul) and Prakfti 
(cosmic nature) .whose union produces the different units of the 
universe. 



10/6 


Sivapuribfa 


2. When the subjects created by the Creator did not 
multiply, he was very much distressed and worried. 

3. Then a celestial voice said—'‘Carry on the creation 
produced by couples.*’ On hearing it, Brahma pondered over 
the creation produced by couples in order to carry it out. 

4. Since no generation of women had formerly come 
out of Isana, the lotus-born deity (Brahma) was unable to 
produce the creation by means of copulation. 

5. Brahma then began to perform penance thinking 
“Without the power of 6iva, the subjects will not be born.” 

6. Within his heart he pondered lovingly over lord 
Siva united with the great Sakti called Siva. He then per¬ 
formed great penance. 

7. Ere long Siva became satisfied with the severe penance 
of the self-born lord Brahma. 

8. Then assuming the wish-yielding form of Isana—the 
perfect consciousness, and in the guise of half-male and half- 
female form Siva approached Brahma. 

9. On seeing lord Siva united with great Sakti and 
bowing to him prostrate, Brahma eulogised him with palms 
joined in reverence. 

10. Then the delighted lord Siva, ihc creator of the 
universe, spoke in words majestic in sound like that of rumb¬ 
ling cloud. 

Lord Sioa said :— 

11. “O dear son of great fortune, O grandfather, I 
have understood correctly all that you have cherished in your 
mind. 

12. It is for the increase of the subjects that this 
penance has been performed by you now. 1 am delighted 
by that penance. I shall confer on you what you desire.” 

13. After saying these naturally sweet and magnani¬ 
mous words, lord Siva detached Siva from his body. 

14. On seeing that great Sakti, detached separately 
from Siva, Brahma bowed to her politely and requested her. 

Brahms said - 

15. *‘0 Siy3, I cfcafcil' at first your husband 



^atarudrasarhhitd 


1077 


the lord of gods. I was ordered by l§iva the great soul to 
create the subjects. 

16. O Siva, the gods and others were mentally created 
by me. But they do not multiply themselves. Hence they 
are being created again and again. 

17. Hereafter I wish to make all my subjects flourish 
by making the creation originate from pairs. 

18. The unchanging generation of women has not 
come out of you before. Hence I do not have the power 
to create women. 

19. All Saktis spring up from you. Hence I request 
you the great Sakti, the goddess of all. 

20. O Siva, O mother, O beloved of Siva, for the in¬ 
crease of the mobile and immobile beings of the universe, 
give me the pov/er to create women. Obeisance be to you. 

21. O goddess bestowing boons, I request for another 
boon from you. O mother of the universe, take pity on me 
and grant that too unto me. Obeisance be to you. 

22. O omnipresent mother, be born as the daughter 
of Dak^a, my son, for the increase of the mobile and im¬ 
mobile beings through only I5a.” 

23. Thus implored by the Creator, the Supreme goddess 
consented and bestowed that power upon the Creator. 

24. Hence that goddess Siva, the Sakti of Siva consti¬ 
tuting the universe, created a Sakti equal in lustre unto her 
self, from the middle of her eyebrows. 

25. Siva, the foremost among gods, the ocean of mercy, 
the great I^ana indulging in divine sports saw that Sakti and 
laughingly spoke to her. 

Lord Siva said : — 

26. “O goddess, yon have been propitiated by Brahma, 
through his penance. Lovingly become pleased with him and 
fulfil his desires.” 

27. Receiving that behest of lord Siva with her bent 
head, the goddess became the daughter of Dak^a on the im¬ 
portunity of Brahma. 

28. O sage, after giving the unequalled power to Brahma, 
the goddess Siva entered the body of Siva. And lord Siva 
vanished from the scene. 



1078 


29. Ever since then, the section of women was created 
in the worldj Brahma attained bliss. Creation became copu- 
latory. 

30. Thus O dear, the excellent form of iSiva, half¬ 
male and half-female that bestows auspiciousness upon the good 
has been told. 

31. He who reads or listens to this pious narrative enjoys 
all pleasures and attains to the greatest goal. 


CHAPTER FOUR 

(TTu story of ^abha) 


Jfmdiioara said :— 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumara, the story of !§iva that 
ever confers happiness, was gladly and lovingly narrated by 
Siva to Brahma. 

Lord ^ioa said :— 

2-3. In the seventh Varaha Kalpa, in the Vaivasvata 
Manvantara, the lord Kalpeivara who illuminates all the 
worlds will be bom as your great grandson and son of 
Vaivasvata Manu. O Creator, in that Manvantara all the 
four Yugas will take place. 

4. For the welfare of the worlds and for the benefit of 
the brahmins O Creator, whatever will take place in the Yuga 
called Dvapara, 1 foresee now. 

5-6. In that first Yuga, towards the close of Dvipara 
and the beginning of Kali when Vyfisa is Svayamprabhu I 
%vill be bora as the great sage named Sveta, with a tuft, fix* 
the welfare of Brahmins. 

7. Then O Brahmfi, on the mountain Chfigala^—the 
beautiful summit of Himavat, will be bora my disciples en¬ 
dowed with tuft. 

7. Ghigala, one of file peaks of the Hitnilayai, hat aot been 
identified 10 far. 



iakamdrMsmllhitS t079 

8. Those four disciples Sveta, Sveta4iklia, Sveta^va, and 
Svetalohita will come to my city by the Yoga of meditation. 

9. Realising my unchanging real form, the devotees 
will become devoid of birth, death and old age and will 
meditate on the Supreme Brahman. 

10. O dear Pitamaha, except through meditation I can¬ 
not be seen by men by resorting to charitable gifts and sacred 
rites that bring about the bondage of Karman. 

11. In the second aeon of Dvapara when the patriarch 
Satya becomes Vyasa I will be bom as SutSra and continue to 
live in Kali age. 

12. There too my disciples will be the four Brahmins 
well-versed in the Vedic lore viz. Dimdubhi, Satarupa, Hf^ika 
and Ketuman. 

13. By resorting to the Yoga of meditation all the four 
will go to my city and then realising my unchanging real 
form they will become liberated. 

14. In the third aeon of Dvapara in the age of Bhargava 
Vyksa I will be bom as Damana at the outskirts of the dty. 

15. Foul* sons will be bom of me there viz—^Viiloka, 
Viiesa, Vipkpa and Papana<ana. 

16. O four-faced deity, I will help Vyasa and will 
propagate firmly the path of renunciation in the Kali age. 

17. In the fourth aeon of Dvkpara in the age of Angi- 
ras Vyasa, I shall be bora as Suhotra. 

18. There also four sons will be bom of me all aspiring 
after the Yogic path and noble-souled. O Brahmfi, 1 shall 
mention their names. 

19. They are Sumukha, Durmukha, Durdarbha and 
Duratikrama. O Brahma, I shall then render help to Vyksa 
through the disciples. 

20. In die fiflh aeon of Dvkpara there will be Savitf 
Vyksa. I shall be born as a Yogin of great penance and called 
Kafika. 

21. There also four sons will be born of me, all aspiring 
after the Yogic path and noble-souled. Please hear their 
names firom me. 

22. They are Sanaka, Sanktana, Sanandana and Sanat- 
kumkra freed from sin and egotism. 



lOHO iwaputd^ 

23. There also O Brahma, I, named Kahka, enhancing 
the path of renunciation shall render help to Vyasa in the 
form of Savitr. 

24. When the sixth aeon of Dvapara takes place there 
will be Mrtyu Vyasa who will classify the Vedas. 

25. Then I will be born as Lokaksi, making the path 
of renunciation flourish and helping Vyasa. 

26. Four disciples of steady rites viz. Sudhama, Virajas, 
Sahjaya and Vijaya will be born then. 

27. O Brahma, in the seventh aeon of Satakratu 
Vyasa I shall be born as the lord Jaigi§avya. 

28. Seated on a Kusa mat in a divine spot in the 
middle of a mountain-cavern in Ka^i, I, an expert in the great 
Yoga, will stabilise the path of Yoga. 

29. O Brahma, I shall render help to l^atakratu Vyasa 
I shall lift up the devotees from the fear of worldly existence. 

30. There also in that aeon, four sons will be born of 
me viz. Sarasvata, Yogisa, Meghavaha and Suvahana. 

31. In the eighth aeon there will be Vasisfha Veda- 
vyasa—the excellent sage who will classify thfc Vedas. 

32. There I will be born as Dadhivahana by name. 
As the foremost among those who know Yoga I will render 
help to Vyasa. 

33. Four sons, all Yogins on a par with me, viz— 
Kapila, Asuri, Salvala and Panca^ikha will be born of me. 

34. O Brahma, in the ninth aeon of the same Yuga, 
there will be Sarasvata Vyasa, the excellent sage. 

35. As Vyasa sits in meditation for the flourish of the 
path of renunciation, I will be born as R^bha. 

36. There, Parasara, Garga, Bhargava and GiriSa, all 
good Yogins, will be my four disciples. 

37. O Patriarch, with them I will stabilise the path 
of Yoga. O good sage, I will render help to Vedavyasa. 

38. O Brahma, in that form, 1, the merciful, will cause 
the uplift of many distressed devotees, from the worldly 
existence. 

39. O Brahma, such is my incarnation named j^$abha. 
It causes Yogic practice; it fulfils the desire of Vyasa in the 
guise of Sarasvata and it consists of many divine sports. 



SatarudrastahhitS 


1081 


40. Bhadrayu a prince who had been abandoned by 
his father and who had died of poison infection, was resus¬ 
citated by me in that incarnation. 

41. When that prince reached his sixteenth year I 
as Rsabha, went to his mansion suddenly. 

42. O patriarch, being duly worshipped by him, that 
sage, of good form, the store-house of mercy instructed him 
in virtues in connection with the administration of his kingdom. 

43. Becoming excessively delighted, he gave him a 
divine conch and a lustruous sword that could destroy his 
enemies. 

44. The lord, favourably disposed to the indigent, smeared 
his body with the ashes from his own body and gave him 
the strength of twelve thousand elephants. 

45. After consoling Bhadrayus and his mother very 
well, lord R$abha after being duly worshipped by them went 
as he pleased. 

46. O Brahma, the saintly king Bhadrayus conquered 
all his enemies, married Kirtimalini and virtuously ruled the 
kingdom. 

47. Thus the ninth Rsabha incarnation of !§iva has been 
narrated to you. He is the goal of the good and kinsman 
of the indigent. 

48. The story of Rsabha is great, highly sacred, and 
conducive to heaven, fame and longevity. It shall be listened 
to with devoted attention. 


CHAPTER FIVE 

(The nineteen incarnations of ^iva) 


^iva said :— 

1. In the tenth aeon of Dvapara there will be Tridhama 
Vyasa on the excellent Bhfgutunga^ peak of Himavat. 

8. BhrguUiAga is one of the peaks of the Himalayas. According to 
Varihapurflna (ch. 146, 4.'-46) it is a mountain in Nepal on the eastern 
bank of the Gan(;laka Wheie the sage Bhrgu had a hermitage. The 
Vimanapur&na (81'. 33) lex ales it near the Viiastli and Himavat. See 
GEAMI Part I P. 70. 



1082 

2. There my sons weU>versed in the Vedic lore are 
Bhniiga and others i.e. Balabandhu, Nara, Mitra and Jhe sage 
Ketu^r^g^* 

3. In the eleventh aeon of Dvapara when there will be 
Trivfta VySsa I shall be born as Kali at GaAgIdvara.* 

4. There also the four sons of steady rites viz. Lambo- 
dara, Lambak^a, KeiSalamba and Pralambaka will be bom. 

5>6. In the twelfth aeon, there will be 8atatejas Vyasa. 
I will be bora in the Kali age at the end of Dvapara 
adopting golden bodice. I shall be wandering for rendering 
help to Vyasa as the reviver of the path of renunciation. 

7. O great sage, these four sons of good yogic skill 
will be born as my sons viz. Sarvajfta, Samabuddhi, Sadhya 
and Sarva. 

8. In the thirteenth aeon, there will be Narayana 
Vyasa. Then I shall be born as the great sage Bali. 

9. In the hermitage of Balakhilyas on the excellent 
mountain of Gandhamadana,^*’ the auspicious sons will be 
Sudhama, KaiSyapa, Varsi$tha and Virajas. 

10. In the fourteenth aeon, there will be Raksa Vyasa, 
I shall be born as Gautama, in the family of Angiras. 

11. In the Kali age my sons will be Atri, Devasada, 
Sravaria and I§ravi 9 kata. 

12-13. In the fifteenth aeon of Dvapara, there will be 
Trayyarum Vyasa. I shall be bom as Vedsdiras with a power¬ 
ful weapon. Veda^ir^a is a mountain on the top of Himavat 
on the northern bank of Sarasvad.^^ 

14. There the four viz. Kuni, Kunibahu, Ku^arira and 
Kunetraka will be my sturdy sons. 

15. In the sixteenth aeon, there will be Deva Vyasa; 
I shall be born as Gokar^a for imparting instructions in Yoga. 

9- GaAgSdvSra represents modem Haradvira, It is also known by 
various names like Mok;adv 3 .ra, Haridv&ra and Miy&pura. Gp Sk iv. i. 
7 . II 4 - 

m: r 

^ 3*1: ii 

to- The location of Gandhamidana is highly controversial. See 
PP. ao5, 633. Most probably it refers to that part of the Himalayas on 
whicn the mularikAframa is situated. 

II. See P. 47 note. 



^sktmdrMsmhftttd 1083 

16. It is there itself that the holy forest Gokaixia^* exists. 
There also four Yogin sons will be born of me. 

17. They are KS^yapa, U^anas, Gyavana and Brhaspati. 
They too will go to the abode of iSiva through the same path. 

18-19. In the seventeenth aeon, there will be Devakftah- 
jaya Vylsa. I shall be bom in the name of Guhavasin. There is 
a snow-covered Siva temple on the lofty summit*® of Himavat. 
The sons are Utathya, Vamadeva, Mahayoga and MahSbala. 

20. In the eighteenth aeon, there will be Rtafijaya 
Vyasa. I will be bom as Sikhandin on the auspicious sum¬ 
mit of Himavat. 

21. In the very sacred holy centre of achievements 
there is the mountain Sikhandin, where the forest is resorted 
to by the Siddhas. 

22. These four will be born as the sons, the sages 
Vaca^Sravas, Rucika, Syavasya and Yatisvara. 

23-24. In the nineteenth aeon, there will be Bharadvaja 
Vyasa. Then I shall be born as Jatt and Malin. On the 
summit of Himavat, my sons will be four in number named 
Hiranyanama, Kau^alya, Lokak^in and Praghima. 

25. In the twentieth aeon, there will be Vyasa Gautama. 
My name will be Att&hSsa. Men are fond of Attahasa (loud 
boisterous laughter). 

26. On the tops of Himavat, Attahasa a great moun¬ 
tain which is resorted to by Gods, men, Yak^as, Indra, Siddhas 
and Garanas. 

27. There will be born of me sons, who will be experts 
in Yoga and will be called Sumantu, Varvari, Kabandha and 
Kuk^ikandhara. 

28. In the twenty-first aeon when Vaca.^4ravas becomes 
Vyasa, I shall be bom as Daruka.*^ Hence the forest Darfivana 
is auspicious. 

29. There too, experts in Yoga, will be my sons viz. 
Plak^a, Darbhayarii, Ketuman and Gautama. 

12. Gjkariia, *cow's ear* is a town sacred to Siva in Nepal on the 
Bigamatl river. There is also a sacred hill of this name on the western, 
ghat neaGoa. It cannot be ascertained which of the two is meant here 

13. This peak of the Him&Iayas has not been identified so far. 

14. D&ruvana or DSrukivana or Deva DSruvana is a part of the 
Himilaya mountain near Badrinath. See Mbh xiii. 25. 27. See also P. 
411 note. 



1064 


30. In the twenty-second aeon, there will be lSu$mayana 
Vyasa. I shall be born as a great sage in Varanasi.'* 

31. I shall be known as Lahgali Bhima (having plough¬ 
share) wheie the gods including Indra will see me in the Kali 
age as Bhava and Halayudha. 

32. There too my sons will be virtuous viz. Bhallava, 
Madhu, Pihga and i§vetaketu. 

33. In the twenty-third aeon, there will be the Trna- 
bindu Vyasa. I shall be born as Sveta in the auspicious 
Kalafijara** mountain. 

34. There too my sons will be the sages—Ulika, Brha- 
dasva, Devala and Kavi. 

35. In the twenty-fourth aeon, there will be Yak$a 
Vypsa. I shall be born as Sulin a great Yogin in the same 
Yuga in Naimi^a.^’ 

36. There too my disciples will be the sages Salihotra, 
Agnivesa, Yuvana^va and Saradvasu. 

37. In the twenty-fifth aeon, there will be Sakti Vyasa. 
I shall be the great Yogin, lord Mundi^vara armed with a 
staff. 

38. There too my disciples will be the sages Chagala, 
Kundakarna, Kumbhanda and Pravahaka. 

39. In the twenty-sixth aeon, when Para^ara, becomes 
Vyasa I will be bom as Sahi^nu after reaching the city 
Bhadravata.^® 

40. There too my disciples will be the sages Uluka, 
Vidyuta, iSambuka and Alvalayana. 

41. In the twenty-seventh aeon, there will be Jatukarpya 
Vyasa. I shall be bom as Soma^arman after resorting to the 
holy centre Prabhasa.'* 

42. There too my disciples will be the sages Ak^aplda, 
Kumara, Uluka and Vatsa. 


15. See P. 266 note. 

16. It has not been possible to identify this mountain. 

17. Sec P. 76 note. 

18. The town has not been identified. 

19. PrabhSsa is a celebrated place of pilgrimage in Saur&;tra, the 
southern part of Kathiawar. 



&ikarudras(uhhitd 


1085 


43-44. In the twenty-eighth aeon of Dvapara, there will 
be Dvaipayana Vyasa, the son of Paraiara, and the most 
excellent of Puni$as shall be born as Kr$na with his one sixth 
part, as the foremost of the sons of Vasudeva. 

45. 'Fhen I too shall be born with the body of a 
Brahmacarin and the soul of a Yogin by means of Yogic 
Maya to the great surprise of the worlds. 

46-47. On seeing a dead body forsaken in the crema¬ 
tion ground I shall enter into it and make it free from 
ailments by means of Yogic Maya for the welfare of the 
brahmins. Then I will enter the holy divine cavern of Mcru*® 
along with you and Visnu. O Brahma, I shall then be 
known as Lakulin. 

48. The physical incarnation thus and the holy Siddha 
centre will be greatly renowned as long as the earth lasts. 

49. There too my disciples will be the sages Kuiika, 
Garga, Mitra and Taurusya. 

50. The Yogic brahmins well-versed in the Vedas, and 
of sublimated power will attain the Yoga of MaheSvara and 
reach the auspicious city. 

51. In the Vaivasvata manvantara, during all its recur¬ 
ring aeons, the Yoge^vara incarnations of the great Atman 
of virtuous deeds have been explained to you. 

52. O great lord, the Vyasas in every recurring Dvapara 
are twenty-eight in number. The YogeSvara incarnations 
at the beginning of every recurring Kali age are also so many. 

53. In each of the incarnations of YogeSvara, there are 
four disciples who make the path of Yoga flourish and who 
are eternal as well as great devotees of Siva. 

54. These disciples of $iva smear their bodies with 
holy ashes, use the necklaces of Rudrak$a beads as their 
ornaments and mark their foreheads with Tripundra. 

55. All the disciples arc pious and well-versed in the 
Vedas and Vedangas; they arc devoted both externally and 
internally to the worship of the phallic image of 8iva. 

56. By their devotion to me and by means of Yoga 
they arc engaged in meditation; they h»vc perfect control 

ao. For the identifiestiopi of Mount Meru sec P. 3 *® !*• 

6a3 note. 



1086 Sioapurtb^ 

over the sense-organs. They are considered one hundred and 
twelve in number by the learned. 

57. Thus I have mentioned the characteristic features of 

the incarnations from Manu to in the twenty-eighth 

recurring cycles of the Yoga in order. 

58. The classification of the Vedas was the characteristic 
sign of the Kalpa when Kr 99 a Dvaiplyana became the chief 
redactor. 

59. After saying this and blessing Brahma, the great 
lord of the gods glanced at him again and vanished there itself. 


CHAPTER SIX 

{The incarnation of Xandiioara) 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

1. O lord, how did you happen to be bom of Maha- 
deva and gain access to 8iva I wish to hear. Please narrate 
everything in detail. 

XandiSoara said :— 

2. O sage Sanatkumara, O omniscient one, listen with 
attention as to how I was bom of Mahadeva and how I gained 
access to 8iva. 

3-4. Urged eagerly by the manes who desired their 
uplift 8ilada piously thought of. raising them up. He was 
therefore desirous of a progeny. For that he of great poten¬ 
tiality performed a penance with his drooping eyes. He had 
the same activities as the slopes. He went to Sivaloka. 

5. That sage iSilada performed a severe penance with 
Indra in view, for a long time. His mind was steady and 
he was stead-fast in his activities. 

6. Indra was delighted at his penance. He, the lord of 
gods, went to him in order to grant him the boon. 

7. Indra lovingly spoke to 8illda—excellent sage, 
O sinless one, I am delighted with you. Therefore choose 
your boons.’* 



SMtarndwathhild 


1087 


8. Bowing to the lord of the gods and eulogising him 
with holy hymns, 8iUda, the most excellent sage, told him with 
palms joined in reverence. 

SiUtda said :— 

9. O lord of gods, O Indra, if you are pleased with me, 
I wish to have a son of holy rites free of death and not bom 
of a womb. 

Indm said :— 

10. O desirer of a son, I can give you only a son bom 
of a womb and sure to die. I cannot give it to you otherwise. 
There are no persons who can escape death. 

11. I shall not give you a son devoid of death and 
not bora of a womb. O great sage, even lord Vif^u and 
Brahmi die. Not to speak of others then ? 

12. Even these two, bora of l§iva, the destroyer of the 
Tripuras, die. The extent of their longevity has been mentioned 
separately in the sacred lore. 

13. Hence O great brahmin, abandon your desire of 
deathless son who is not born of a womb. Accept a son befit¬ 
ting your mortal nature. 

14. But if Siva, the lord of the gods, becomes delighted, 
even an immortal son not born of a womb, though hard to 
get, may be obtained. 

15. Neither I, nor lord Visnu, nor Brahmi, O, great 
sage, can give an immortal son not born of a womb. 

16. Propitiate lord l§iva therefore, for the fulfilment of 
yoiu* desire for such a son. The great lord of all is very powerful. 
He will give you a son. 

NandUoara said :— 

17. O sage, after speaking thus to the great brahmin 
and blessing him, the compassionate lord of the gods returned 
to his region surrounded by the gods. 

18. When the granter of boons, the thousand-eyed lord 
Indra had gone away, Silada propitiated lord Siva. He de¬ 
lighted Siva by means of his penance. 

19. As the brahmin was engrossed in penance day and 
night, a thousand divine years elapsed like a mmnent. 



1088 


20-21. His body was covered with anthill. He was sur¬ 
rounded by a hundred thousand worms, with pointed beaks, 
as hard as adamant and other types of blood-sucking insects 
all round. He remained in the cavity with his flesh and 
blood drained up. He was left with a bare skeleton. The 
excellent sage 8ilada was reduced to such a state. 

22. The delighted lord showed him his divine body 
endowed with all divine qualities and inaccessible to people 
of crooked intellect. 

23. As he continued the penance for a thousand divine 
years, the trident-bearing lord of all the gods spoke to him 
**1 am here, the gpranter of boons.** 

24. The great sage 8ilada engrossed in the great 
trance did not hear those words of 8iva who is subservient 
to the devotees. 

25. Only when the great sage was touched by the 
slayer of the Tripuras did he leave off his penance. 

26. O sage, on seeing Siva accompanied by Parvati 
after opening his eyes, he immediately bowed to him and 
fell at his feet with joy. 

27. The delighted Silada, drooping down his shoulders, 
with palms joined in reverence eulogised lord Siva with words 
choked with pleasure. 

28. Then the delighted lord of gods, the three-eyed 
deity told the great sage **I am the granter of boons,** 

29. O intelligent one, what shall be done with this 
penance ? I shall give you a son who will be omniscient and 
a master of all sacred lore. 

30. On hearing that, the sage SiJada bowed to die 
moon-crested lord and spoke in word* choked with pleasure. 

Sildda said :— 

31. O lord Siva, if you are delighted, if you are ready 
to grant boons, I wish for a son equal to you, devoid of 
death and not bom of a womb. 

NandUvara said :— 

32. When thus requested by him, the three-eyed lord 
Siva delightedly replied to the occellcnt sage SilSda. 



108d 


Siva said :— 

33. O brahmin, O sage, formerly I have been propi¬ 
tiated by means of penance by Brahma, by sages and by 
leading gods and urged to take an incarnation. 

34. O sage, I shall become your son by the name of 
Nandin. I shall not be born of a womb. Thus you shall 
be my father, of me who am the father of the worlds. 

KandiSoara said :— 

35. After addressing these words to the sage who stood 
waiting after bowing, the merciful lord Siva gave him his 
directions and vanished there itself along with PSlrvatl. 

36. After lord Siva had disappeared, the great sage 
Silada returned to his hermitage and mentioned the tidings 
to the sages. 

37. After a short while, my father, the foremost among 
those who knew the sacrificial rites, ordered for the construc¬ 
tion of the sacrificial altar for the performance of sacrifice. 

38. But before the beginning of sacrifice I was born 
as Siva’s son at his bidding, with a lustre as brilliant as the 
fire at the end of a Yuga. 

39. Then Pu^karavartaka*' and other clouds showered. 
When I was born as the son of Silada, the Kinnaras, Siddhas, 
Sadhyas and other beings walked through the sky and the 
great sages made showers of flowers all round. 

40. Then Brahma and other gods together with their 
wives, Vi?nu, Siva and Parvati came there lovingly. 

41. There was great jubilation. The celestial damsels 
danced. After honouring me all of them delightedly eulogised 
my phallic image. 

42. After praising Silada and eulogising Siva and Par¬ 
vati by reciting good hymns all of them returned to their 
respective abodes. Siva and Siva, the lord and goddess of all, 
went away too. 

43-44. On seeing me the boy with three eyes, four 
arms and lustre like that of Yama, sun and fire and clad in 
matted hair and coronet, Silida was highly delighted. I was 

21. ForPufkara, Avartaka etc. see P. 365. note. 



in the form of Rudra in every respect with the trident and 
other weapons. He bowed to me lovingly. 

SilSda said :— 

45. O lord of gods, since I have been delighted by 
you, you will be named Nandin. Hence I bow to you, bliss 
(incarnate), the lord of the universe. 

NandiSvara said :— 

46. My delighted father after bowing to the gpreat lord 
returned to his hut with me, as pleased as an indigent person 
who had struck a treasure-trove. 

47. O great sage, when I reached the hut I cast off 
my divine form and assumed the human one. 

48. After seeing me assuming human form, my father, 
honoured by the world, was distressed and so lamented sur¬ 
rounded by his own people. 

49. The son of j^lahk&yana SilSda fond of his son 
performed all the post-natal** rites for me. 

50. Within 6ve years my father taught me all the 
Vedas with their Ahgas and Upahgas as well as other sacred 
texts. 

51. When I completed the age of seven, the two sages 
Mitra and Varuna came to the hermitage at the bidding of 
the lord in order to see me. 

52. Duly welcomed by the sage and seated on their 
seats, the great sag^ of noble soul looked at me again and 
again and said. 

Mitra and Varur^ said :— 

53. O dear sage, although he has mastered the sacred 
lore, your son Nandin will be short-live^ I do not his 
life for more thsm a year from now. 

54. When the brahmins said this, SilSda fond of his 
swi was much distressed. He lamented loudly after embracing 
me. 

55. On seeing my father and grand-father fallen like 

as. Jitakarma etc are tacramenta esaential for the material and 
apiritual growth of the child. For detaila ace Hindu Saih^kira. 



^atarudrasofhhiti 


1091 


a dead body I spoke after remembering the lotU8*like feet 
of Siva with a delightful mind. 

56. **0 father, what is your distress for which you 

tremble and cry ? 1 wish to know correctly whence this 

misery has come to you ?** 

Hu father said :— 

57. O son, I am much distressed at the thought of 

your early death. Who can remove my misery ? 1 shall 

indeed seek refuge in him. 

The son said :— 

58>59. Even if the gods, demons, Yama or Klla were 
to be angry with me or even if it be any other person, I 
will not be short-lived. Do not be gpieved. O father, 1 speak 
the truth, I take a vow unto you. 

The father said :— 

60. What is your penance ? What is your knowledge? 
What is your Yoga ? Who is your lord? Whereby O son, 
you propose to ward off my terrible misery ? 

The son said :— 

61. O father, I shall deceive death by means of my 
penance, not learning. By worshipping great god, I will con¬ 
quer death, not otherwise. 

JfemdUvara said :— 

62. O sage, after saying this and bowing at his feet 
And circumambulating my father I went to the excellent 
forest. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 


{The coronation and the nuptials of JSfandiloara) 

NandiSvara said :— 

1. O sage, after going there and staying in an isolated 
place with a steady mind I performed a severe penance very 
difficult even for good sages. 

2-3. Meditating in the lotus-like cavity of the heart 
the lord Tryambaka, Sada^iva wtih five faces,** ten arms and 
three eyes and quiet in features I performed the repetition 
of Rudra Japa. I was in great meditation on the northern 
bank of the river. My mind was concentrated and I had 
pure thoughts. 

4. Delighted with that Japa, lord Siva, accompanied 
by Parvati and bedecked with the crescent moon, said :— 

Siva said :— 

5. “O Sailadi (son of Silada) I have been pleased by 
this penance of yours. O intelligent one, you have performed 
the penance very well. Tell me what you desire. I am here 
the granter of boons.” 

6. When thus addressed by the lord I bowed to his 
feet with my head and eulogised lord Siva, the destroyer of 
the sorrow of old age. 

7-8. I was endowed with great devotion. My eyes 
were filled with tears. I fell prostrate at his feet with my 
head resting there. Lord Siva, the destroyer of great distress, 
lifted me up and stroked me with his hands. The bull-ban¬ 
nered lord clasped me with his hands and stood face to face 
with me. 

9. Glancing at the leaders of the Ga^as and the god¬ 
dess, the daughter of Himavat, the lord of the worlds, looked 
at me with sympathy and spoke. 

10. “Dear Nandin, O intelligent one, wherefore can 
you be afraid of death? The two brahmins were sent by 
me alone. There is no doubt. You are equal to me. 

11. You will be free from death and old age. You 

23. On the five*faced form of iSiva see P. 34 note 





iatarudrasathhit/i 


will not be unhappy. You will for ever be the leader of 
die Ga^as. You will be unchanging and unwasting. You 
will be loved by all in the company of your father and 
friends. 

12. You will gain strength from me. You will always 
be at my sides. You will be for ever my favourite. Due 
to my favour you will have neither birth, nor death, nor old 
age. 


NandiSvara said :— 

13. After saying thus, the store*house of mercy took 
off his own lotus>garland round his head and tied it round 
my neck immediately. 

14. O brahmin, as soon as that garland adorned my 
neck I became three-eyed and ten-armed like a second l^iva. 

15. Then, taking me by the hand, lord l^iva said— 
“Tell me, what excellent boon shall I grant you ?** 

16. Then he took the water from his matted hair, 
water as pure as necklace, and said “Be Nandin.** Then the 
bull-bannered lord let off the water. 

17. Then five auspicious rivers flowed. They had pure 
water. They were very rapid. They were beautiful and 
dmne in form. 

18. The five rivers** are glorified thus—Jafodaka, Tris- 
rotas, Vr^adhvani, Svarnodaka and Jambunadi. 

19. O sage, this basin called Paficanada is a very 
auspicious spot of Siva. It is near Jape^vara and is very 
holy. 

20. He who goes to the holy centre of Paficanada, 
takes his bath there, performs the Japa of the lord of lords 
and worships him, certainly attains the Sayujya of Siva. 

31. Then Siva said to Parvati “I am going to coro¬ 
nate Nandin and proclaim him as the lord of Ganas. O 
unchanging goddess, what do you think?” 


94.. This group of five rivers is mythical. It is not appropriate to 
identify the Trisrotsis di this group with the Tcesta in North Bengal and 
the Jambu with the Jambu of mount Abu. For the PurA^a speaks of the 
group of five rivers forming a confluence near Japeivara. The Teesta and 
the Jambu meet . nowhere and cannot be held identical with the Trisrotas 
and the Jambu that have entered into this group. 



1094 


PSrvati said :— 

22. O lord of gods, it behoves you to give that to 
Nandin. O lord, Sailadi is my most beloved son. * 

Nandiioara said ;— 

23. Then Siva the independent lord, the Supreme 
deity, the bestower of everything and favourably disposed 
towards his devotees remembered his excellent leaders of Ganas. 

24. Even as they were remembered, all the leading 
Ganas of Rudra came there. They were countless. They 
had the shape of Siva. They were highly delighted. 

25. Those leading Ga^as bowed to lord Siva and the 
goddess Parvati with joined palms and drooping shoulders. 
The powerful Ganas spoke. 

The leading Ga^as said :— 

26. O great lord, the destroyer of Tripuras, why are 
we called ? Please command us, O bestower of wishes. We 
arc your servants and we have come here. 

27. Shall we dry up the oceans ? Shall we kill Yama 
with his servants ? Shall we slay great death or the aged 
Brahma especially ? 

28. Shall we bind Indra with all the gods or Visnu 
vi*ith all his Parsadas and bring diem here ? Or the Daityas 
and Danavas ? 

29. To whom shall we cause great and terrible distress 
at your behest ? O lord, who is to be extremely jubilant 
to-day for the increase of all cherished desires ? 

MandUvara said ;— 

30. On hearing these heroic words of the Ganas the 
great lord spoke after praising them. 

Siva said :— 

31. NandWvara is my son. He is the lord of lords. 
He is the favourite leader of my Gai(^as. Let my behest be 
carried out by you. 

32. All of you, crown him lovingly as your leader and 
resort of all my Ganas. From today onwards, Nandi^vara 
is your lord. 



^atarudrasat/lkiid 


1095 


^aruKIvara said :— 

33. Thus ordered by Siva, the leading Ga^as *>aid **LeC 

it be so**; they brought all the requisite things (for his con¬ 
secration) 

34. Then Narayana and other gods including Indra, 
and die sages came from all the worlds with pleased faces. 

35. At the behest of iSiva, the holy Brahma performed 
the coronation of Nandin w th care and attention. 

36. Then Vi$nu, Indra, the guardians of the quarters, 
Brahma and the sages eulogised me. 

37. While they were eulogising, Visnu, the lord of the 
universe, eulogised me with devotion with palms joined to¬ 
gether over the head. 

38. With palms joined in reverence he bowed to me 
and cried shouts of victory. Then all the leading Ganas, the 
gods and the Asuras did likewise in order. 

39. O great brahmin, thus at the instance of the great 
lord, I, Nandilvara was coronated and eulogised by the gods 
including Brahma. 

40. My nuptial ceremony was also conducted at the 
instance of Brahma with great jubilation and pleasure [by 
Vi^nu, Brahma and others. 

41. The daughter of the Maruts, the gentle and beauti¬ 
ful lady Suya^a became my divine wife pleasing to my eyes 
and mind.- 

42. A well-decorated umbrella shedding moonlike lusixe 
was held above her in the company of women holding the 
chowries in their hands. 

43. A fine throne was occupied by me along with her. 
I was bedecked by the illustrious Lak^mi with various orna¬ 
ments like crown and others. 

44-45. A fine necklace worn by the goddess round her 
neck was given to me. I got a fine bull, a white elephant, 
a lion, the lion-banner, a chariot, gold necklace, like the 
disc of the moon and many other auspicious articles, O sage. 

46. O great sage, the marriage having been celebrated 
thus I, in the company of my wife, saluted the feet of l3iva, 
BrahmS and Vi^nu for the sake of welfare. 

47. Siva, lord of the three worlds, favourably disposed 
towards his devotees spoke these words with great love and 
pleasure to me accompanied by my wife. 




Lmd Sioa said :— 

48. O dear son, listen. This Suya^a is your beloved 
wife : Whatever is desired by you in your mincf I shall 
grant you that boon. 

49. O Nandiia, O lord of Ganas, I am always pleased 
with you in the company of the goddess. O dear boy, listen 
to my weighty words. 

50-51. You will be my favourite always. You v'ill be 
endowed with all prosperity. You will be a great Yogin and 
a fine bowman along with your father and grandfather never 
to be defeated by anyone. You will be all-victorious and 
worthy of worship. You will be endowed with great strength. 
Wherever I am, you shall also be and wherever you are I 
shall also be. 

52. O son, your father will be endowed with all pros¬ 
perity. He will become a presiding officer of the Ganas, a 
great devotee of mine and very powerful. 

53. O dear son, your grandfather too shall be like-wise. 
This is my rule that whoever approaches me is certainly 
endowed with a boon. 

MandUvara said :— 

54. Then the goddess, the granter of the boon and of 
great fortune told me—“Speak out what your desire is. Tell 
me all your wishes.” 

55. On hearing those words of the goddess, I spoke 
with palms joined in reverence “O gc ldess, let my excellent 
devotion be always towards your feet.” 

56. On hearing my words the goddess said **Let it be 
so.” With great pleasure Siva spoke to SuyatSa, the beloved 
wife of Nandin. 

The goddess said 

57. Dear daughter, as you desire I grant you the-boon 
that you will be enciowed with three eyes. You will be devoid 
of future births. You will have devotion to me along with 
your husband, sons and grandsons. 

Nandin said 

58. Then the delighted Brahmfi, Vift^u, all the gods 



&Uarudras<Mitd 


1097 


and the Ganas gave them boons with pleasure at the behest 
of $iva. 

59. Taking me along with all the members of the 
family, kinsmen and relatives, lord l9iva mounted his bull 
}*nd went to the abode of the goddess. 

60. Vi^nu and all other gods praising these and eu« 
logising Siva and Siva lovingly returned to their respective 
abodes. 

61. O great sage, O dear one, thus my own incarna¬ 
tion has been narrated to you. It is always pleasing and 
heightening the power of Siva. 

62-63. He who listens to or narrates, reads or teaches 
the incarnation of Nandin, the granting of the boons, the 
coronation and the nuptial ceremony with faith and devotion 
enjoys all pleasures here and attains great goal hereafter. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

(Bhairava incarnation) 


Nandiivofa said :— 

1. O Sanatkumara, O omniscient one, listen to the 
story of Bhairava by listening to which alone, devotion to 
Siva becomes 6rm and steady. 

2. Bhairava is the prior form of Siva, the great soul. 
Fools who are deluded by Siva’s Maya do not know about it. 

3. O Sanatkumara, neither Vi^nu of four arms nor 
Brahma of four faces knows the greatness of lord Siva. 

4. There is nothing to be surprised at in this. Siva’s 
Maya is inscrutable. Deluded by it people do not even wor¬ 
ship him, the great lord. 

5. If any one knows him the supreme soul, he alone is 
lord Siva. But then, none of these people know him out of 
their own will. 

6. Although lord Siva is omnipresent he is not seen 
by the people of deluded intellect. He is known as a mere 
lord, he who is beyond the reach of minds and words. 



1098 


7. O great sage, in this connection I shall narrate an 

ancient legend. O dear one, listen to it with faith. It is 
the great cause of perfect knowledge. * 

8. As Brahma was stationed on the wopderful and 
beautiful summit of Meru, all the celestial sages approached 
him with a desire to know the real truth. 

9. All the great sages with palms joined in reverence 
and shoulders drooping down came there and bowed to 
Brahma. They asked him respectfully. 

The celestial sages said :— 

10. O lord of gods, O lord of subjects, O Creator, O 
leader of the worlds^ tell us the real fact. What is that sole 
unchanging entity ? 

Nemdiivara said :— 

11. Deluded by the Maya of gpreat lord and net know¬ 
ing the great fact the lotus-born Brahma replied haughtily. 

Brahmd said :— 

12. O gods, O sages, all of you listen with attention 
and intelligence I shall describe the great unchanging entity 
as it really is. 

13. I am the womb (material cause) of the universe, 
the creator, the self-born, the unborn, the lord, the primor¬ 
dial being, the Brahman, the sole unsullied soul. 

14. O excellent gods, I am the instigator of the 
worlds, and the deterrent too. There is none greater than 
I or any other who causes their revoludon. 

XandiSvara said :— 

15. While the Creator was saying thus, O sage,.Vi 99 u 
who was there became angry as he too was deluded by 
Maya. He spoke these words derisively. 

16. O Brahma, this is not proper. It is sheer foolish¬ 
ness on the part of a pracdser of Yoga. Without knowing 
the great reality, this is being mentioned in vain. 

17. I am the Creator of ail the worlds, the great Atman, 
the greatest Purusa, the sacrifice, the lord Nfir&ya^a, the 
master of M2yfi and the greatest goal. 



Satarudrasaihhitd 


10d9 


18. O Brahma, it is at my behest that creation is 
carried on by you. Without regard for me, the lord, no life 
can exist in the worlds. 

19. O sage, thus starting a mutual clash due to delu¬ 
sion and desiring to conquer each other they asked the Vedas 
about truth. 

20. The Vedas were there in embodied form. They 
shall be specifically asked. With this idea in mind they asked 
the four Vedas about the truth. 

Brahmd and Vifnu said: — 

21. Vedas are the authorities everywhere. They have 
been honoured everywhere. Hence you please say un¬ 
reservedly. What is the sole unchanging entity ? 

KandiSvara said :— 

22. On hearing their words, the Vedas spoke in 
reality after remembering the lord. 

23. ^Tf we are honoured, O deities as the causes of 
creation and maintenance, we shall cite authorities that will 
dispel your doubts. 

NandUvara said :— 

24. On hearing the conditions mentioned by the Vedas 
the two deities told the Vedas—“What is mentioned by you 
is acceptable to us as authority. What is that entity ? 
Please tell us that. 

^gveda said :— 

25. That in which the Bhutas stay, that from which 
everything comes out, what they call as the greatest entity— 
that is Rudra alone. 

Tajurvsda said :— 

26. The lord who is worshipped by means of all 
sacrifices and meditation, whereby we have an authority—that 
sole seer of all is iSiva. 

SSmaveda said :— 

27. That by which this universe whirls, that which is 



tlOO 


meditated upon by Yogins, the light whereby the universe 
is illuminated—that Tryambaka alone is the greatest. 

Alharvaoeda said :— 

28. They call that sole being Siva who is beyond all 
misery who is the lord of gods whom the people who have 
the blessing of devotion see. 

NandiSvara said :— 

29. After hearing what was thus said by the Vedas, 
Brahma and Vi?nu, deluded very much by the Maya (and 
hence) crooked in consciousness smiled and said to the 
Vedas. 

Brakmd and Vifnu said :— 

30; O Vedas, what is this that you all speak without 
sense ? What has happened to you ? All wisdom is utterly 
lost now. 

31-32. The lord of Pramathas incessantly sports with 
Siva. He is naked and of yellow colour and tawny due to 
dust. His dress and features are ugly. He has matted hair 
and moves about on his bull. He weani serpents as his 
ornaments. How can he be the supreme Brahman? Where 
is that Brahman free from any attachment ?’* 

33. On hearing their words, the all-pervasive Pranava 
who though unembodied assumed an embodied, extensive 
form told them thus. 

Praitaoa said: 

34. Lord 14a, Rudra, Siva indulging in sports and assu¬ 
ming various forms never sports about with the Sakti different 
from him. 

35. The great lord, is self-luminous and eternal. Siv£ 
is his Sakti in the form of Bliss, not a chance occurrence. 

Jiandifvara said :— 

36. Even after this explanation the ignorance of 
Brahma and Vi^u was not quelled. It was due to the 
Maya of Siva alone. 

37. Then a great flame menifested itself in their 



Sataruirasa^kitd 1101 

midst. It filled the space between the heaven and the 
sarth by means of its splendour. 

38. O sage, then Brahma and Vi^nu saw a shape in 
the form of a man in the middle of the mass of flame. 
Its body was huge and wonderful. 

39. The fifth head of Brahma burnt with rage (as. 
though saying) “who is this bearing a man’s outline and 
features in our midst ?” 

40-41. By the time Brahma could reflect properly, 
the great Being was seen immediately as the three-eyed 
Nilalohita with the trident in his hand and an eye in the 
forehead. Serpents and crescent moon constituted his orna¬ 
ments. The deluded Brahma on seeing him said laughingly. 

Brahma said '.— 

42-43. *‘0 Nilalohita, I know you. Do not be afraid; 
O moon-crested one. You, Rudra, came out formerly from 
my forehead. Since you cried, the name Rudra was also 
assigned to you by me formerly. O son, seek refuge in me 
alone. I shall save you.” 

M^ndihara said: 

44. O sage, on hearing the haughty words of the 
lotus-born Brahma, Siva became angry as if out for destruc¬ 
tion. 

45. Angrily, he created a Puru$a Bhairava blazing in 
great brilliance. Then he spoke lovingly. 

^im Said :— 

46. O Kalabhairava, at the outset this lotus-born 
Brahma shall be chastised by you. You shine like god of 
death, hence you are Kalarija. 

47. You are called Bhairava because you are of 
terrifying features and you are capable of supporting the 
universe. Since even K§la is afraid of you, you are called 
Kalabhairava. 

48. When you are angry you will be suppressing the 
wicked souls. Hence you will be known everywhere as the 
suppressor of the wicked. 



1102 Sioapwribfa 

49. Since you will be devouring the sins of devotees 
in a trice your name will be famous as sin-eater. 

50. O Kalaraja, you will have forever the suaerainty 
over my city Kali, the city of liberation, which is greater 
than all other cities. 

51. You alone will be the chastiser of those who 
commit sins there. Gitragupta will write down their auspi¬ 
cious and inauspicious activities. 

Nandiivara said :— 

52. After receiving all these boons. K&la-Bhairava, 
in a trice, cut off Brahma’s head with the tip of the nails 
of the fingers of his left hand.** 

53. The limb that commits offence shall be chestised. 
Hence the fifth head that censured was cut off. 

54. On seeing Brahma’s head cut off, Vi^pu became 
terribly afraid. Devotedly he repeated the Satarudriya 
mantras and eulogised §iva. 

55. The frightened golden-wombea dranma too per¬ 
formed the Japa of iSatarudriya. O sage, thus, in an instant, 
both of them were divested of their pride. 

56. But they realised that l§iva is the Supreme Brahman 
with Sat (Existence) Cit (knowledge) and Ananda (Bliss) as 
the characteristics. He is the great Atman and transcends 
the attributes. 

57. O omniscient Sanatkumara, listen to my extremely 
auspicious advice. As long as there is pride, perfect know¬ 
ledge lies excessively hidden. 

58. Eschewing false prestige and pride, a man realises 
lord Siva. Lord Siva quells the arrogant because he is the 
destroyer of arrogance. 

59. Coming to know that Brahma and Vijpu had 
been deprived of their pride, lord Siva the g^eat god became 
delighted and the lord assured them of his protection. 


25. Vs(Ch 8) speaks of Bhairava’s attempt to cut off the fifth head of 
BrahmS at the instance of Siva and also of the cancellation of that attempt 
by the intervention of Siva at the behest of Vifnu. The present account of 
Satarudra SaifahitA is somewhat different flrom the above account. Here 
Kilabhairava is mentioned to have severed the fifth head of BrahmS with 
the nails of his left finger. This account is substantiated by similar accounts 
in the other PurS|^. 



^atarudrasaihhitd 


1103 


60. After consoling both of thenii the delighted i§iva» 
favourably disposed towards his devotees, spoke to Bhairava- 
his own other form. 

Lord Siva said :— 

61. This Vi$nu shall be honoured by you as well as 
by Brahma, O Nilalohita, hold the skull of Brahma as an 
atonement. 

62. Show to the world the rite of expiation foi 
removing the sin of slaying brahmin. You beg for alms by 
resorting to “the rite of skull.” 

63. After saying this and creating a virgin renowned 
as **Brahmahatya” even as he was watching, Siva, in the 
form of mass of flame, spoke thus. 

64. Until she goes to the divine city of Varapasi you 
too shall follow her for a terribly long period. 

65. You will have free access to everywhere except the 
city of Varanasi. When she goes to Varl^asT you can be 
fr#*ed of her in a trice. 

Jfandiivara said :— 

66. Thus directing the Brahmahatya, the wonderful 
lord Siva, vanished from the scene. 


CHAPTER NINE 

{The sports of Bhairaoa) 


NdndUoara said :— 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumira, listen lovingly to an¬ 
other story of Bhairava that destroys all defects and enhances 
devotion. 

2. Due to Brahmahatyk’s presence Bhairava began to 
calculate the time for release. At the words of the lord of 
gods, he kept on the rite of K&p^ika. 

3. He, the soul of the universe, roamed over the three 
worlds with the skull in his hand- The terrible Brahmahatya 
never left Bhairava. 



1104 


la 


4. Although he went to every holy centre, he was 

not left off by Brahmahatya. Let the greatness of iSiva, the 
enemy of Kama, be understood thereby. • 

5. Once, while sporting about, being attended upon 
by Pramathas, Bhairava went as he pleased, to the abode 
of Vi?nu. 

6-7. On seeing the three-eyed Bhairava of full size, 
born partially of lord Siva, with serpents for his ear-rings 
the Garuda-bannered Visnu fell prostrate on the ground like 
a staff. The gods, the sages and the womenfolk of the gods 
too did the same. 

8. Afler bowing to him, pure in mind, and keeping 
the joined palms on his head, Visnu, the consort of LaksmI, 
eulogised him with various hymns. 

9. The delighted Visnu being highly pleased in his 
mind, O great sage, joyously spoke to LaksmI, born at the 
time of the churning of the milky ocean*® and residing in the 
lotus. 

Vifnu said :— 

10. “O lotus-eyed beloved, you are blessed, O comely 
sinless lady. O gentle lady of beautiful hips, I am blessed, 
since we both see the lord of the universe. 

11. He is the creator, the maintainer and the lord of 
the worlds. He is the primordial being, the lord and the 
refuge of all. He is calm and higher than the twenty-six 
principles.** 

12. He is omniscient, Uie lord of all Yogins, the sole 
leader of all Beings, the inner Atman of all living creatures 
and the bestower of everything to everyone always. 

13. O Lak|mi, see, he is that lord whom the quiet 
wakeful people, engrossed in breathless meditation, see in 
their heart of hearts through their mind. 

14. Here he comes, the all-pervasive who is without 

26. See P. 224 note 

27. Read q¥f qq ‘ <fYtr<T : for JT: I Siva is con¬ 

ceived as the twentyseventh principle, higher t£an the group of 26 tattvas 
comprising in 10 senses, 5 gross elements, 5 subtle elements, mind, intellect, 
ego, invisible cosmic nature, individual soul and the transcendent Puru|E. 

livara. Sec Lthgapur&oa i. 71. ,'Si :*!; 

I 



SiLtarudrasaihhiti 


nos 


form but has assumed a form (now) and whom only the 
Yogins of restrained mind, the knowers of the principles of 
the Vedas, understand. 

15. Oh, wonderful indeed is the activity of the lord 
l§iva, for he who repeats his names is freed from the bondage 
of the body that he has taken then. 

16. On seeing him men do not obtain a rebirth in the 
world. Such a lord the moon-crested Tryambaka comes here. 

17 . O Laksmi, blessed indeed are my eyes as wide as 
the petals of a lotus, since by them the great god lord Siva 
is seen. 

18. Fie upon the position of the gods where emancipa¬ 
tion is not obtained, but on seeing Siva it is obtained and 
it puts an end to all miseries. 

19. There is nothing more inauspicious than the state 
of the gods in the heaven that here even after seeing the 
lord of the gods all of us do not obtain salvation. 

Nandiivara said :— 

20. After saying this, Visnu bowed to the great lord 
with the thrill of delight through pleasure and spoke this 
to the bull-bannered deity ? 

Vifnu said : — 

21. O lord, O unchanging one, O queller of all sins, 
what is this being done by you the omniscient lord of the 
gods and the creator of the worlds ? 

22. O lord of the gods, O three-eyed intelligent one 
this is only your sport. O Virupak?a, O suppressor of Kama, 
what is this activity of yours motivated by ? 

23. O lord Siva, O lord of Sakti, why do you go a- 
begging ? O lord of the universe, this is my doubt, O bes- 
tower of the kingdom of the three worlds ! 

NandUvara said :— 

24. Thus addressed by Vi§ 9 u, lord Siva, the destroyer 
of the worlds of ferocious form of wonderful sports, laughingly 
said to Vi? 9 U. 



Sivapuri$d 


1106 

Bkairava said :— 

25. Brahma’s head was cut off with the top of tl^e nail 
of my fingers. It is to remove that sin that I am observing 
this auspicious sacred rite. 

Mandfivara said :— 

26. Thus addressed by l^va, Bhairava, the lord of 
Lakfmi remembered something and bent down his hf^ad. He 
spoke again. 

Visffu said :— 

27. **0 great god, O remover of all obstacles, sport 
about as you please. But it dors not behove you to envelop 
me with your Maya. 

28. O lord, it is true that from within the lotus from 
my navel, crores of lotus*seated Brahmas have come out in 
the different Kalpas through the power of Yoga. 

29. O lord, please eschew this Maya very difficult 
to be crossed by those who have no control over themselves. 
Brahma and others are deluded by your Maya. 

30. O Siva, O lord of all, O goal of the good, O lord 
of Siva, it is due to your own blessing that I am able to 
follow your activity. 

31-32. When the time of dissolution comes, O destroyer 
of the world, you annihilate all the gods, sages and people 
of all castes and stages of life. O great god, then, the sin of 
slaying brahmins and others docs not affect you. You are 
not bound by these and arc quite independent. You sport as 
you please. 

33. O Siva, the garland of the bones of BrahmS shines 
around your neck. Similarly, O Siva, O sinless one, the 
primordial Brahmahatya has followed you. 

34. Even after conunitting a great sin, if a person, 
remembers you who are the lord and support of the worlds, 
his sin is quelled. 

35. Just as darkness does not stand in the presence of 
the sun, similarly the sin of your devotee does not stand 
but is wasted away. 

36. If a pious soul contemplates on the lotus-like pair 



^atarudrasarti/iitd 


1107 


of your feet, even his sin of brahmin-slaughter becom? s 
wasted away. 

37. O lord of the universe, if a person is devoted to 
uttering your name, his sin as weighty as the peak of a 
mountain does not overwhelm him. 

38. O great soul, O ultimate abode, O god that as- 
sumest a body at your own sweet will, this is only a fancy 
of yours, this miserliness and dependence. 

39. O lord of gods, I am blessed. I am seeing the 
eternal supreme god of cosmic form whom even Yogins do 
not see. 

40. I have the g^reatest of gains today. I have the 
most auspicious of signs today. Even heaven and emanci¬ 
pation are as insignificant as a blade of grass to me who 
am contented with the nectar of seeing him.” 

41. When Govinda was saying this, Padma offered the 
desired alms into his begging bowl. 

42. Lord l§iva, who had assumed the body of Lord 
Bhairava, left the place joyously for begging elsewhere. 

43. On seeing Brahmahatya following him, Visnu called 
ner and requested her “Please stop pursuing the Trident- 
bearing deity.” 

Brahmahatya said ;— 

44. Under this pretext, I am waiting upon the bull- 
bannered deity. Thus 1 shall sanctify myself for the annihi¬ 
lation of a rebirth. 

NandUvaia said :— 

45. Though urged by Vi^nu she did not leave his side. 
The smiling l§iva of Bhairava form, spoke these words to Vi?nu. 

Bhairava said :— 

46. O lord of Lak|mi, O bestower of honour, I am 
satisfied by dri nkin g the nectar of your words. Whatever 
you say is natural to good-natured persons. 

47. O Vi^^u, choose your boon, O sinless one, I am 
the granter of boons. O Vi 9 ^?^u, you are free from aber¬ 
rations and ar& the foremost among my devotees. 



iloe 



48. Mendicants suffering from the fever of begging 
alms do not turn mad with the good articles of alms so 
much as by the drinking in of the nectar of honour.* 

Nandiivara said :— 

49. On hearing the words of high-souled Bhairava, 
Visi^u became delighted and spoke to him. 

Viftfu said :— 

50. O lord of gods, this itself is a great favour that 
I see you who being the lord of the gods are inconceivable 
by mind and speech. 

51. O !§iva, this is like a shower of nectar without 
clouds. I am jubilant over this; thy benign glance to the 
good is a treasure easily acquired by them. 

52. O lord l§iva, let me never be detached from your 
feet; this is the favour I seek, nothing else. 

Lord Bkairava said :— 

53. *‘0 dear, O intelligent one, let what you have said 
occur. You will be the gpranter of boons to all the gods.** 

NondUvara said :— 

54. Blessing Vi 9 ntJ moving in the central mountain 
Meru*® and the world, the lord went to the city of the libera¬ 
ted, Varanasi. 

55. As soon as Bhairava of terrible features entered 
the holy centre, Brahmahatya felt aggrieved and entered the 
nether worlds. 

56. The skull of Brahma fell on the ground suddenly 
from the lotus*like hand of Bhairava. The holy centre then 
became Kapalamocana. 

5Z, On seeing the skull of Brahma falling from his 
hand, even as everyone was watching it, Rudra danced with 
great joy. 

58. The unbearable skull of Brahma did not leave his 
hand as he was roaming elsewhere but it fell down in a trice 
at Ka^i. 


a8. The mount Meru, lifuated in the centre of the earth, ii the 
common resort of Vi^pu, Indra and other gods. 



^Qtarudrasarhhitd 1109 

59. Brahmahatya which did not leave iSiva at 
any other place vanished in a moment at Ka^i. Hence KaiSi 
shall be resorted to for shedding off evil. 

60. If a person remembers the excellent holy centre 
Kapalamocana at Ka<i, his sin committed here and elsewhere 
becomes quelled immediately. 

61. After coming to the foremost ot holy centres, 
performing the ablution in accordance with the rules and by 
making the water-offering to the manes one is rid of Brahma¬ 
hatya. 

62. Bhairava stood facing the holy centre of Kapala¬ 
mocana, devouring the series of sins of devotees. 

63. It was on the eighth day in the dark half of the 
month of Marga^ir^a that lord l§iva, the favourite of the good 
and indulging in auspicious sports, manifested himself in the 
form of Bhairava. 

64. The person who observes fast on the eighth day of 
the dark half of the month of Marga^ir$a in front of Kala- 
bhairava and also keeps awake at night is freed from great 
sins. 

65. He who performs that rite with devo’tion even else¬ 
where and also keeps awake is rid of great sins and attains 
the goal of the good. 

66. The sin conunitted by persons in the course of 
coimtless millions of births is quelled entirely on seeing Kala- 
bhairava. 

67. He who commits offence against the devotees of 
Kalabhairava is deluded and becomes miserable. He will 
attain the distress of the wicked people. 

68. The devotees of lord l§iva, who do not show devo¬ 
tion for Kalabhairava, attain great sorrow and especially so 
at Kaii. 

69. The man who, while staying at Varanasi, neglects 
the worship of Bhairava acquires sins that multiply like the 
moon in the bright half. 

70. If a person neglects the worship of Kalaraja at 
KfUi on every Tuesday and Bhut&ftem^ day, his merit de¬ 
creases like the moon in the dark half. 

71. A person is rid of all sins on hearing this narrative 
of **Bhairava’8 nativity** which can quell even Brahmahaty^. 



1110 StoaPurSf^n 

72. Even a person put in a prison, or involved in 
adversity is freed from distress on hearing of the narrative 
of Bhairava. 


CHAPTER TEN 

{The narrative of Man-lion) 

NandUvara said 

1. The destroyer of Dak;a*s sacrihce Virabhadra shall 
be known as an incarnation of lord Siva, the great soul. 

2. His narrative has been mentioned in the episode 
of Sad. You too have heard it several times. Hence it is 
not mentioned in detail. 

3. O excellent sage, now by my affection to you I 
shall narrate the l^ardula incarnation of lord Siva, Listen. 

4. For the benefit of the gods, the wonderfully divine 
form of a ^arabha (the mythological animal with eight 
legs and capacity of killing lions) of blazing fire-like lustre 
was assumed by lord Siva. 

5. O excellent sages, $iva*s incarnations are countless 
and conducive to the benefit of good devotees. Their number 
cannot be counted or specified. 

6-7. The number of the stars in the sky, of the sand 
particles on the earth and of the bursting showers of heavy 
rain can be specified by intelligent persons at some time in 
the course of many births over many Kalpas; but not of 
the incarnations of l^iva; know my words to be true. 

8. Still in accordance with my intelligence I shall 
mention, exactly as I had heard, the divine story of the 
Sarabha, portending great prosperity. 

9. O sage, when Jaya and Vijaya were cursed by you, 
they became the sons of Diti and Kalyapa. 

10. Those, two attendants,* the celestial sages were 
bom as Diti’s sons. The elder was Hiranyakatipu and the 
younger was Hiranylkfa the very poweiilsl. 

11. .Formerly lor4 Vif^u was requested by Brahma to 



iaianirasathhitS nil 

the Earth. He assumed the form of a boar and slew 
Hira^y&kfa. 

12. O sage, on hearing that his heroic brother, as dear 
to him as his very vital breath, was killed, Hira^yakaSipu 
became furious with Vi^nu. 

13. He performed penance for ten thousand years and 
propitiated BrahmS from whom he obtained the desired boon. 
“None of your creations shall kill me.” 

14. He left for Sonita.** He challenged the gods every¬ 
where. He put the three worlds iu his control and had an 
unrivalled rule over it. 

15. O sage, Hiranyaka^ipu harassed the gods and the 
sages. He violated all virtuous rites. He oppressed brahmins 
and became a sinner. 

16. When the king rf the Daityas hated his own son 
Prahlada, Visnu became h:s particular enemy. 

17. O sage, Vi?nii then came out from a pillar in the 
hall, at dusk in the bcdy of a man-lion, with great fury. 

18. O great sage, the body of the man-lion was very 
terrible in every respect. It blazed frighteningly and terrified 
the leading Daityas. 

19. The Daityas were killed in a trice by the man-lion. 
HiranyakalSipu fought a terrible battle. 

20. O excellent sages, a great fight ensued between 
them for some time. It was terrifying, frightening and caused 
horripilation to every one. 

21. The lord of gods, lord of Lak§mi, the man-lion 
dragged the leading Daitya to the threshold even as the gods 
were watching in the sky. 

22. While the gods were watching he placed the daitya 
on his lap and immediately tore open his stomach with his 
claws and killed him. 

23. When Hira^yaka^ipu was killed by the man-lion 
Vi?nu, the whole universe attained normalcy and peace. But 
the gods did not derive any special comfort. 

24. The celestial drums were sounded. On seeing the 
wonderful form of Vijriu, Prahlada was surprised, T.nlf «ynt 
was in a state of suspense. 


aQ. See P. loa? note. 



25. Though the lord of daityas was killed, yet the 
gods did not derive any pleasure. The fiery fury of the 
man-lion did not subside. 

26-27. The entire universe was again excited by that 
fiery splendour. The gods were miserable. Saying “What 
will happen now?” they kept themselves at a safe distance 
from fear. The lotus-born deity and others were excited by 
the fiery fury of the man-lion. 

28. They sent Prahlada near Visnu in order to subside 
his anger. At the behest of all in a body Prahlada approa¬ 
ched the man-lion. 

29. The man-lion, the store-house of mercy, embraced 
him. The heart became cool, still the flame of fury did not 
subside. 

30. When it did not subside, the afflicted and miserable 
gods sought refuge in Siva. 

31. Going there, Brahma, other gods and the sages eulo¬ 
gised i§iva for the happiness of all the worlds. 

The gods said :— 

32. O great lord of gods, favourably disposed cowards 
those who seek refuge, save us the gods who have sought 
refuge in you as well as all the worlds. 

33. Obeisance be to you, O Sadasiva. Whenever there 
had been misery formerly, it was you that saved us. 

34. The ocean was churned and the gems were shared 
by the gods. Then O Siva, poison was taken by you.®® 

35. We were saved by you, O lord and you became 
famous as Nilakantha (Blue-necked). If you had not drunk 
the poison then, every thing would have been reduced to 
ashes. 

36. This is well known, O lord, that whenever a person 
is in misery, by repeating your very name the misery is 
quelled. 

37. O Sadasiva, we are now afflicted by the fiery fury 
of the man-lion; O lord, it is certain that you are com¬ 
petent to quell it. 

30. The incident relates to the legend of Siva’s swallowing poison 
that emerged at the churning of the ocean as a result of which Siva became 
blue-throated and was called Nllakan(ha. 



Stitarudrasaifikitd 


1113 


NanSivara said :— 

38. Thus eulogised by the gods, lord Siva, favourably 
disposed to the devotees, assured them of protection and 
spoke delightedly. 

39. Siva said :—O ye Brahma and other gods, Return 
to your abodes fearlessly. My rite quells misery in every 
respect: 

40. The misery of the person who seeks refuge in me 
vanishes. Undoubtedly the seeker of refuge is dearer to me 
than life. 

Nandiivara said :— 

41. On hearing this, the gods were delighted much. 
Remembering Siva joyously they returned. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

{Prologue to Sarabha incarnation) 

Nandiivara said: — 

1. Thus implored by the gods, lord Siva, the abode ol 
mercy, decided to quell that great fiery fury of man-lion. 

2. Thereafter Rudra remembered the powerful Vira- 
bhadra, the cause of dissolution and addressed Bhairava, hi« 
own form. 

3-5. Then suddenly there came the leader of the 
Ganas laughing loudly and accompanied by the leading Ganas 
laughing boisterously and jumping about here and there. 
He was surrounded by crores of fierce manlion-formed Ganas, 
madly dancing heroes joyously leaping about. The warlike 
heroes Brahma and others were playing about as if with 
balls; the leader of the Ganas was surrounded by others too 
who had remained unseen. He was respected by the 
heroes. 

6. He had a fiery splendour as fierce as the fire at 
the end of Kalpa. His three eyes shone splendidly. He had 
no weapon. He had matted hair. He was bedecked by the 
refulgent crescent moon. 



1114 Sivapwi^^ 

7. He had two sharp fangs curved like the crescent 

moon. His eyebrows were like the split pieces of lndra*s 
bow. * 

8. With his fierce hissing whooping sound be deafened 
the faces of the quarters. He was as dark as the blue 
cloud and collyrium He was terrible and wondrous with 
full grown moustaches and beards. 

9. He was whirling his trident of unsplit lustre like a 
piece of musical instrument over and over again. The lord 
Virabhadra arrived with his heroic strength fully expanded. 

10. He said to Siva—**0 lord of the universe, why 
I have been remembered by you ? Please do me a favour 
and command me.** 

MandUvara said: — 

11. On hearing the words of Virabhadra, and glancing 
at his face respectfully lord Siva, the chastiser of the wicked, 
said lovingly. 

^iva said: — 

12. An untimely terrible fear has cropped up tor the 
gods. The fire of that man-lion is blazing You shall quell 
this inaccessible one. 

13. At the outset convince him in a consoling manner. 
If he does not subside thereby, show my great terrible form. 

14. O Virabhadra, at my behest, bring me his head 
and hide after quelling his subtle fury with your subde one 
and his gross splendour with your gross one. 

Nandiioara said :— 

15. Urged thus, the leader of the Ganas, assumed a 
calm body and features and hastened to the place where the 
man-lion was sitting. 

16. Then Virabhadra, the destroyer addressed Vi^nu. 
Siva, then spoke to him as a father speaks to his own son. 

Virabhadra said :— 

17. O lord Vi$ 9 u, you have taken the incamauon for 
the happiness of the universe. You, the great lord, have 
been entrusted with the task of maintaining the universe by 
Siva. 



Salarudrasarhhitd 


1115 


18. Formerly, multitudes of creatures moving about 
in the one vast ocean have been split by your lordship in 
the form of a fish by binding them with your tail. 

19. You support the earth in the form of a tortoise. 
You lifted it up in the form of a boar. In the form of a 
lion HiranyakaiSipu has been killed. 

20. Again in the form of a dwarf, you had bound 
Bali. You are the origin of all living beings. You are the 
eternal lord. 

21. Whenever any misery torments the world you 
incarnate yourself and make it free from distress and ailment. 

22. O Visnu, there is none else devoted to Siva more 
than you or even equal to you. The Vedas and sacred rites 
have been established by you towards an auspicious goal. 

23. That Danava Hiranyaka^ipu has been killed for 
which purpose you have taken this incarnation. Prahlada 
too has been saved. 

24. O lord Narasiihha, O soul of the universe, subdue 
this extremely terrible body youiself in my presence. 

J^andfSvara said :— 

25. Urged thus with quiet peaceful words of Vira- 
bhadra, the arrogant man-lion assumed a more terrible 
anger. 

26. O sage, threatening the heroic Vlrabhadra with 
his curved fangs he spoke harsh and terrible words. 

The Man-lion said :— 

27. Go back the way you have come from. Uo not 
speak offending words. 1 am now going to annihilate the 
universe of the mobile and immobile being^. 

28. The annihilation is not the withdrawal of myself 
by myself or through others. I have my sway everywhere. 
There is none to rule over me. 

29. Everything functions fearlessly by my favour. I 
am the instigator as well as the restrainer of all powers. 

30. O leader of the Ganas, whatever is endowed with 
magnificence, whatever is glorious and powerful, know that 
to be my expanded splendour. 

31. They know me, the knower of the reality of the 



1116 jSiui^itra^ 

divinity, as the greatest. Brahtnl, Indra and other gods are 
powerful in as much as they are my own parts. 

32. Brahma, the creator of the universe wfio was 
tormerly born of my umbilical lotus*^ is greater than all, being 
independent, maker, remover and the lord of all. 

33. This is my greatest glory. What else do you wish 
to hear again ? Hence seek refuge in me and return to your 
abodes being freed from feverish ailment. 

34. O lord of Ganas, know that the entire universt! 
of this nature, is my own; this universe including the gods, 
Asuras and human beings is the manifestation of my 
greatness. 

35. I am Kala, the cause of destroying the worlds. I 
am engaged in annihilating the worlds. O Virabhadra, 
know me to be the Death of Death. These gods are alive 
by my very favour. 

NandiSuara said :— 

36. On hearing the arrogant words of Visnu, Vira¬ 
bhadra of immeasurable exploits laughed and said contem¬ 
ptuously with throbbing lips. 

Virabhadra said :— 

37. Don't you know the Pinaka-bearing lord of the 
universe as the annihilator ? Baseless argument and disputa¬ 
tion will end in death for you. 

38. What other incarnation of yours is left still to be 
taken®* with that whatever it may be you will remain 
alive only in the story. 

39. Tell me the defect which has led you to this 
plight. With that lord capable of annihilation you will get 
the balance of Dak^ina. 

40. You are Prakrti and Rudra is Puru?a. The semen 
is deposited in you. The five-faced Brahma was bom of your 
umbilical lotus. 

;ji. Hindu Mythology represents BrahmS as springing iron: tHe navel 
of Visiiu or from a lotus which grew thereout. Hence Brahmfi is called 
nSbhija, ‘navel-born.’ See Dowson; HM. 

32. The Ckintents of the verses ai, 29, 30 and 35 in this chapter 
are reminiscent of similar ideas expressed in the Bhagavad'-giti. 



SatarudrasaThhita 


1117 


41. Remaining in a severe penance, he contemplated 
on Siva, the blue-necked, in his forehead for the creation of 
the three worlds. 

42. Siva came out of his forehead. 1 am the ornament 
of the lord of gods in the form of Bhairava in the matter of 
creation. 

43. O Visnu, I have been engaged in subduing you 
either through humility or through force, by Rudra the lord 
of gods, the lord of all. 

44. After tearing to pieces a single demon you roar 
by your arrogance. Actually you are free from slumber only 
because you are endowed with a digit of his power. 

45. Help rendered to good men is accepted as con¬ 
ducive to happiness. Help rendered to bad men is condu- 
sive to offence. 

46. O Nrsiriiha, if you consider lord Siva as a mere 
living being you are ignorant, very arrogant and full of 
aberrations in every respect. 

47. O base Nrsiriiha, you arc neither creator^ nor 
sustainer, nor annihilator. You are subservient and deluded 
in mind. You are not independent anywhere. 

48. O Visnu, like the potter’s wheel you are forcibly 
induced by Siva when you take the different incarnations. 
You are always dependent on him. 

49-50. Your skull, left by you in the midst of the 
necklace of Siva, while you .had assumed the form of a 
tortoise, is still there. None who is burnt is bound. Is it 
your partial forgetfulness that in your body as a Boar your 
fangs were felled by the slayer of Taraka 

51. You were burnt by the fire of the Trident, O 
Visvaksena. At the time of Daksa’s sacrifice your head was 
cut off by me brilliant in form. 

52. O Vi?nu, the fifth head of Brahma your son, 
which was cut, has not been set right even now. It is for¬ 
gotten by you. 


33. This versf as well as the fourth foot of the previous verse is 
defective. 



1118 


Sivapurdna 


53. In a battle you were defeated by Dadhica along 
with the gods.** How can it be forgotten by you while 
scratching your head? 

54. O discus-armed one, you are fond of your discus 
but you have forgotten whence you got it and by whom it 
was made. 

55. Whatever worlds I have seized, in them, you lie 
down in the ocean, overcome by sleep. How can you then 
be a Sattvika? 

56. From you to a blade of grass, every thing expands 
and develops only through Rudra’s power. Professing to 
possess power you have been deluded by the fire all round. 

57. Ordinary man is incapable of seeing the greatness 
of his splendour. That is the greatest of the regions of 
Vijnu which only the people of subtle intellect can 
perceive. 

58. Lord Siva manifests himself in between heaven 
and earth, Indra and Agni, Yama and Varuna, in the heart 
of darkness and in the light of the moon. 

59. You are Kala but lord Siva is Mahakala and 
Kalakala. Hence you will be death of death only through 
Siva’s digit. 

60. But the steady one today is the imperishable hero, 
the lord protector of the universe. He is the destroyer of 
fever, a dreadful beast, a golden bird. 

61. You and the four-faced Brahma arc not the rulers 
of the world. Nor any one else is the ruler. Siva is certainly 
the ruler of all. 

62. Thus taking everything in consideration you sub¬ 
due yourself by yourself. O Man-lion, O wise one, keep your¬ 
self safe. 

63. Otherwise death will befall you like a thunderbolt 
on a stump due to the fury of the lord in the form of Bhairava. 

NandiSvara said :— 

64. After saying this and observing the view of the 
Man-lion, Virabhadra the furious form of Siva, stopped. He 
was not afraid of anyone. 

34. For details see RS. Satikharda. cji. 39- 



Satarudrasarhhiid 


1119 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

{The incarnation of Sarabha) 

Sanatkumara said :— 

1. O NandiSvara, O intelligent one, this is understood. 
Take pity on me and tell me now lovingly what happened 
thereafter. 

^fandUvara said :— 

2. Thus admonished by Virabhadra, the Man-lion be 
came furious. He roared and began to seize him with force. 

3. In the meantime, the splendour of Siva rose up 
unbearably enveloping the sky all around. It was terrible 
and cause for imminent fear. 

4-5. Then in a trice the form of Virabhadra became 
invisible. The splendour of Lord Siva was neither golden 
nor fiery, neither lunar nor solar. It resembled neither the 
lightning nor the moon. It was beyond comparison. The 
forms of brilliance were merged in Siva. 

6. That great splendour was not of the sky too. There¬ 
after its middle became clearly manifested in the form charac¬ 
teristic of Rudra of deformed shape. 

7. Even as all the gods stood watching with the auspi¬ 
cious shouts of victory. Lord Siva became manifest in the 
form the Annihilator. 

8. He had a thousand hands and wore matted hair. 
His head was adorned by the crescent moon. He appeared 
like a bird with wings and beak. His body was fierce and 
fully developed. 

9. His fangs were very sharp. Adamantine claws were 
his weapons. His neck was black in colour. He had huge 
arms and four legs. He was blazing like fire. 

10. His voice was resonant and terrible like the rumbl¬ 
ing sound of the clouds that gather at the end of a Yuga. 
His three eyes were as wide and blazing as the fire of the evil 
spirit of great fury. 

11. His fangs and lips were clearly visible. He was pro¬ 
ducing a hissing sound of Hurhkara. Siva of such a form 
appeared in sight. 



1120 


^ivapurJI^ 

12. At his very vision Visnu lost his strength and 
exploit. He assumed a lustre of the flickering glow-worm 
beneath the sun. * 

13- I4. Fluttering with his wings, and tearing the navel 
and legs he bound the legs of the Man-lion with his tail and 
his hands with his own hands. He struck his chest, caught hold 
of Visnu. It expanded in the sky along with the gods and 
the sages. 

15-16. Like a vulture seizing a serpent he fearlessly 
caught hold of Visnu, lifted him up and fell him to the 
ground. At the time of flight he was excessively oppressed, 

being hit with the wings. Then Lord Siva took Vi§nu and 
flew up. 

17. All the gods followed him eulogising him with the 
words of obeisance. Brahma and other sages bowed to him 
with reverence and love. 

18. Being led thus Visnu was helpless. His face was 
pallid and sorrowful. With palms joined in reverence he 
eulogised Lord $iva with prayers of simple words. 

19. After eulogising Mrda with the hundred and eight 
names of the lord, Nrsirhha requested lord l^arabha again. 

20. “O great lord, whenever my ignorant mind be¬ 
comes defiled by arrogance, it shall be removed by you alone.** 

NandiSvara said ’.— 

21 Thus saying with love to l§iva, the Man-lion 
turned submissive and bowed to him. Vi§nu was utterly 
defeated and came to the end of his life. 

22. Within a trice Virabhadra made his powerful 
body powerless and dead. 

J{andUvara said :— 

23. Then Brahma and other gods eulogised lord 
Siva who had assumed the form of a Sarabha and who was 
the sole benefactor of all the worlds. 

The gods said :— 

24. O lord Siva, Brahma, Vi?nu, Indra, the Moon, 
the gods, the sages, and the Daityas are born of you. 

25. O lord of all, you alone create and protect Brahma 



Satarudrasarhhitd 


1121 


Visnu and Indra, the sun and others, the gods and Asuras 
and you alone devour them. 

26. Since you annihilate the world, you are called 
Hara by the learned. Since Visnu was curbed and caught 
hold of by you, you are called Hara by the learned. 

27< Since you support and hold every thing after divi¬ 
ding your body into eight, O lord, protect us, the gods, by 
means of the desired gifts. 

28. Vou are the great Purusa, Siva, lord of all, leader 
of the gods, the soul of the indigent, of a mind without 
aberrations. You are the great Brahman, the goal of the 
good. 

29. You are the kinsman of the distressed, the ocean 
of mercy, of wonderful sports, the vision of the great soul, 
the intelligent, the Immense Cosmic Being, the all-pervasive, 
the truth, the Existence, knowledge and Bliss as the charac¬ 
teristics. 

NandiSvara said :— 

30. On hearing these words of the gods, ^iva, the great 
God, spoke to the gods and the great ancient sages. 

31. Just as water poured into water, or milk poured 
into milk, or ghee poured into ghee becomes one with those 

*things, so also Vi$nu is merged into !^iva, not otherwise. 

32. It was Visnu alone in the form of the Man-lion, 
haughty and strong, engaged in the activity of annihilating 
the universe. 

33. He shall be prayed and bowed by my devotees 
aspiring achievements. He is the foremost of my devotees 
and the granter of boons. 

Nandiivara said : — 

34. After saying this, the lordly king of birds of great 
strength, vanished there itself even as all the gods were 
watching. 

35. Lord Virabhadra, the leader of the Ganas, of 
great strength, peeled off the hide of the Man-lion and went 
to the mountain taking it with him. 

36. From that time Siva began to wear the hide of 



the Man-lion. His head was the leading bead in his necklace 
of skulls. ^ 

37. Then the gods freed from their distress began to 
sing the glory of this story. With their eyes blooming with 
wonder they returned the way they came. 

38. He who reads or listens to the great narrative, 
which being sacred has the flavour of the Vedas, will realise 
all hk desires 

39. This narrative is conducive to wealth, fame, longe¬ 
vity and health. It increases prosperity, subdues obstacles 
and quells ailments. 

40. It subdues misery, yields the fruits of desires and 
is the abode of auspicious features. It removes premature 
death, confers intelligence and destroys enemies. 

41. This great form of Siva in the form of Sarabha 
shall be made public only among the leading devotees of Siva. 

42. This shall be read and listened to only by them 
with their soul dedicated to Siva. It then confers the nine¬ 
fold devotion. It is divine. It purifies the inner mind 
and sense. 

43. This shall be read during the festivals of Siva, 
during the eighth and fourteenth Tithis, and at the instal¬ 
lation of the idol. It then causes the presence of Siva. 

44-45. When there is danger from thieves, tigers, 
lions, one’s own or enemy kings, during commotions earth¬ 
quakes and robberies, dust storms, when there is the fall of 
meteors, when there is draught or too much of rain—during 
all these occasions he who reads this with purity becomes a 
great devotee of Siva steady in his rites and very learned. 

46. He who reads or listens to this without any spe¬ 
cific desire and performs the rites of Siva attains Rudra’s 
region and becomes a follower of Rudra. 

47. O sage, after attaining Rudra’s region he rejoices 
with Rudra. Then he becomes one with Rudra by the 
mercy of Siva. 



1123 


^atarudrasarhkiti 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

{The incarnation of Grhapati) 

Nandiioara sdid :— 

1. O son of Brahma, listen lovingly to the narrative of 
the moon-crestcd lord $iva how he was bom willingly in tlie 
house ofVi^vanara. 

2. He was Grhapati by name. O sage, he became the 
lord of Agniloka. The great lord, the soul of all, was fiery 
in form and brilliant too. 

3. On the beautiful banks of Narmada in the city of 
Dharmapura,^ formerly there lived a devotee of Siva, a 
soul, the sage Vi^vanara. 

4. While in the stage of celibacy, he was devoted to 
Brahmayajfia rites. He belonged to the Saiji^ilya lineage. He 
was pure, the storehouse of Brahminica) splendour and had 
self-control. 

5. He understood the real meaning of sacred lord. He 
followed the conduct of the virtuous. He was highly skilled 
in Siva ethics. He was the foremost among the knowers of 
worldly conventions. 

6. After pondering over the good qualities of an ideal 
housewife, Vii^vanara married with due rites the daughter of 
Kala who was really worthy of him. 

7. He maintained the sacrificial fires. He was devoted to 
the performance of the five daily sacrifices.** He practised the 
six sacred rites everyday.*’ He was fond of serving gods, manes 
and ^ests. 

35. Dharmapura is a sacred Tirtha situated on the northern bank 
of the Narmada river, 8 miles frmn PagSrft, near the confluence of the 
KubU and Narmadft. It contains many temples and is supposed to be 
the Xirama of the sage Dadhici who gave away his bones to the gods 
for their protection from the demons. 

36. The five daily sacrifices to be performed by a householder 

constitute PW[*Tiri and which are defined as 

i 

it 

37. The six acts enjoined on a Brihmana are mentioned in MS 
lo. 75 : 

aj'qiqd^Twrqq | 



1124 


SivapurdiitiX 


8. When a long time elapsed in that manner l^ucismati 
the wife of that Brahmana who observed all rites spoj^e to her 
husband. 

9. “O Lord, by your favour, all pleasures which 
women could expect have been enjoyed by me in your 
company. 

10. O Lord, still a desire has been lurking in my heart 
for a long time. !♦ is proper to all householders. You shall 
grant it to me. 

VHvdnara %aid \— 

11. O gentle lady of beautiful hips ever desirous of my 
welfare, what is there that cannot be granted to you ? O 
lucky one, you may ask for it. I shall grant it to you with¬ 
out ielay. 

12. O good woman, by the favour of Lord Siva, nothing 
is inaccessible to me either here or hereafter. Lord Siva is 
the cause of all good. 

JsfandiSvara said: — 

13. On hearing these words of her husband she who 
thought her husband to be a deity was delighted. Joining 
her palms in reverence she humbly said. 

Sudsmati said :— 

14. O Lord, if I deserve a boon, if a boon is to be 
granted to me, please give me a son equal to Lord Siva. I 
am not choosing any other boon. 

jSfandiSvara said :— 

15. On hearing her words that Brahmin of pure rites 
entered into mystic trance for a short while and thought in 
his heart thus. 

16 “What is this ? This lady has wished for an ex¬ 
tremely inaccessible thing. It is beyond the reach of wishes. 
Let it be. Only He does everything. 

17. It is by Siva himself stationing himself in her 
mouth in the form of speech that this has been said. This 
alone is possible. Who else could have endeavoured to say 



Satarudrasarhhitd 


1125 


18. After thinking like this, the sage Visvanara of 
liberal heart who strictly adhered to the principle of mono¬ 
gamy spoke to her. 

19. After consoling his wife, the sage set out for pen¬ 
ance to the city of Varana- • where Lord J^iva himself is 
stationed. 

20. Reaching Varanasi immediately and seeing Mani- 
karnika”®, he was freed from three distresses acquired in the 
course of hundreds of births. 

21. He saw Visve^vara and other phallic images. He 
performed ablutions in all holy ditches, wells, tanks and 
lakes. 

22. He bDwed to all Vinayakas and Sarva Gauri. He 
worshipped Kalaraja Bhairava who devours sins. 

23. Strenuously he eulogised Dandanayaka and other 
Ganas, Adike^ava and others. He propitiated Ke.-iava. 

24. He bowed to Lolarka and other suns again and 
again. Without lethargy he offered balls of rice in all the holy 
centres. 

25. He satiated sages and brahmins by means of *-'feed- 
ing thousand” and other rites. With devotion he propitiated 
the phallic images of Siva by means of great worship and 
service. 

26. He thought frequently—“What is that phallic image 
that yields the result quickly? Where can the penance due 
to the longing for a son find ultimate rest.” 

27. Thinking thus for a moment, the intelligent sage 
Visvanara praised the VireSa form of Siva which confers 
the blessings of a son immediately. 

28. Innumerable thousands of Siddhas have derived 
the fulfilment of their desire from the worship of Siva. Hence 
Vire^a is famous as the fruit-yielding phallic image. 

29. If any one worships the Viresvara phallic image 
for a year with great devotion he obtains longevity, cherished 
desires, sons and other things. 

30. T too shall worship Vire^a here thrice a day and 
shall ere long acquire a son as desired by my wife. 

31. After thinking like this, the intelligent brahmin, 

I( is a pool in Viiiunabi. 



111^6 

the contented Vilvanara took a bath in the well Candrakupa 
and took the vow of the sacred rite. 

32-34. For a month he lived on a single meal *a day. 
For another month he took only the night-meal. He spent 
another month taking only the food he got without begging. 
He spent another month without any food. For another 
month he took only milk. For another month he took only 
fruits and vegetables. For another month he ate only a 
handful of gingelly seeds. For another month he took liquid 
diet. For another month he took only Pailcagavya. For 
another month he performed the Gandrayana rite. For an¬ 
other month he drank water from the tip of Ku^a grass and 
for another month he had air alone as his food. 

35. Thus for a full year he performed the wonderful 
penance. He worshipped the excellent VireSa thrice a day. 

36-37. On the thirteenth month while he was going 
to Vire^a after taking bath in the Gahga river very early in 
the morning, the sage saw a child of eight years smeared 
with ashes all over the body, in the middle of the phallic 
image. 

38. The child had eyes as long as his ears. He had 
ruddy lips. He had matted hair of beautiful tawny colour. 
He was naked and had a smiling face. 

39. He had all the dress and features proper to child¬ 
hood. He seemed intelligent. He was reciting hymns from 
the Vedas. He was laughing sp>ortively. 

40. On seeing him he was joyous. He was thrilled 
all over the body. He uttered the formula to you over and over 
again. 

41. The contented Vai^vanara eulogised iSiva, the great 
bliss in the form of child by means of eight verses that 
gave expression to his desire. 

ViSvdnara said :— 

42. The Brahman is alone without a second. It is true. 
Indeed there is no multitude of different things. There is 
only one Rudra. There is none second to him.** Hence I 
seek refuge in you, the sole great lord. 

39- Cp TS. r. 8. 6, I ; N. I. 15. 




1127 . 


^atarudrasarhkitd 


43. O Siva, you alone are the creator and annihilator 
of every thing. In the different forms you are of single form 
and formless. Just as the inner virtue is only one though 
it may seem to be many. Hence I do not resort to any one 
except you. 

44. The snake in the rope, the silver in the oyster 
shell, the water in the mirage —like that when he is known, 
the whole world vanishes and Sat alone remains. I resort to 
that great lo^d. 

45. Coolness in the water, heat in the fire, the scor¬ 
ching nature in the sun and the pleasing gentleness in the 
moon, fragrance in the flower and the ghee in the milk— 
just, in that manner, O Siva, you are the essense in the world. 
Hence I resort to you. 

46. You the earless perceive sound; you the noseless 
perceive fragrance; you the footless come from far; you the 
eyeless see; you the tongueless perceive the taste. Who 
knows you really? Hence I seek refuge in you. 

47. O lord, even the Vedas do not know you directly, 
nor Visnu, nor the Creator of every thing, nor the leading 
Yogins, nor Indra and other gods. Only a devotee knows. 
Hence I seek refuge in you. 

48. You have no spiritual lineage; you are unborn; 
you arc immortal, formless without any prescribed conduct 
or native land. Still you are the lord of three worlds and 
you fulfil all our desires. I worship you. 

49. Everything originates from you. You are all-in-all, 
O enemy of Kama, you are the lord of Gauri; you are naked 
and quiescent; you are old, youthful and the child. Whatever 
is, you arc that. There is no source of your origin. I bow 
to you. 

XandiSvara said :— 

50. After eulogising thus, when the brahmin fell on 
the ground with the joined hands, the boy became the aged 
of the aged and spoke delightedly to the brahmin. 

The boy said * 

51. O ViSvanara, O excellent sage, O brahmin, pro- 



1128 


pitiated by you I am very much delighted. Ask for the 
boon of your choice. ^ 

52. Then the delighted and contented sage Vi^vanara 
stood up and replied to ^iva who had assumed the form 
of a boy. 

Viivanara said :— 

53. O lord Siva, what is it that is not known to you 
who are omniscient? You are lord Sarva the gran ter of 
everything and the immanent soul of all. 

54. Why do you speak forcing me in the pity-provok¬ 
ing task of imploration? O lord Siva, after knowing this, 
please do as you wish. 

Nandiivara said :— 

55. On hearing the upright words of Viivanara of pure 
rites, the lord in the form of a child, spoke smilingly. 

56. O pious one, the desire that you have cherished 
in your heart regarding l^ucismati will be certainly realised 
ere long. 

57. O intelligent one, I shall become your son in 
Suci^mati. I shall be known as Grhapati, pure and loved 
by all gods. 

58. The hymn of eight verses of desire—Abhilasastaka 
—that you recited now, when recited thrice a day for a year 
in the vicinity of i§iva will yield all desires. 

59. The recitation of this hymn yields sons, grandsons 
and wealth. It is conducive to the mollification of everything 
and quells all mishaps. 

60. It is the cause of acquisition of heaven, emancipa¬ 
tion and prosperity. There is no doubt in this. This is on 
a par with all other hymns. It always yields every desire. 

61. If an issueless man gets up early in the morning, 
takes his bath, worships $iva*s phallic image, recites this 
hymn and continues the practice for a year, he will surely 
secure a son. 

62. The Abhilasastaka hymn shall not be taught to 
common people. It shall be preserved carefully as a secret 
mantra. It makes the most barren lady deliver of a child. 

63. This hymn recited by a woman or a m.'in with 



SatarudrasarhhilS 


1129 


due observances in the presence of a phallic image for a 
year undoubtedly yields the birth of a son. 

NandtSvara said :— 

64, After saying this, Siva, the goal of the good and 
who assumed the form of a boy vanished. The brahmin 
Vi^vanara returned to his house highly delighted. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

{The incarnation of Grhapati) 


NandUvara said :— 

1. With great delight the brahmin returned home and 
told his beloved wife all thos : details. 

2. On hearing it, Suci^mati, the wife of the brahmin, 
rejoiced much and being full of love she praised her good 
fortune. 

3. She became pregnant in due course. The brahmin 
performed the rite of impregnation^® duly. 

4. Before the stir and throb of the child in the womb 
was felt, the learned Brahmin performed the holy rite of 
Puihsavana*^ in the manner prescribed in the Grhyasutras for 
the growth of embryo’s manliness. 

5. Then in the eighth month he performed the holy 
rite of Simanta^® which is conducive to the growth of the 
embryo and which facilitates easy delivery of the child. 

40 Gjirbh&dtvina or Garbhalambhana is a riie by the perfbrmanre 
of which a woman receives semen scattered by her husband. 

P.M I. 4. i. The saihskSra presupposes a well established home, a 
regular marriage, a desire of possessing children and a religious idea that 
beneAcent gods help men in begetting childn-n. 

4>. The rile of seeking a male child (Pum.'^avana) is performed in 
the third or fourth month of pregnancy or even later, on the day when the 
moon is on a male constellation on Ti$ya particularly. 

In this rite the hairs of the pre^nant^ woman are parted in the 
sixth or eighth month of pregnancy. Yflj. 1. n. 

This is done to ward o(T evil spirits »hn are bent on sucking the blood of 
the foetus. 



6-9. Then at the conjunction of stars when Jupiter 
was in the centre, when the Lagna was auspicious, when the 
good planets stood in pairs, Siva, the giver of happiness 
to all, was born as the son of Suci^matl. His face resembled 
the moon. The lamps in the lying-in-chamber were dim¬ 
med by his bodily lustre. The lord, the destroyer of mis¬ 
fortunes and the bestower of happiness to the dwellers of the 
Earth, the nether worlds and the heaven was born as the son. 
The smoke exuding therefrom became the perfume to 
sweeten the breath of the quarters. The immense clouds 
showered flowers of pleasing fragrance. The divine drums 
were sounded and the quarters were brightened up. 

10. The rivers became transparent as also the minds 
of living beings. The darkness of evil dwindled and the 
Rajas was stripped of its quality or of its dust. 

11. The living creatures were endowed with Sattva 
quality. There was a shower of nectar. People began to 
talk sweet and pleasant words. 

12-13. Rambha and other celestial damsels arrived 
with auspicious articles in their hands. Thousands of 
Vidyadharis, Kinnaris, Goddesses, the womenfolk of Gan- 
dharvas, serpents and Yaksas of sweet voice flocked singing 
auspicious songs. 

14-20. The following sages came there—Marici, Atri, 
Pulaha, Pulastya, Kratu, Angiras, Vasi^tha, KaiSyapa, 
Agastya, Vibhanda sou of Mantjavi, Lomasa, Romacara^a, 
Bharadvaja, Gautama, Bhrgu, Galava, Garga, Jatukarna, 
Para^ara, Apastamba, Yajftavalkya, Dak^a, Valmtki, Mud- 
gala, Satatapa Likhita, Silada, Sahkha, Uficchabhuk, Jama- 
dagni, Sarhvarta, Matahga, Bharata, ArhSuman, Vyasa 
Katyayana, Kutsa, Saunaka, Susruta, Suka, R^yaifnga, Dur- 
vasas, Suci, Narada, Tumburu, Uttaiika, Vamadeva, Pavana, 
Asita, Devala, Salankayana, Harita, Visvamitra, Bhargava, 
Mfkundu with his son, Parvata, Daruka, Dhaumya, Upa* 
manyu Vatsa and others came to the happy hermitage of 
Vi.svanara for the auspicious Santi ceremony. The daugh¬ 
ters of the sages too came there. 

21. Brahma came there with Bfhaspati. Lord Vi^riu 
came riding on Ganida as vehicle. The bull-bannered lord 
came there with Gauri, Nandin, Bhrngi and others. 



SatarudrasatfMtd 


1131 


22. Mahendra and other gods^ the Nagas residing 
in the nether regions came there. Taking gems with them 
many great oceans and rivers came there. 

23. Thousands of immobile beings came there in the 
forms of the mobile beings. During the great festivities then 
there was an untimely flood of moonlight. 

24-25. Brahma himself performed the postnatal rite^* 
after bowing to the infant. In consonance with his form 
and beauty he gave him the na^e** of Grhapati on the 
eleventh day in accordance with injunctions, repeating the 
Vedic mantras. 

26. After conlerring blessings on everyone by reciting 
the mantras from the four Vedas, Brahma left the place while 
riding on the swan. 

27. After affording proper safeguards for the child in 
accordance with worldly conventions Siva returned to his 
abode on his vehicle along with Visnu. 

28-30. The visitors praised the infant. They were at 
the height of their joy. They spoke in unison “O what a 
beauty ! What a splendour ! All the characteristic signs are 
there in all the limbs. How fortunate is Suci^mati ! Siva 
himself is born. What is surprising in this ? Siva has in¬ 
carnated in all devotees. Siva has been worshipped by her.” 
Then they took leave of Visvanara and departed. 

31. The eternal Veda says—‘ A person conquers the 
worlds through a son ’. Hence all householders wish for 
a son. 

32. The house of a sonless person is a void. His 
earnings are futile. His penance is split. It is not holy due 
to the want of a son. 

33. Both here and hereafter there is no better acquisi¬ 
tion than a son; there is no better happiness than a son; 
there is no greater friend than a son. 

34. In the fourth month the rite of “crossing the 

4^. See P. 1090 Note 

44. The N&tnakarai.ia (name^giving) was more a custom than a 
ceremony at hrst but it was later on included in the saihskaras. The 
ceremony is performed on an auspicious day ranging from the tenth up to 
the first day ^ the second year. 



1132 


Sivapurttina 


threshold” was performed by the father.^* At the end of six 
months the rite of Annapiasana^* and at the end of a year 
the tonsure ceremony*^ was performed. » 

35. The knower rites performed the Karnavedha rite*® 
under the constellation of Srav<ina. In order to enhance his 
brahminical splendour he made him perform an auspicious 
Vrata*® in his fifth year. 

36. After celebrating theUpakarma rite,®® the intelligent 
sage taught him the Vedas. The boy learned the Vedas for 
a year with their ancillaries. He learnt the Padapa^ha and 
Kramapatha of the Vedas. 

37. Evincing his humility and other qualities, the 
competent youth grasped the lore almost by himself but for¬ 
mally through the preceptor just as a medium. 

38. In his ninth year, Narada came there to see 
Grhapati, son of Visvanar^i, and found him engaged in ser¬ 
ving his parents. 

39. The divine sage reached the hut of Visvanara, 
received due hospitality and seated himself. Eagerly he 
enquired of his health. 

40. He remembered the lotus-like feet of Siva and 
mentioned to Visvanara the future fortune and activities of 
his son. 

41-42. Narada said to the boy “O son of Visvanara 
come on. Sit on my lap. I shall study your characteristics. 
Show me your right hand.” On being thus addressed, the 
boy bowed to Narada after receiving the permission of his 

4). According to this Purana, the ceremony of taking the child 

out of the h;,u.sc is perfornu'd in the fourth m* nth. But there is a wide 
option about the time of this sainsLAra. 

46. The rite of feeding the child for the first time is performed 
in the sixth, eighth, ninth, tenth or even at the expiry of a year. But 
the right occasion is when the child’s teeth come out 

47. The rite of shaving, cutting the hair and nails is peifoimed to 
remove the impurities and impart g'od health. This is done at the end 
of first year or before the expiry of the third >ear. 

48. The ceremony of boring the cars of the child is performed as 
precaution against hydrocele and hernia. Cp Susruia, CikitsA 19. ai. 

49. I'hc rite of learning alphabets was peiformed in the fifth year 
when the mind of the cliil<| v.a.s prepared to receive education. 

V>. The c' lemnny of initiation arose out of the civil needs of the 
community at first. But n leceived a religious rolotiiing later on, for 
every funrtibn was in need of religions sanction for its valMity. 



Satarudrasarhhitd 


1133 


parents. With great devotion the glorious child sat there 
humbly. 

NandiSvara said :— 

43. Examining closely the palate, tongue etc. (of the 
boy) the intelligent Narada spoke to Visvanara, urged by 
Siva. 

Mdrada said :— 

44. “O sage Visvanara, listen. I shall mention the 
detailed characteristic marks of your son. Your son Jbears 
good marks on every limb. He possesses all good signs. 

45. But fate alone must guard this boy duly, this boy 
who has all good qualities, who is characterised by all good 
features and who is possessed of all pure digits in their 
entirety. 

46. This child should be protected with all effort?. 
When the fate is adverse, even good qualities assume the 
state of defects. 

47. In the twelfth month from now 1 suspect a great 
danger to him from lightning and fire.” After saying this 
Narada returned to heaven the way he had come. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

( The incarnation of Gfhapati) 

Nandiivara said :— 

1. On hearing the revelation of Narada, Visvanara and 
his wife considered it a terrible bolt from the blue. 

2. He shouted “O I am doomed !” He beat his chest. 
Excited by the grief about his son he fell into a great swoon. 

3. The grief-stricken Suci§mati too lamented much. 
Her senses were benumbed and she. lamented aloud. 

4. On hearing her loud lamentation, Visvanara woke 
up from his swoon. He cried aloud “What is this? What 
is this ? Where is Gfhapati my vital breath who stands 



1134 SivapUfS^ 

outside and who is the lord of all the senses lodged within 
me. 

5. On seeing his parents excessively grieved, <hc boy 
Gfhapati, a part of Siva, smiled and said. 

GrhaPati said :— 

6. O Mother, O Father, what is the reason? Please 
tell me now. Why do both of you cry ? What and whence 
is such a fright for you ? 

7. Time and pitiable fickle existence cannot affect me, 
whose body is guarded by the dust-particles of your feet. 

8. O my parents, please listen to my vow. If I am 
your true son, I will do that whereby death itself will be 
terrified. 

9. I shall propitiate lord Siva, the conqueror of 
death, the omniscient and the bestower of all to the good. I 
shall perform the Japa of Mahakala. O parents, I am 
telling you the truth. 

NandiSvara said :— 

10. On hearing his words the aged branmin couple 
were freed of their distress by the untimely showers of nectar. 
They then spoke. 

The brahmin couple said :— 

11. Say again. Say again. What is it? What is it? 
Speak again. Time and pitiable fickle existence will not 
affect you? 

12. A great means has oeen suggested by you to dis¬ 
pel our distress, that of the propitiation of lord Siva, the 
conqueror of death. 

T3. The same is the result for those who seek refuge 
in Siva who dispels sins and does every thifig beyond the 
path of our desire. There is nothing better than this. 

14. O dear, haven’t you heard that the slayer of 
the Tripuras protected, in days of yore, Svetaketu who was 
bound by the noose of Kala ? 

15. When Silada’s son was threatened by death, when 
he was only eight, Siva saved him and made him his own 
attendant as Nandin, the delighter of the whole universe. 



S^arudrasartihitd 


1135 


16. He protected the three worlds by drinking ofT the 

terrible poison as fearful as the fire at the hour of dis¬ 

solution, when it was produced at the churning of the milk- 
ocean. 

17. With the wheel raised up by the line drawn with 
his beautiful toe he killed the haughty Jalandhara who had 
deprived the three worlds of their pleasure. 

18. He burnt the Tripuras, who were haughty and 

deluded by their lordship of the three worlds, by means of 
the blazing fires emanating from the fall of a single arrow. 

19. Even as Brahma and others were watching, he 

reduced Kama to ashes by a single glance, Kama whose 

strength had been enhanced by his conquest of the three 

worlds. 

20. O son, seek refuge in that Siva, the amulet of 
protection of the universe, the sole creator of Indra, Acyuta, 
Brahma and others. 

Nandiivara said ; — 

21. Thus he secured the permission of his parents. He 
bowed at their feet and circumambulated them. He then 
pacified them and started. 

22-25. He reached Kali inaccessible even to Brahma, 
Visnu and others. He reached Kail that dispels all recur¬ 
ring distress, that is protected by Vilvcia, that shines with 
the celestial river Gaiiga as with a necklace round its neck, 
that shines splendidly by the presence of Parvati, the consorl 
of Siva and of wonderful qualities. After reaching Kali he 
went to Manikar^ika at the outset. After taking bath in 
accordance with the injunctions of the Sastras he saw Lord 
Vilvelvara** with palms joined and head bent in reverence. 
The intelligent brahmin was greatly delighted. He bowed 
to lord Siva who instils life into and protects the three worlds. 

26. Seeing that phallic image of Siva again and again 
he was delighted in his heart and thought—^‘Undoubtedly 
this is possessed of great bliss.” 

51. Installed at Varftoasl, Vilvesvara is one of the twelve, grMt 
phallic images of lord Siva. It has been for many centuries the chief 
object of worship. Its propitiation is said to result in the increase of 
material wealth and spiritual attainment. 



27. Ha, there is none more blessed than I in the three 
worlds consisting of the mobile and immobile beings since 
today I have seen here the lord Vi^ve^vara. 

28. It is only to enhance my good fortune that sage 
Narada formerly came and told me that. I am therefore 
very much contented. 

29-31. By the nectarine juice of bliss he concluded the 
sacred rite. Then on an auspicious day he installed the 
phallic image, the bestower of all benefits. He adopted austere 
rites difficult to be performed by those who have no control 
over themselves. He filled pots with the water of the Ganga 
strained and purified by means of a cloth. Every day he 
bathed the phallic image with hundred and eight potfulls 
of water. Then he put a garland of blue lotus round the 
deity. 

32. He wreathed the garlands with a thousand and 
eight flowers. He ate fruits, roots and bulbous roots once 
in a fortnight or a month. 

33. The courageous devotee spent six months by eat¬ 
ing withered leaves. The remaining six months he spent 
drinking drops of water or simply breathing. 

34. O Brahmins, thus a year in the life of that noble 
soul passed by, performing the penance with the devoted 
mind resting only in Siva. 

35. In the twelfth year of his life, the thunderbolt- 
armed Indra approached him as if fulfilling the utterance 
of Narada. 

36. He said—brahmin, I am Indra, I am delighted 
at your holy rites. Ask for the boon you wish to have. I shall 
give you whatever desire you have in your mind. 

37. On hearing the words of lord Indra, the son of the 
sage spoke these words boldly and sweetly. 

Grhapati said :— 

38. “O Indra, O enemy of Vrtra, I know you as armed 
with the thunderbolt. I do not want a boon from you. Siva 
is the grantor of boon to me.” 

Indra said :— 

39. O child, Siva is pot separate from me. I am the 



Satatudrasarhhitd. 1137 

lord of gods. Give up your foolhardiness and ask for a boon 
from me. Do not delay. 

Grhapati said :— 

40. O Paramour of Ahalya®^ O wicked one, O enemy 
of mountains, O chastiser of Paka, it is quite clear that I 
shall not ask any other god except Siva for a boon. 

Nandiivara said :— 

41. On hearing his words, Indra’s eyes turned red 
with fury. He raised his terrible thunderbolt and threatened 
the boy with dire consequences. 

42. On seeing the thunderbolt with the flames of light¬ 
ning, the boy remembered the words of Narad a. He became 
frightened and fell into a swoon. 

43. Then Siva, the lord of Parvati, the dispeller of 
darkness appeared in front. As though enlivening him with 
gentle strokings he said :—“Stand up. Stand up. May good 
come up to you.” 

44. Opening his eyes resembling the lotus that had 
gone to sleep at the end of the day and getting up, he saw 
Siva shining more brilliantly than hundred suns. 

45-49. Seeing the lord with the eyes in the fore-head, 
blue-necked, bull-bannered, moon-crested, with Parvati oc¬ 
cupying the left side, shining with matted hair, armed with 
the trident and Ajagava bow, possessed of limbs shining white 
like camphor, clad in the elephant’s hide, he recognised the 
lord as the great God described in the Agamas and statements 
of his preceptor. He w'as delighted and he evinced the thrill 
of hair. For a moment he stood motionless like the mount¬ 
ain Gitrakuta.* He forgot himself like a man suddenly 
becoming rich. He was unable to eulogise or bow down or 
plead for anything. Then Siva smiled and said. 

^iva said :— 

50. O child Grhapati, 1 know that you are frightened 

53. The epithet speaks contemptuously of Indra. He is called the 
seducer of Ahalya—the wife of the sage Gauiama. for which he' was 
cursed by the sage. As a result of Gautama’s imprecation Indra boie a 
thousand marks resembling a female organ which afterwards that.^rd 
to eyes. 

*The text of the second P.ld3 of Verse 84 is deferlive. 



1138 


of Indra with the thunderbolt in his lifted hand. Don't 
be afraid, I only wanted to know your nature. 

51. Neither Indra, nor the thunderbolt, nor even the 
god of death is powerful to molest my devotee. You have 
been terrified by me alone in the form of Indra. 

52. O gentle one, I shall grant you the boon. I confer 
the title of Agni on you. I authorise you to grant boons to 
whatever deity you think fit. 

53. O Agni, you will be moving in the midst of all 
mortals. Acquire kingship as the guardian of the quarter 
in the south-east. 

54. The phallic image installed by you will be known 
by your name. It will be known as Agnisvara and it will 
be conducive to the enhancement of all splendour. 

55. The devotees of Agnisvara need not fear lightning 
and fire. They will never suffer from impaired digestion or 
premature death. 

56. A person who worships Agnisvara, the bestower of 
prosperity, at Varanasi, is honoured in the region of fire even 
if, by chance, he dies elsewhere. 

NandiSvara said :— 

57. After saying this and fetching his kinsmen 8iva 
crowned him as the guardian of the quarter. Even as the 
parents watched it, l§iva entered his phallic image 

58. Thus, O dear, the incarnation of 8iva as fire has 
been explained to you. This incarnation of l^iva, the great 
soul, is famous as Gfhapati also. 

59. The city of Gitrahotra is beautiful, pleasant and 
finely lustrous. Those who are devotees of fire stay there. 

60. People of steady Sattvika quality and control over 
their sense-organs, who enter fire, or women endowed with 
Sattva quality become as lustrous as fire. 

61. Brahmins performing Agnihotra regularly, Brahma- 
carins maintaining sacrificial fires, and those who stay amidst 
five fires become as splendrous as fire in the region of fire. 

62. He who makes gifts of bundles of fuel during 
winter for alleviating chillness or he who makes fire-bricks 
(of cow-dung) stays with fire. 



Satarudrasarhhitd U39 

63. He who faithfully f>erforms the rites ol' cremation 
for the unclaimed bodies or he who urges others to do so, 
himself being incapable, is honoured in the region of fire. 

64. Fire alone is the greatest means of salvation for 
the brahmins. He is the preceptor, the lord, the sacred rite, 
the holy centre. Certainly everything is fire. 

65. All unholy things become pure the moment they 
come into contact with lire. Therefore fire is called Purifier. 

66. The fire is certainly the immanent soul of man. 
Even morsels of flesh it will digest in the stomach, but not 
the muscles of women. 

67. The fiery form of Siva is in the form of the 
fire visible. Excepting this what else is seen as creative, 
protective and destructive? 

68. Fire is the eye of the lord of the three worlds. 
In this world of pitch darkness what else than this becomes 
the illuminator? 

69. The incense, the lights, the food offerings, milk, 
curd, ghee and sugarcane juice—all these go unto the dwel¬ 
lers of heaven when offered into the fire here. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

(A’ofl’j Incarnation as Takfeivara) 

JIandUvara said '.— 

1. O great sage, listen to the Yak^e^vara incarnation 
of iSiva, that dispels the arrogance of the arrogant and lets 
the devotion of ^e good flourish. 

2. Formerly, the powerful gods and the Daityas moti¬ 
vated by the desire to gain their selfish ends churned the milk 
ocean for achieving nectar. 

3. When the churning of the milk ocean started as 
the gods and demons wanted nectar, poison blazing as the 
fire of dissolution came out at first. 



1140 iwapurS^ 

4. O dear, at the sight of it, the gods and the daityas 

were highly agitated and frightened. They fled from there 
immediately and sought refuge in Siva. * 

5. After seeing Siva» the crestjewel of all the gods, 
all of them including Vi$nu devoutly bent their heads and 
bowed to Visnu with devotion. 

6. Then the delighted lord Siva favourably disposed to 
the devotees, quaffed off the terrible poison afflicting gods 
and Asuras. 

7. The lord retained obliquely the acute poison that 
he drank, in his neck. He shone much thereby and became 
Blue-necked. 

8. Released from the burning sensation of the poison 
thanks to the blessings of Siva, the gods and the Asuras 
began to churn again. 

9. O sage, many gems came out of it, but O sage, it 
was the nectar that the gods and the Danavas prized much. 

10. Not the Asuras, but the gods drank the nectar, 
thanks to the favour of Visnu. Then a great battle ensued 
between them inflicting pain on both.^^ 

11. A mutual clash occurred between the gods and the 
Danavas, O sage. The moon was eclipsed by Rahu and fled 
in terror of Rahu. 

12. He went to the abode of Siva extremely agitated 
by fe-»r and sought Siva’s protection. Saying “Protect me 
O Lord, protect me” he bowed to the lord and eulogised 
him. 

13. Lord Siva, the bestower of protection to the good, 
and favourably disposed to his devotees, wore the moon on 
his head as the latter had sought refuge. 

14. Then Rahu too, came there. He bowed to and 
eulogised lord Siva with reverence by means of sweet v/ords. 

15. Realising his desire, Siva fixed on to his neck his 
head that had been formerly cut off by Vi|nu, and that 
was known as Ketu. 

16. Then the Asuras were defeated by the gods in the 
battle. By drinking nectar the gods had become powerful 
and gained victory. 


53. The text of the fourth frot ol this vr^rse is corrupt. 



^atarudratarhhitd 1141 

17. Deluded by Siva’s Maya, Vi^^u and others became 
very haughty. Their strength began to take root and sprout 
within them. 

18. O sage, then Lord Siva, the suppressor of arro¬ 
gance, became a Yak^a. He hastened to the place, O sage, 
where the gods were stationed. 

19. On seeing Vi^nu and all other gods arrogant in 
their minds, lord Siva, the lord of Yaksas and the suppressor 
of arrogance spoke. 

Takfeivara said :— 

20. O ye gods, why have you all assembled here. 
What is your goal ? Tell me the reason as I ask unto you. 

The gods said — 

21. O lord, a terrible battle took place here wherein 
all the Asuras were killed. The few that remained fled 
away. 

22. We are great heroes and powerful slayers of the 
Daityas. How insignificant in strength are those Daityas in 
front of us ! 

NandiSmra said :— 

23. On hearing the arrogant words of those gods, 
lord Siva, the suppressor of arrogance, in the form of Yak^a 
said. 

TakfeSoara said :— 

24. O ye gods, you listen to my words with attention. 
I shall tell you the truth that will dispel arrogance. 

25. Do not be arrogant. There is another lord who 
is the creator and annihilator. You have forgotten the great 
lord. You boast too much but you are devoid of strength. 

26. If you are proud and think that you know your 
strength to be great, O gods, split this blade of grass placed 
by me, with your own weapons. 

NandUvara said:— 

27. Saying this, Siva in the form of Yakfa, the goal 
of the good, placed a blade of grass before them and dispel¬ 
led their arrogance. 



28. Then Visnu and other gods professing to be 
heroic exerted their manliness and hurled their respective 
weapons. 

29. But the weapons of the gods, were rendered fruitless 
before the power of Siva, the destroyer of the arrogance of 
the deluded. 

30. Then a celestial voice arose that dispelled the 
surprise of the gods—“O gods this Yaksa is Siva who 
removes the arrogance of the arrogant. 

31. The lord himself is the creator, sustainer and 
annihilator. The living beings are powerful thanks onlv to 
his power. Otherwise they are not powerful. 

32. Deluded by the power of his illusion you have 
become arrogant and have not realised lord Siva, who is 
the very knowledge embodied. 

33. O hearing the celestial voice they became divested 
of their arrogance. They had realised Yakse^vara. They 
bowed to and eulogised him. 

The gods said :— 

34. O lord of the gods, the dispeller of arrogance, O 
Yakse^vara of great sports, O lord, your Maya is wonderful. 

35. Even now we are deluded by this Maya of yours 
in the form of Yaksa. Hence, separated from you we began 
to speak arrogantly before you. 

36. O lord, thanks to your grace, alone, knowledge 
has dawned on us. O Siva, you alone are the creator, 
sustainer and annihilator, none else. 

37. You alone arc the initiator and the withdrawer 
of all powers. You are lord of all, the threat soul, the 
unchanging, the unrivalled. 

38. In the form of Yak^eSvara you have removed our 
arrogance. With sympathy and kindness we think we have 
been blessed by you. 

39. Then the Yaksanitha blessed the gods enlightened 
them with various instructions and vanished there itself. 

40. Thus has been described the pleasant incarnation 
of Siva called Yak^elvara that bestows pleasure, satisfaction 
and protection of the good. 



i^Umukasartihiti IMS 

41. The narrative is sacred; it dispels all arrogance; 
it bestows peace, worldly pleasure and salvation upon all good 
men. 

42. The intelligent man who listens to or narrates 
this with devotion attains all desires. Then he attains 
salvation. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

(The incarnations of £iva) 


Mandikeivara said :— 

1. Now listen to the first ten incarnations of Siva 
beginning with that of Mahakala. They are resorted to with 
devotion and explained in Upasanakanda. 

2. The first incarnation is that of Mahakala, the bcs- 
tower of worldly pleasures and liberation to the good. Sakti 
there, is Mahakall'^ who bestows the desired fruits on the 
devotees. 

3. The second incarnation is called Tara. Sakti there, 
is Tara. Both of them confer worldly pleasures and salvation 
on their attendants. 

4. The lord of worlds called Bala is glorified as the 
third incarnation. Sakti there, is Siva that bestows plea¬ 
sure on the good. 

5. Srividyela is the fourth incarnation and 

Srividya, Siva $oda^i is the Sakti. They confer pleasure on 
the devotees and yield worldly pleasures as well as salvation. 

6. The fifth incarnation is famous as Bhairava, who 
bestows desires on the devotees. Sakti there is Bhairavi who 
bestows desires on good worshippers. 

7. The sixth incarnation of Siva is glorified as Ghin- 
namastaka who confers desires. Sakti there, is Dhumavati who 
bestows all desires on the devotees. 

54. The concept of god (in the male form) and his Energy (in 
the female form) is not pecnliar to Siva-cult alone. It belongs to 
almost every god—Vifnu, firahmft, Indra and others. It is found in 
pairs—Siva-lSivl, Vi^Ou-Vaistiav!, Brahmi-BrahmSpi, Indra-IndifiiiT. The 
Present chapter mentions the eluent incarnations of $iva and their re- 
pective l^ergies. 



1144 


&oapiir^ 


8. The seventh incarnation of Siva is Dhumav&n, the 
bestower of the fruits of all desires. Saktit here, is Dhumavati 
who bestows all desires on the good worshippers. * 

9. The eighth pleasant incarnation of Siva is Bagala- 
mukha, Sakti there, is Bagalamukhi who is also famous as 
Mahananda. 

10. The ninth incarnation of Siva is glorified as Ma- 
tanga. Sakti there, is Matangi who bestows the fruits of all 
desires. 

11. The tenth incarnation of Siva is Kamala, the 
bestower of fruits of worldly pleasures and salvation. Sakti 
there, is Kamala, the protectress of her own devotees. 

12. The ten incarnations of Siva are pleasing as they 
confer worldly pleasures and salvation. They bestow every¬ 
thing on good devotees. 

13. These ten incarnations of Siva the great soul 
bestow different kinds of pleasures on those who always resort 
to them without aberrations. 

14. O sage, the glory of the ten in:amations of Siva 
has thus been described. It bestows all desires as explained 
in the Tantraiastra and other treatises. 

15. O sage, the greatness of these Saktis too is wonder¬ 
ful. It bestows all desires and shall be known as explained 
in Tantra^astra and other treatises. 

16. The different Saktis are considered in such activi¬ 
ties as destroying enemies etc. They punish the wicked and 
enhance brahminical splendour. 

17. O Brahmin, thus I have explained to you the ten 
incarnations of Siva along with his Sakti, beginning with 
Mahakala. They are all auspicious. 

18. He who reads this sacred narrative during the 
festivals of Siva, with great devotion becomes a great favou¬ 
rite of Siva. 

19. A brahmin attains the sacred splendour of Brahman; 
K^atriya becomes victorious; a Vaiiya becomes lord of wealth 
and a Sudra attains happiness. 

20. The devotees of Siva maintaining their respective 
duties and listening to this narrative become especially happy 
and devoted to Siva. 



SedarudrasmhhiUl 


1143 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

0iva*s Eleven Incarnations) 

Sioa said :— 

1. Listen to the eleven excellent incarnations of l^iva 
on hearing which obstacles due to intimate contact with 
worldly objects etc. do not torment. 

2. Formerly Indra and other gods defeated by the 
Asuras left their capital Amaravati^* due to fear. 

3. The gods harrassed by the Daityas went to Ka^yapa. 
Highly agitated, they bowed down to him with palms joined 
and shoulders drooping. 

4. After eulogising well, the gods made tbe submission 
respectfully. They intimated to him their misery due to that 
defeat. 

5. O dear, on hearing the misery of the gods their 
father Kasyapa whose mind was attached to Siva, was much 
distressed. 

6. O sage, tne sage consoled and encouraged them. 
With his mind regaining calmness he joyously went to Kali 
presided over by lord Vilvesvara. 

7. Taking his ceremonial bath in the waters of the 
Gahga and performing due rites, he worshipped Lord Vil> 
velvara, lord of the universe, accompanied by Parvatl. 

8. With the desire for the benefit of the gods he joy¬ 
ously installed Sivalihga and performed an elaborate penance 
with Siva as the object of pursuit. 

9. A long time elapsed, O sage, as he boldly per¬ 
formed penance with his mind attached to the lotus-like feet 
of Siva 

10. In order to grant the boon to that sage whose 
mind was devoted to his feet, Siva, kinsman of the distressed 
and goal of the good, appeared in front of him. 

11. The delighted Siva who is favourably disposed 
towards his devotees said to Kasyapa, the best of his devotees, 
to ask for the boon. 

5'}. It is the capital of Indra’s heaven, famous for its greatness and 
splendour. It is called Devapura, ‘city of gods’ and Pu^ibhdsS, ‘sun- 
splendour’ and by -various other names- 



1146 SivapurS^a 

12. On seeing lord Siva, the delighted Ka^yapa bowed 
to him with palms joined in reverence. Ka^yapa, the pro¬ 
genitor of the gods, eulogised him with contentment in his 
mind. 

KaSyapa said 

13. O lord Siva, lord of the gods, favourably disposed 
towards those who seek refuge in you, you are the lord of all, 
the great soul, achievable only through meditation, the un¬ 
equalled and unchanging. 

14. O lord Siva, you are the restrainer of evil forces. 
You are the goal of the good, kinsman of the distressed, ocean of 
mercy and intellectually efficient in protecting your devotees. 

15. O lord, these gods are your own. They are espe¬ 
cially devoted to you. Now they are defeated by the Asuras. 
Save them from distress. 

16. Even Visnu cannot move in this matter. He has 
frequently pressed you for this job. The gods have sought 
refuge in me intimating their misfortune. 

17. O lord of the chiefs of the gods, O destroyer of 
the miseries of the gods, it is for this that I have performed 
this penance and resorted to you. My purpose has now been 
fulfilled by you since you are pleased. 

18. O lord, I have sought refuge in you by all means 
O lord, please fulfill my desire. Please dispel the misery of 
the gods. 

19. O lord of gods, I too am much distressed at the 
misfortune of my sons. O lord, make me happy. You are the 
source of succour to the heaven-dwellers. 

20 O lord 6iva, the gods and the Yak^as, born as 
my sons, have been defeated by the powerful Asuras. Be 
the bestower of bliss on the gods. 

21. O lord l§iva, do help the gods always lest the 
harassment by the Asuras should afflict them. 

Nandiivara said :— 

22. On being thus requested, lord, 6iva said “So be it’* 
and even as he was watching he vanished' there. 

23. Ka^yapa too was delighted. Immediately he re- 



Satarudrasar/Aitd 


1147 


turned to his abode. He eagerly intimated to the gods all tnc 
details. 

24. Then, in order to keep his promise Siva was born 
of Surabhi assuming eleven forms. 

25. There was great jubilation then. Everything be¬ 
came auspicious. The gods and the sage Ka^yapa became 
delighted. 

26-27. These are the eleven Rudras born of Surabh! 
(I) Kapalin (2) Pingala (3) Bhima (4) Virupak^a (5) Vi- 
lohita (6) Sastj* (7) Ajapad (8) Ahirbudhnya (9) Siva 
(10) Ganda and (11) Bhava. They were born for the aid 
to the gods. They are identical with Siva and the cause of 
happiness. 

28. Those Rudras, born of Ka^yapa, rendering help 
to the gods, slew the Daityas in the battle. They were heroes 
of great strength and exploit. 

29. By the grace of those Rudras, the gods conquered 
the Asuras and were rid of fear. Indra and other gods had 
peace of mind and ruled over their own kingdom. 

30 Even today the great Rudras, identical with Siva, 
shine always in the sky for the protection of the gods. 

31. Those Rudras favourably disposed towards their 
devotees took up their residence in the north-eastern city of 
Isana. Experts in different kinds of sports they sport about 
there always. 

32. The Rudras glorified as their followers and retainers 
are crores in number. They are stationed everywhere in the 
three worlds, undividedly. 

33. O dear, thus the eleven Rudra incarnations of 
Siva, pleasing to all the worlds have been described to you. 

34. This narrative is pure, it destroys all sins. It is 
conducive to wealth, fame and longevity. It yields all desires. 

35. He who listens to or reads this with pious heart 
enjoys all pleasures here and attains liberation hereafter. 


56. The names of eleven Rudras differ in different Pur&^as. Born 
of Surabhi from Kaiypa, residing in the North eastern regions, these were 
directed to protect the gods against the Asuras. The Pur&nas speak of 
Rudras emanated from these and stationed in the three worlds for carrying 
out the task of protecting the good against the wicked. 



1148 


SioatwiS^ 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

{The Narratioe of Durodsas) 

Nandiivara said :— 

1. O great sage, now listen lovingly to another story 
of 8iva, how Siva was born as Durvasas for the maintenance 
of virtue. 

2. Atri, son of Brahma, was a great sage. He was 
holy and a knower of Brahman. He was the husband of 
Anasuya. He was intelligent and he strictly followed the 
orders of Brahma. 

3. At the direction of Brahma he went to the moun¬ 
tain Rksakula^^ accompanied by his wife in order to per¬ 
form penance there, with the desire to get son. 

4. On the banks of the river Nirvindhya,*® the sage 
who had controlled his breath and had freed himself from 
mutually clashing emotions performed a great penance for 
a hundred years. 

5. He decided in his mind thus—, **let that sole great 
lord, whoever he is, who is free from aberrations, grant me 
the boon of a son.** 

6. A long time elapsed while he performed the holy 
penance. A holy flame of fire came out of him. 

7. O great sage, the worlds were almost burnt by that 
flame. Indra and other gods and the celestial sages too 
were afflicted by it. 

8. Then, highly distressed by that flame, O sage, Indra 
and other gods and the sages hastened to the abode of Bra¬ 
hma. 

9. After bowing to and eulogising Brahma the gods 
mentioned to him their grief. O dear, Brahma immediately 
went to Vi9nu*s region along with the god. 

57 0 is a misprint for ]^k>akula. The name 8k?a (mod. 

Satpura) was applied to a section of the Vindhya range lying to the 
north of tlje Narmada river while the Vindhya distinguished from the 
^ksa denoted the chain lying to the south. See Sircar ; GAMI Pp. 49 » 
BhSg. P. iv i. 17-iM; also 0 . 0 . Day’s map of Ancient India. 

*,8. The river NirvindhyS issues from the 8lt?a fSatpura) mountain 
and flows through Vindhyatavi. 



Satarudrasathhitd 


1149 


10. O sage, after reaching there along with the gods 
Brahma bowed to and eulogised Vi^^u and mentioned his 
endless grief to him. 

11. Vifou too, accompanied by Brahma and the gods 
hastened to Rudra’s abode. After reaching it he bowed to 
and eulogised lord iSiva. 

12. After eulogising him Vifnu mentioned to Siva his 
grief caused by the flame due to the penance of Atri. 

13. O sage, thus gathering there, together, Brahma, 
Vi^i^u and Siva consulted one another about the welfare of 
the worlds. 

14. The three deities Brahma and others, foremost 
among the bestowers of boons, went to the hermitage of Atri 
immediately to grant him the boon. 

15. On seeing them marked by their respective charac¬ 
teristic signs, the excellent sage Atri bowed to and eulogised 
them respectfully by uttering pleasing words. 

16. The surprised brahmin, the humble son of Brah¬ 
ma spoke to those deities Brahma, Visnu and Siva, with palms 
.joined in reverence. 

Atri said :— 

17. O Brahma, O Vi^nu, O Siva, you are worthy of 
being worshipped by the three worlds. You are lords and 
masters and the cause of creation, maintenance and annihi¬ 
lation. 

18. Accompanied by my wife, I meditated only on a 
single lord for obtaining a son, that lord whoever he may be, 
who is famous as I^vara. 

19. How is it that you three deities, the foremost 
among the bestowers of boons have come here ? Please 
dispel my doubt and then grant me the desired boon. 

20. On hearing his words, the three deities replied 
“O great sage, what has occurred is in accordance with 
what you have conceived. 

21. We three are great lords and equally leading 
among the granters of boons. Hence three sons originating 
from our parts will be born to you. 

22. They will be known in the world as enhancers of 



1150 SivapwOija 

their parent’s reputation.” After saying this, the three deities 
returned to their abodes joyously. 

23. After securing the boon, the sage joyously returned 
to his hermitage accompanied by Anasuya. O sage, he was 
delighted and he experienced the bliss of the supreme Brahman. 

24. Then Brahma, Visnu and Siva, the delighted ex¬ 
ponents of different kinds of sports, took their incarnations 
as the sons of his wife. 

25. The part of Brahma was born as the moon in 
Anasuya from the great sage. Hurled by the gods into the 
ocean he alone could come out of it. 

26. O sage, the part of Visnu was born of that lady, 
wife of Atri, as Datta by whom the great path of renunci¬ 
ation was expanded. 

27. The part of Siva was born of that wife of Atri as 
the excellent and leading sage Durvasas who propagated ex¬ 
cellent virtue. 

28. Siva by becoming Durvasas, the enhancer of Brah- 
minical splendour, tested the piety of many people. He 
was merciful. 

29. The king Ambarisa, a scion of the solar dynasty, 
was tested by him. O great sage, listen to that story. 

30. The king Ambarisa was the lord of the earth 
consisting of seven continents.^® He observed the rite of Ek- 
ada^i regularly with steady restraint. 

31. The king had the firm resolve that he would per¬ 
form the rite of breaking fast on the Dvada^i day. 

32. Coming to know of his regular observance the 
excellent sage Durvasas, born of Siva’s part approached him 
writh many disciples. 

33. The king was about to take his breakfast realising 
that very little of Dvada^I was left on that day when the 
sage came there. The king invited him for food. 

59 . The seven Dvipas are Jambu, Plak^a, S^lmali, Ku£a, Krauhra, 
Saka and Pujkara. They are surrounded by the Oceans of salt, sugar¬ 
cane, wine, butter, curd, milk and water. See Agnif). io8. i- 3 * In this 
concept, the world comprises of seven Dvmas or continents. Jambu is the 
central Dvipa surrounded by an Ocean oi salt water. Round this Ocean 
is Plak^a Dvipa encompassed by the Ocean of sugarcane-juice and so on. 
Thus the seven Dvipas are surrounded by seven seas. S.M. AH. Geography 
of the PurSiias, Ch. II. on Puranic continents and Oceans. 



^alarudrasarhhitS 


1151 


34. Then the sage Durvasas went away for his cere¬ 
monial ablution, accompanied by his disciples In order to 
test the king, the sage purposely delayed there. 

35. Realising that there would be violation of sacred 
injunction otherwise, the king took in a small quantity of 
water and waited for the arrival of the sage. 

36-37. In the meantime the sage returned. Knowing 
that the king had already had his breakfast, the sage, born 
< i Siva i part, who had assumed that form for the testing of 
piety, became very furious with the king. He spoke very 
harsh woids for testing his piety. 

Durvasas said :— 

38. () base king, after inviting but without feeding 
me you ha'’e taken in water. I shall show you the fruit 
thereof, her I am the chastiser of the wicked. 

3*^ *4(1, After saying this he stood up, his eyes turned 
-ed due to fury and attempted to burn him. Immediately, 
I'Udarsana the discus of the lord blazed forth to protect the 
k'ng am biun the sage unmindful of the fact that he was 
the part ofSiva. It had been deluded by the Maya of Siva. 

41. In the meantime an unembodied celestial voice 
spoke to Amljarisa, the noble soul, the devotee of Brahma 
and Visi i 

'The celestial (vice said :— 

42. O king, this discus had been given to Visnu by 
Si\a. It is low blazing against Durvasas. Quieten it. 

43. This sage Durvasas is Siva himself whose discus 
had been given to Vi§nu. O excellrn king, do not take 
him for an ordinary sage. 

44. It was to test your piety that this great sage came. 
Seek refuge in him. Otherwise there will be a great destruc¬ 
tion. 

Nandiivaui said : — 

45. O great sage, after saying thus, the celestial voice 
stopped. Ambarisa too eulogised the sage who was the part 
of ^iva himself. 



1152 SivapurS^ 

Ambarifa said :— 

46. If I possess the merit of charity and sacrifice, if 
my spiritual duty has been well performed by me, and if 
our family considers brahmins godly, let the weapon of 
Vi$nu turn calni. 

47. If our lord, favourably disposed to his devotees, 
is delighted with my devotion let this missile SudarSana 
become quite calm. 

Ptandifvara said :— 

48-49. While be eulogised in front of Durvasas, the 
discus Sudar^ana that originally belonged to Siva became 
calm in all respects. Knowing him to be biva’s part, the 
king Ambaiisa, who had regained the composure of mind 
bowed to the sage whom he realised as Siva’s incarnation 
come there to test his vow. 

50. The sage, born of Siva’s part, was much delighted. 
He took his meals and granted him the desired boon. Then 
he returned to his abode. 

51. O sage, I ;have narrated the story of Durvasas in 
the course of his test of Ambarli^a. O great sage, listen to 
another story of his. 

52. O sage, through the condition stipulated by Kala 
in the form of a sage he conducted the test of Rama, son 
of Da^aratha. 

53. At the very same time Lak^mana was obstinately 
sent in by Durvasas. O sage, Rama immediately forsook his 
brother in accordance with the earlier agreement. 

54. The story has been diversely narrated and spread 
in the world by the sages. It is known by all means to the 
scholars. Hence it is not mentioned in detail by me. 

55. Knowing his promise steady and resolute, the sage 
was highly delighted. The delighted sage Durvasas granted 
him the desired boons. 

56. He had tested the resoluteness of lord Krfna too. 
O excellent sage, listen to that also. I shall tell you that 
story also. 

57. At the request of Brahma, Vi^nu was born as the 
son of Vasudeva in order to ease the burden of the Earth 
as well as to protect the good. 



iaiarudrasathkitd 


1153 


58. Lord Kf^na slew the wicked, the great sinners, 
those who harassed the brahmins and the knaves. He pro* 
tected all good men and brahmins. 

59. Kr^na, son of Vasudcva, showed great devotion to 
Brahmins. Everyday he fed many br ahmin s with many 
juicy articles. 

60. The fame that Kr^na was especially devoted to the 
brahmins spread everywhere. O sage, desirous of seeing him, 
the sage approached Kf^na. 

61. He tied Kf^na and his consort Rukmini to the 
chariot and sat hiinself in the chariot. Kf^na bore the chariot 
delightfully. 

62. The sage descended the chariot. He was delighted 
at the steadfastness of Kf^na and blessed him with the 
boon that his body would become adamantine. 

63. O sage, once the excellent sage Durvasas was taking 
bath in the celestial river Gahga^ when he became naked. He 
became a curious object of sight and was ashamed. 

64. Draupadi who was taking bath there provided him 
with the cut-piece of her garment and thus saved him from 
dishonour. 

65. As the piece of cloth reached him being carried 
by the current, the sage covered his private parts with it. 
He was therefore pleased with her. 

66. He granted her the boon of ever increasing folds 
of cloth. Later, Draupadi made the Pa 9 <jlavas happy due 
to that boon. 

67. That holy sage gave directive to Vi?nu and des¬ 
troyed two wicked kings who had insulted him in the form 
of two young ones of swans. 

68. By his excellent brahminical splendour he estab¬ 
lished the path of renunciation in the world in accordance 
with the order and injunctions of the sacred lore. 

69. By instructions and enlightenment he uplifted 
many. By imparting knowledge he made many liberated. 


6 o. The Ganges flowing from the toe of VffOu is called the celestial 
river. 



1154 


Sivapurii^ 


70. Thus the sage Durvasas had a variegated and 

wonderful life, conducive to wealth, fame and longevity. To 
the listeners it yields all desires. • 

71. He who hears or reads the story of Durvasas with 
devotion and joy will be happy here and hereafter. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

( The Incarnation of Hanumat and his story) 

PlandiSvara said :— 

1. O sage, henceforth listen lovingly to the story of 
Hanumat, how !§iva performed excellent sports in that form. 

2. Out of love. Lord Siva rendered great help to Rama. 
O brahmin, listen to the whole of that story which is pleasing 
to all. 

3. Once lord Siva of wonderful sports saw Visnu in 
the form of an enchantress with glittering qualities. 

4. As if hit by the arrows of Cupid, Siva let fall his 
semen dislodged from its seat, for Rama’s work. 

5. Eagerly urged by him mentally for Rama’s work, 
the seven celestial sages retained that semen in a leaf. 

6. For Rama’s work that semen was poured through 
the ears of Afkjani, the daughter of Gautama, by those sages. 

7. In due course Siva was born of it in the form of 
a monkey named Hanumat. He had great strength and 
exploit. 

S. Even as a child the lord of monkeys, Hanumat 
was very powerful. Early in the morning he took the disc 
of the sun for a small fruit and wanted to eat it. 

9. At the request of the gods he left it. Knowing him 
to be an incarnation of Siva of great power the gods and 
the sages granted him boons. 

10. Highly delighted he approached his mother and 
eagerly told her everything in detail. 

11. At her behest the bold monkey went to the sun 



Satarudrasafhhiti 


1155 


every day and learnt all lore from the sun without any 
strain. 

12. The excellent monkey, a part of Siva approached 
Sugriva, a part of the sun, at his behest, after getting the 
permission of his mother. 

13. Sugriva who had been exiled by his elder brother 
Bali who enjoyed his (Sugriva’s) wife, stayed on the mountain 
Rsyamuka®^ along with Hanumat. 

14. The intelligent monkey born of a part of Siva 
became Sugriva’s minister and did everything beneficial to 
him in every respect. 

15. He made him enter into a pleasing alliance with 
Rama who came there along with his brother and who was 
sad because his wife had been abducted by Ravana. 

16. Rama slew the powerful monkey Bali who was a 
sinner as he enjoyed his brother’s wife and who professed to 
be a great hero. 

17. Then at the behest of Rama, O dear, the intel¬ 
ligent and leading monkey Hanumat went out in search of 

Sita along with many monkevs. 

18. On knowing that she was in Lanka, the leading 
monkey quickly jumped acioss the ocean, never before crossed 

by any and reached Lanka.** 

19. There he performed wonderful exploits and handed 
over the excellent token of recognition of his lord Rama to 
Sita. 

20. Narrating the endeavours of Rama for the pro¬ 
tection of her life, the heroic leader of monkeys dispelled the 

sorrow of Sita. 

21. Taking a token from her he turned back to go 
towards Rama. On the way he broke Ravaija’s park and 
killed many Rak?asas. 

22. At the same time he killed Ravana s son also 
along with many Rakfasas. That fearless monkey of great 
exploits wrought a havoc there. 


61. R?yamukagiri, associated with the life of RSma, is placed in the 

south about three miles from Vijayaoagara. .. .. u 

62. The identification of LahkS b controversial. Acco^ 
present context. Laftka, the capital 

muka in the island of Ceylon surrounded by the sea. 



1156 


23-24. O sage, when the powerful Ravana bound 
him with oil-dripping cloths and set fire to them, the mon¬ 
key, a part of l$iva himself, jumped about and marking that 
a pretext burnt the city of Lanka. 

25. After burning Lanka except the mansion of Bi- 
bhi^ana, the heroic leader of monkeys jumped into the 
ocean. 

26. Thereby extinguishing the 6re from his tail he 
reached the other shore. Not at all tired or grieved the 
monkey born of a part of Siva approached Rama. 

27. The rapid and excellent monkey Hanumat 
reached Rama’s side without delay and handed over the 
crest-jewel of Sita. 

28. At his behest, the powerful hero, gathered many 
mountains through the hosts of monkeys and built a bridge 
in the ocean. 

29. At the time when he was about to cross the ocean, 
Rama installed a phallic image of Siva and worshipped it 
with & desire to be victorious. 

30. Securing his boon of victory, he crossed the ocean, 
surrounded Lanka with the monkeyL and fought against 
the Rak^asas. 

31. The heroic Hanumat slew many Asuras and pro 
tected Rama’s army. He enlivened Laksmana by the medici¬ 
nal herb Sahjlvani when he was wounded by Meghanada’s 
javelin. 

32. The lordly son of Siva made Rama and Lak$mana 
happy in every respect. He protected the entire army. 

33. The untiring monkey destroyed Ravana, his family 
and his followers. The monkey, the storehouse of great 
strength made the gods happy. 

34. He slew the demon Mahiravana and brought 
Raina and Laksmana Brom his place to their own after guar¬ 
ding them well. 

35. The leading monkey quickly carried out the tasks 
of Rama by all means, made the Asuras bow down and 
submit and performed various sports. 

6 ^. It was a medicinal herb that healed the injured and restored 
the uncojnscious lu life. 



SatarudrasathhitS 


1157 


36. Himself a leader of devotees, he made Sita and 
Rama happy. He, the lord of monkeys, established the cult 
of devotion to Rama in the world. 

37. Indeed he was the Incarnation of Siva the lord 
and uplifter of devotees. He was the life-saviour of Laksmana 
and the destroyer of the arrogance of all Daityas. 

38. He was the heroic Hanumat who carried the tasks 
of Rama always. In the world he is called Rama’s messen¬ 
ger. He is favourably disposed to his devotees. He is the 
slayer of Daityas. 

39. Thus O dear, the excellent story of Hanumat has 
been narrated to you. It is conducive to wealth, fame and 
longevity. It yields the fruits of all desires. 

40. He who listens to this or narrates this with 
devotion and purity of mind enjoys all desires here and 
attains liberation hereafter. 


CHAPTER TWENEYONE 

(The Incarnation and the story of Maheia) 

NandiSvara said: 

1. O sage, O son of the self-born Brahma, listen to the 
great incarnation of lord l§iva, which yields all desires to the 
hearer. 

2. O great sage, once the supreme god Siva and the 
great goddess Parvati became desirous of indulging in sports. 

3. Keeping Bhairava as the watch-man they went in¬ 
side. Acting like human beings they were lovingly served 
by many attendants. 

4. O sage, indulging in different sports of their 
choice for a long time, the lordly deities were highly delighted. 

5. The independent goddess Parvati sportively assumed 
the form of a mad woman and with the permission of her 
lord came near to the door in that form itself. 

6. Fascinated by her charming form Bhairava glanced 
at her as at a woman and prevented her from going out. 



1158 iivapurd^ 

7. O sage, viewed at very closely by Bhairava, the 
goddess Parvati became furious and cursed him. ^ 

Siva said: — 

8. O base man, since you glanced at me as at a 
woman, O Bhairava, be born as a human being on the earth. 

KandiSvara said :— 

9. O sage, when Bhairava was thus cursed by her 
there was a hue and cry. He became very miserable due to 
the sport of the goddess. 

10. O great sage, hastening to that place, Siva con¬ 
soled Bhairava. Indeed, the lord is very expert in the various 
forms of consolation. 

11. Due to her curse, and as a result of Siva’s will, 
O sage, Bhairava descended to the earth in human birth 
under the name of Vaitala. 

12. Urged by his friendship lord Siva also incarnated 
on the earth along with Siva. He indulged in good sports 
and followed worldly conventions. 

13. O sage, Siva was known as Mahe^a and Parvati 
as Sarada. Both of them experts in different sports indulged 
in fine sports. 

14. O dear, thus the story of Mahesa has been 
narrated to you. It is excellent, conducive to wealth, fame 
and longevity and yields all desires. 

15. He who listens to and narrates this story with 
devotion and purity of mind enjoys all pleasures here and 
attains salvation hereafter. 



iatafudrasathhiti 


1159 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 

{Harassment by Vifftu's sons and tke story of 
Siva*s incarruUion of the Bull) 

NandUvara said :— 

1. O great sage, O intelligent son of Brahml, listen 
to the excellent Vr^eia incarnation of l§iva that perfonned 
pood sports and that destroyed the {*rrogance of Vi?9u. 

2. Formerly all the gods and Asuras, distressed by the 
fear of old age and death made alliance with each other and 
became desirous of taking gems from the ocean. 

3. O son of the sage, then the gods and the Asuras 
attempted to churn the excellent milky ocean. 

4. “With what shall the churning be carried out lor 
the attainment of our object ?” thus the gods and the Asuras 
were quite dismayed. 

5. Then a celestial voice with the rumbling sound of 
clouds spoke to the gods and the daityas as a result of diva’s 
wish and consoled them. 

The celestial voice said :— 

6. O gods, O Asuras, churn the milk*ocean. Undoubted¬ 
ly a factual test of your strength will take place. 

7. Make Mandara your churning rod and Vasuki your 
churning rope. Unitedly you carry on the churning with 
firm devotion. 

Nandiivara said :— 

8. O excellent sage, on hearing the celestial voice the 
gods and the Asuras exerted themselves in carrying out the 
plan. 

9. Allying together they went straight to the excellent 
mountain Mandara of golden splendour and of diverse lustre. 

10. After propitiating l3iva and after obtaining his 
consent they tried to uproot the Mandara in their desire to 
take it to the milk-ocean. 

11. O sage, uprooting and lifting it by means of their 
arms they went to the milk-ocean. Their strength failing 
they became incapable of taking it up to the sea. 


C4. See P 3.24 note. 



1160 


iSioapurd^ 

12. Slipping from their arms the Mandara became very 
heavy suddenly and fell over the gods and the Asuras. 

13. Failing in their effort the gods and the^ Asuras 
broke down. After regaining consciousness they eulogised 
the lord of the universe. 

14. At his wish in their next attempt' they lifted up 
the mountain. They took it to the northern shore of the 
ocean and hurled it into the waters. 

15. Then both the gods and the Asuras made Vasuld 
the churning rope. Desirous of taking the excellent articles 
they churned the milk-ocean. 

16. When the milk-ocean was churned the goddess of 
heaven sprang up from the ocean as the daughter of Bhrgu 
who later became Visnu*s beloved. 

17-18. There also emerged—Dhanvantari^ the m.oon> 
the Parijata tree, the horse Uccai^^ravas, the elephant AirS- 
vata, wine, the bow of Visnu, the conch, the cow Kamadhenu, 
the jewel Kaustubha and the nectar. 

19. When it was churned again, the great poison 
Kalakuta blazing like the fire at the dissolution of the Yugas 
and terrifying the gods and the Asuras, came out. 

20. From the sprays and drops that sprang up at the 
outcome of nectar, many damsels of wonderful beauty were 
born. 

21. Their faces resembled the full moon in the Autumn; 
their lustre was as glittering and dazzling as fire, lightning 
or the sun and they were bedecked in divine Jewels, necklaces, 
bracelets and bangles. 

22. Sprinkling the ten quarters by the water of necta¬ 
rine beauty they seemed to madden the world by their 
beauteous glances. 

23. They emerged in crores from the nectar sprays. 
Then the nectar that wards off old age and death came out. 

24. Visiju kept for himself Lak§ml, the conch, Kaus¬ 
tubha and the sword; the Sun chose the divine horse Uccail- 
4ravas for himself. 

25. With great eagerness the husband of Saci, the lord 
of the gods, took Parijata the excellent tree and AirSvata the 
lordly eleohant. 



Satarudrasarhhitd 


1161 


26. For the protection of the gods, Siva, favourably 
disposed towards his devotees, voluntarily retained the Kala- 
kuta in his neck and held the moon on his forehead. 

27. O Vyasa, deluded by the illusion of Siva, the 
Daityas accepted Sura (wine) and the common people took 
Dhanvantari (the physician). 

28. The great sages took the cow Kamadhenu. The 
damsels, the enchantresses became common to all. 

29. A great battle for the possession of Amfta ensued 
between the gods and the Asuras who desired to conquer 
each other and who were agitated in their minds. 

30. The Amrta was forcibly taken by the Daityas Bali 
and others, O Vyasa, of fine lustre resembling that of the 
fire and the sun at the dissolution of the Yugas. They 
defeated the gods. 

31. Indra and other gods, O dear, overwhelmed by 
2§iva*s illusion and harassed by the Daityas sought refuge in 
Siva. 

32. O sage, then the Amrta was strenuously snatched 
away from the Daityas by Vi§nu at the behest of Siva, after 
assuming the form of a woman. 

33. Visnu, the most excellent of those who wield 
Maya assuming the form of a woman Mohini deluded the 
Asuras and made the gods drink it. 

34. The leading Daityas approached her and said— 
“Make us drink this nectar. Let there be no break in the 
lines.** 

35. Ail those Daityas and Danavas deluded by Siva*s 
Maya said thus and gave the nectar to Visnu in disguise. 

36. In the meantime on seeing the damsels bom of 
Amrta, the leading Danavas took them to their abodes ac¬ 
cording to their convenience. 

37. The cities built by the architect Maya for those 
women were divine, hundred times more beautiful than 
heaven. They were well fortified by terrible machines. 

38. The daityas made those cities well guarded and 
set off for fighting after taking this pledge touching their 
chests. * 

*Wc have adopted the reading For | 



1162 


39. “We will never touch these women if we were to 
be defeated by the gods.** After saying this, the heroic 
Daityas became eager to fight. 

40. They roared like lions. Severally they blew their 
conches as if filling the sky and propitiating the clouds. 

41. A terrible fight ensued between the gods and the 
Asuras. The unrivalled battle between the gods and Asuras 
is famous in the three worlds. 

42. Protected by Vi^nu, the gods gained victory. The 
Daityas fled and those who remained were killed by Vif^u 
and his associate gods. 

43. The Daityas were deluded by the gods and Vi|nu 
the great soul. Those that survived entered the nethjbr regions. 

44. The powerful Vi^nu armed with his diseus chased 
them even after they had gone to the ultimate end of Patala*^ 
excessively frightened. 

45. In the meantime Vi^iiu saw those damsels bom 
of nectar sprays who were haughty due to their divine beauty 
and whose faces resembled the full moon. 

46. Fascinated by the Cupid’s arrows Vi 9 i;iu attained 
highest pleasure only there. He began to indulge in sexual 
dalliance with those women of exquisite beauty. 

47. Vi^nu begot of them sons of great exploits and 
valour, experts in various kinds of warfare, shaking 'file 
entire earth. 

48. Those sons ofVi^^u of great strength and valour 
wrought great havoc both in heaven and earth causing misery 
to all. 

49. On seeing the great harm done to the worlds the 
gods and the sages approached Brahma and informed him 
of this after bowing to him. 

50. On hearing it Brahma took them to the mountain 
Kailasa. On seeing Siva there he bowed to him again and 
again along with the gods. 

51. Saying *'0 lord Siva, be victorious, O Lord of all**, 
he eulogised him with various hymns with palms joined in 
reverence and shoulders drooping down. 

65. P&tAla is the lowermost of the seven or eight regions in which 
Visuki reigns over the chief ga^as or snake-gods. 



SakirudraiathhitS 


1163 


BrahmS said :— 

52. O great God, O lord of the gods, save the worlds 
harassed by the passionate sons of Vi?nu stationed in nether 
regions. 

53. O lord, Visnu is now enamoured of the damsels 
born of the nectar sprays. He is in nether regions indulging 
in passionate sexual dalliance with them. 

Nandiivara said :— 

54. For the protection of the worlds and for the 
redemption of Vi?riu, Siva was eulogised thus by Brahma, 
the gods and the sages. 

55. Then lord Siva, the ocean of mercy, realising the 
havoc caused by the sons of Vi^nu assumed the form of 
a bull. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 

{The bull incarnation of ^iva) 


Nandiivara said 

1. Then bellowing in the form of a Bull, the PinSka- 
bearing lord entered the crevice and shouted terribly. 

2. At his bellowing sound, cities and towns crumbled 
down and all the citizens trembled. 

3. Then the bull attacked Vi?nu’s sons wielding their 
bows for fighting, deluded by Siva’s Maya and proud of 
their great strength and exploit. 

4. O excellent sage, the sons of Vi^nu became furious. 
Those heroes roared loudly and rushed against Siva. 

5. Rudra in that form of a bull was furious at those 
sons of Vi$;c^u who rushed at him. He kicked them with 
his hoofs and tore them with his horns. 

6. When their limbs were split by Rudra, they swoon* 
ed and lost their lives. They were immediately destroyed. 

7. When they were killed Visnu the foremost of the 
strong came out shouting loudly and hastened towards Siva. 



1164 Sioetfntri^ 

8. On seeing Siva in the form of the bull going along 

after killing his sons, Vi^nu hit him with divine arrows and 
missiles. * 

9. Then the infuriated Siva, the highly powerful one 
in the form of a bull stood like a mountain and caught 
hold of all those missiles of Vi^^u. 

10. O sage, shouting furiously, lord Siva in the form 
of a bull shook the three worlds terribly. 

11. The lord leaped up suddenly and kicked the in¬ 
furiated Visnu who was deluded and could not realise him. 
The lord then tore him with his horns. 

12. Unable to bear the onslaught, Vi$nu deluded by 
Maya was exhausted and utterly shattered. 

13. When his pride fell off, Visnu was dejected, and 
dispirited. He then realised that Siva was sporting about 
in the form of a bull. 

14. 'JThen on realising that Siva himself had come in 
the form of a Bull, Vi^nu spoke in a shrill voice with droop¬ 
ing shoulders and palms joined in reverence. 

Vi^u said ;— 

15. O lord of the gods, O ocean of mercy, O lord Siva, 
I had been deluded by your Maya and my mind had been 
confused. 

16. O lord, I fought with you, Siva. Taking pity 
on me, O lord, let this offence be excu.sed. 

XandiSvara said :— 

17. O sage, on hearing those piteous words of Vi 9 ]?iu, 
lord Siva favourably disposed to his devotees spoke to Vi^nu. 

Siva said :— 

18. O Vi§riu, O intelligent one, how is ft that you 
did not know me? Why did you fight? Your intellect has 
completely been depraved. 

19. Why don’t you realise yourself as one whose ex¬ 
ploit is dependent on me. You should not have indulged 
in sexual dalliance there. You should have refrained from 
all misdeeds. 



Satarudrasarfihitd 


1165 


20. Why should your intellect be subservient to lust? 
That you should indulge in dalliance with women does not 
behove you, O lord of gods. Remember the task of uplifting 
the universe. 

Nandiivara said :— 

21. On hearing those words of Siva that imparted 
knowledge Vi$nu was ashamed of himself and then he spoke to 
lord Siva respectfully. 

Vifnu said :— 

22. My discus is here. I shall take the discus and 
return to my region abiding by your order with reverence. 

NandiSvara said 

23. On hearing the words of Vi?nu, lord Siva the 
protector of virtue in the guise of a bull, replied to Vi?^?u 
again. 

24. You shall go away quickly from this place. You 
shall not delay, O Visnu, this is my behest. Let your discus 
stay in this world itself. 

25. I shall give you a discus more terrible than the 
sun at the time of dissolution and more efficacious than the 
words of Siva. 

26. After saying this Siva created another blazing dis¬ 
cus, as lustrous as the Kala hre, for the destruction of the 
wicked. 

27. He gave the discus, as lustruous as ten thousand 
fierce suns, to Vi§nu, the great Atman, the protector of the 
gods and the leading sages. 

28. After securing another SudarSana discus of more 
brilliance, Vi^nu the foremost of intelligent gods spoke to 
the gods. 

29. “O ye gods, you listen to my statement eagerly. 
You must act accordingly and immediately. It will be to 
your advantage. 

30. There are many youthful maidens in the nether 
regions exquisitely dressed. Any one of you can go and in¬ 
dulge in sexual dalliance with them.** 



1166 


iipafiur^ 

31. On hearing these words of Visnu the valorous gods 

became desirous of entering the nether regions along with 
Vi^^u. • 

32. Knowing their intention then, lord Siva angrily 
cursed all the eight** types of the gods. 

Siva said :— 

33. ‘‘Excepting a quiescent sage and the Danavas born 
of my parts whoever enters this place shall die in a trice. 

34. After hearing these terrible words which are con¬ 
ducive to the increase of the benefit of human beings, the 
gods thus restrained by Rudra returned to their own abodes. 

35. Thus Vi?nu who was excessively indulgent in 
women was chastised by Siva. O VySsa, he returned to heaven. 
The world attained normalcy. 

36. Lord Siva, favourably disposed towards his devotees, 
returned to his mountain after carrying out the task of the 
gods in the guise of a bull. 

37. Thus the bull incarnation of Siva that dispelled 
Vi^nu’s delusion and caused happiness to the three worlds, 
has been narrated. 

38. This narrative is sacred. It dispels the harassment 
from enemies. It is conducive to the attainment of heaven, 
fame and longevity. It confers worldly pleasures and salva¬ 
tion to the good. 

39. He who listens to this with devotion and narrates 
this with purity enjoys all pleasures here and attains salva¬ 
tion hereafter. So also is the case with him who reads or 
teaches this to intelligent men. 

66 . Amara mentions ten semi-divine beings viz. i*?!, 

W. ftna: and ^ I mentions 

eight, without giving thek names. It is not clear which two shall be exclu- 
ded from the above list. 



Satarudrasttthhitd 


1167 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 

{PippalSda incarnation of Siva) 

Nandiivara said :— 

1. O intelligent one, listen with very great pleasure to 
the Pippalada incarnation of Siva that is excellent and that 
inspires devotion. 

2. Formerly there was a great brahmin and an excel¬ 
lent sage Dadhici. He was born of Cyavana of Bhfgu 
family. He was a great devotee of Siva and very powerful. 

3. In the fight with K^uva, Vi^^u and other gods 
were defeated by this sage who had the support of Siva 
and they were cursed. 

4. He had a fortunate wife Suvarca, who was very 
noble and chaste. The gods were cursed by her. 

5. The great lord, an expert in different kinds of sports 
and extremely brilliant was born of her in the name of 
Pippalada. 

SUta said :— 

6. On hearing these wonderful words of Nandiivara, 
the excellent sage Sanatkumara spoke with palms joined in 
reverence and shoulders drooping down. 

Sanaihtmdra said :— 

7. O Nandiivara, O intelligent one, you are blessed 
in that you have assumed the form of Rudra himself. 
O dear, you are my excellent preceptor. This wonderful story 
has been narrated by you. 

8. O son of Silida, from my father Brahma, the acc¬ 
ount of the battle with K^uva and the defeat of Vi^^u has 
already been heard by me. So also the curse has been heard 
by me. 

9. Now, I was to hear about the curse that Suvarca 
pronounced on the gods. Afterwards, I wish to hear the 
auspieious story of Pippalada. 

SOta said :— 

10. On hearing these auspicious words of the son of 



1168 ^wapurdM 

Brahma the delighted son of Silada remembered the lotus¬ 
like feet of Siva and replied. 

NandtSvdra said'.— 

11. O great sage, once Indra and other gods were 
defeated by the Daityas who had the support of the demon 
Vrtra. 

12. All the gods had formerly kept their respective 
weapons in the hermitage of Dadhica. Hence they were 
immediately defeated. 

13. Then the harassed gods and the sages along with 
Indra immediately went to Brahma’s region and narrated their 
distress to him. 

14. On hearing the words of the gods Brahma, the grand¬ 
father of the worlds, mentioned the details of what Tva^tr 
was desirous of doing. 

16. This Asura has been created by Tvastr by means 
of his penance in order to kill you. The name of that Asura 
is Vrtra. He is of great brilliance and the leader of all 
Daityas. 

16. You shall make such efforts as would ensure his 
death. O intelligent one, listen to the means thereof. For 
the sake of virtue I shall tell you the same. 

17. There is a great sage Dadhici of great penance and 
of full control of his sense-organs. After propitiating Siva 
he secured the boon of adamantine bones formerly. 

18. You all request for his bones. He will undoubtedly 
give them to you. Make the thunderbolt staff therewith and 
kill Vrtra without hesitation. 

J^andUmra said :— 

19. On hearing the words of Brahma, Indra accompa¬ 
nied by his preceptor and other gods went immediately to the 
excellent hermitage of Dadhici. 

20. There Indra saw the sage in the company of 
Suvarca. Along with the preceptor and other gods he humbly 
and respectfully bowed to him with palms joined in reverence, 

21. On realising his intention the sage, the most ex¬ 
cellent of scholars sent his wife Suvarca to the inner apart¬ 
ments of the hermitage. 



SatamdrasarhhitS 


1169 


22. Then the king of gods, accompanied by the gods 
bent upon achieving his own object, and most efficient in 
polity spoke to the great sage. 

Indra said : 

23. All of us, the gods and the sages are oppressed by 
Tvastr. We seek refuge in you, worthy of refuge, a great 
devotee of Siva and a liberal donor. 

24. O brahmin, give us your bones of adamanatine 
strength. I shall make my thunderbolt with your love and 
kill the demon. 

25. Thus requested, the sage fond of helping others 
meditated on lord Siva and abandoned his body. 

26. Immediately he reached Brahma’s region with his 
bondage of actions quashed. There was a shower of flowers 
and the people were agreeably surprised. 

27. Indra then called the divine cow Surabhi to lick 
up the marrow etc. He directed Visvakarman to make the 
weapon with the bones. 

28. At his behest Viivakarman made all the weapons 
with the sage’s bones—very firm and adamantine—that had 
the brilliance of Siva. 

29. With his backbone he made the thunderbolt, arrow 
and the missile called Brahmasiras. With the other bones he 
made many other weapons. 

30. O sage, flourishing with Siva’s brilliance, the in¬ 
furiated Indra lifted the thunderbolt and rushed against 
Vrtra like Rudra rushing against the.god of death. 

31. Indra who was well prepared, cut off the peak¬ 
like head of Vrtra with the thunderbolt forcefully. 

32. There was great jubilation among the heaven-dwel¬ 
lers. O dear, the gods eulogised Indra. Showers of flowers 
fell on him. 

33. O dear, thus this story of Vftra’s slaughter is 
related to you as arising from the context. Now listen respect¬ 
fully to the incarnation of Siva as Pippalada. 

34. At the behest of her lord Suvarca the chaste wife 
of the sage Dadhici^ the noble soul went to the inner apart¬ 
ments of the hermitage. 



1170 

35. At the behest of her husband she finished her 
household duties and came there, 'fhe pitiable lady could 
n(}t see her lord there. 

36. Afler ccaning there and seeing the most 
inauspicious occurrence there, O excellent sage, the surprised 
Suvarca spoke to the gods. 

37. The chaste lady, on realising that all this was the 
action of the gods, became angry. The infuriated wife of the 
excellent sage, Suvarca, cursed them. 

Suoarcd said :— 

38. **Ah! the gods are very wicked. They are 
covetous, stupid but very skiful in manipulating their own 
affairs. Let them all, inclusive of Indra, become beasts 
from today.** 

39. Suvarca, a woman saint and the beloved wife of 
the sage cursed the gods inclusive of Indra thus. 

40. That chaste lady desired to go to the worlds of her 
husband. With the sacred twigs, the noble lady prepared 
the funeral pyre. 

41. Then a pleasant celestial voice urged by l^iva 
spoke to Suvarcfi, consoling her. 

The Celestial Voice said :— 

42. O intelligent lady, do not carry out this calami¬ 
tous task. Listen to my weighty words, llie semen of the 
sage is in your womb. Develop it carefully. 

43. O gentle lady, later on, you may do as you please. 
It is the command of Brahmfi that a pregnant woman should 
not bum herself. 

Nandiiaara said :— 

44. O great sage, after saying this the celestial voice 
stopped. On bearing that voice the wife of the sage was 
surprised for a moment. 

45. That great chaste lady, Suvarcfi, desirous of attain¬ 
ing the world of her husband sat down and broke open her 
belly with a stone. 

46. The foetus of the child of the great sage, ofbril- 



SatamdrasathkiUl 1171 

liant divine body, came oui of her belly illuminating all 
the ten quarters. 

47. O dear, it was the incarnation of Rudra himself 
born of the sage Dadhici. He was competent to perform 
his divine sports. He therefore manifested himself. 

48-49. On seeing her son of divine form, the beloved 
wife of the sage Suvarca realised in her mind that it was 
the incarnation of Rudra himself. The g^eat chaste lady 
became delighted, bowed to him and eulogised him. O great 
sage, that form of the child was impressed on her heart. 

50. Suvarca of pure vision, the mother, desirous of 
going to her husband’s region, smilingly and lovingly spoke 
to her son. 

Suvarca said :— 

51. O dear, O lord Siva, O fortunate one, stay near 
this holy fig tree for a long time. Be the bestower of hap¬ 
piness to all. 

52. Out of affection allow me to go to the region of my 
husband. Staying there along with my husband I shall 
meditate on you in the form of Rudra. 

Nandiivara said :— 

53. After speaking thus to her son that chaste lady 
Suvarca followed her husband by means of the great trans¬ 
cendental meditation. 

54. O sage, thus the wife of Dadhici was re-united 
with her husband. After reaching Siva’s region she served 
Siva devotedly. 

55. In the meantime the delighted gods inclusive of 
Indra, hurriedly came there along with the sages as though 
invited there. 

56. Vi^nu and Brahmi too, accompanied by their 
attendants came over there to see Siva who had taken in¬ 
carnation in the world through SuvarcS and Dadhici. 

57. On seeing him there, incarnated as the sage’s son, 
they bowed to him with palms joined in reverence and made 
obeisances. 

58. O excellent sage, there was great jubilation among 



1172 Sioapurdi^A 

the gods. The Dundubhis were sounded and dancing girls 
danced joyously. 

59. The sons of Gandharvas sang. Kinnaras and 
other players played on instruments. The gods showered 
flowers. 

60. After consecrating the refulgent child and the fig 
tree who became tlie father of Rudra, Vi§nu and other 
gods eulogised him again. 

61. The delighted Brahma named him Pippalada. 
Vis^u and the gods said “O lord of the gods be pleased’*. 

62. After saying this and making great jubilation, 
Brahma, Visnu and the gods went to their respective abodes. 

63. Then Rudra, the great lord in the form of 
Pippalada, performed a penance for a long time at the foot 
of the fig tree, with a desire to bestow benefit on the worlds. 

64. As Pippalada, following the convention of the 
world, performed the penance, a long time passed by. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 

{The story of Pippalada incarnation) 

Pfandiivara said :— 

1. After arranging and establishing Dharma with a 
desire for its good foundation, lord Siva performed great 
sports. O good sage, listen to that. 

2. Once while going to the river Pu?pabhadra*’ for his 
ablution, the great sage saw the beautiful youthful maiden 
Padma, a part of Siva herself. 

3. Desirous of getting her, the sage traversing the world 
and an expert in following the established conventions went 
to the abode of king Anaranya, her father. 

4. On seeing him, the awe-struck king of men bowed 
to him. Offering him Madhuparka*^ he worshipped him 
devotedly. 


67. Not identified, 
tiff. See F. 600 note. 



SatarudrasajhhitS 


1173 


5. The sage accepted everything with regard and 
requested for the hand his daughter. Thereupon the 
king was unable to say anything. He was silent. 

6. The sage repeated the request, saying “Give me 
your daughter devoutly. Otherwise I will reduce everything 
to ashes along with you.” 

7. O great sage, then all the people of the king were 
enveloped by the brilliance of Pippalada, son of Dadhici. 

8. Then the king was much frightened and he lamented 
again and again. He gave his daughter Padma, fully bedecked 
in ornaments to the old sage. 

9. After marrying Padma, the daughter of the king 
and a part of Siva, the sage Pippalada joyously took her to 
his hermitage. 

10. After going to the hermitage the aged excellent 
sage stayed there with that woman. The sage was not too 
indulgent. 

11. Then the daughter of Anaranya served the sage with 
devotion, in mind, word and deed, like LaksmI serving Vi?nu. 

12. Then the excellent sage Pippalada, a part of Siva, 
became a young man by means of his divine sport and 
sported with that young lady. 

13. Ten noble sons, all of them great sons, were born 
to the sage. They were equal to their father and increased 
the pleasure of Padma. 

14. This is the sportive incarnation of Siva the great 
lord. The excellent sage Pippalada was the lord indulgent 
in different kinds of divine sports. 

15. On seeing the harassment by the planet Saturn 
of every one irremediably, the sympathetic lord lovingly 
granted a boon to all the world. 

16. “For sixteen years from birth no man will have 
that affliction. Similarly to the devotees of Siva too. This 
word of mine is true. 

17. If Saturn were to disregard my instruction and 
harass men, he will undoubtedly be reduced to ashes.” 

18. O dear, thus, afraid of him the excellent planet 
Saturn, though in aberration, does not afflict men at 
anytime. 



1174 


19. Thus I have narrated to you the good story of the 
great sage Pippal&da who had assumed the form of p human 
being in the course of his divine sports. Hie story yields the 
fruit of all desires. 

20. These three—Gidhi, Kauiika and die great si^e 
Pippal&da quell the affliction of 9ani on being remembered. 

21-22. For the dissolution of the affliction of Saturn, 
the man who reads or Ustens devoutly to the story of 
Pippal&da along with that of Padml attains all desires in 
diis world. 

23. Blessed indeed is the great sage, who was wise 
and a great devotee of Siva. He was a favourite of good 
men. Lord Siva named Pippalada was his noble son. 

24. This pious n&rrative is conducive to the attain* 
ment of heaven. It quells the adverse effects of the evil 
planets. O dear, it yields all desires and enhances devotion 
to Siva. 


CaiAPTER TWENTYSIX 
{Swa*s ittcamation as Vaifyandtha) 

J^aniUoara said :— 

1. O dear sage, listen to me. 1 shall tell you about 
Vaiiyan&tha, the incarnation of Siva, the supreme soul that 
yields great bliss. 

2. Formerly, in NandigrSma** there was a prostitute 
known as Mahanandii. She was very beautifhl and a devotee 
of Siva. 

3. She was very prosperous, rich and brilliant. She 
was bedecked in gems of different kinds. She was voluptuous 
in love. 

4. She was an adept in all lores of music. She was 
delightful to all. Qpeens and kings were delighted by her 
songs. 

6 <). Nandigr&ma seems to be identical with Nandagaon in MathurS* 
map^Jii^. 



&ttarudrasaihHlS 


1175 


5. She always worshipped Siva and Pihrvad with 
great joy. She was interested in recounting the names of 
Siva. She used to wear ashes and Rudrak^. 

6. After worshipping Siva, the lord of the universe 
she used to dance with great devotion and sing the great 
glory of Siva. 

7. She kept a monkey and a cock which she decorated 
with Rudrik^as. She made them dance singing herself and 
clapping her hands. 

8. On seeing them dance, she, engrossed in devotion 
to Siva, used to laugh lovingly along with her friends and 
attendants. 

9. The monkey, as a result of her instruction, danced 
before her, like a boy bedecked in Rudrik$as as ear-rings, and 
shoulderlets. 

10. The cock too was bedecked in Rudrak^a tied round 
its tuft. It too dsmced along with the monkey delighting the 
onlookers. 

11. Thus that prostitute indulging in these delighthil 
pranks and pursuing devotional service* to Siva was very happy 
always. 

12. O excellent sage, a long time thus elapsed when 
she was quite happy performing her devotional service to 
Siva. 

13. Once Siva assumed the form of a merchant and 
vidted her house to test her. He had assumed the auspi¬ 
cious form of a devotee. 

14. His forehead was marked with Tripu^idra. He 
wore Rudrak^a as ornaments. He was interested in recoun¬ 
ting the names of Siva. He was clad as a devotee of Siva. 
He wore matted locks of hair. 

15. He had smeared ashes all over his body. 
Round his wrist was tied an excellent bangle set wiUi 
gems. 

16. The beautiful prostitute worshipped and welcomed 
the visitor with great joy. She made him sit with great 
respect. 

17. On seeing the excellent bangle round his wrist she 
coveted the same. In great surprise she said. 



1176 




Mahdnandd said :— 

18. This bangle set with great gems arouncf your arm 
captivates my mind. It is worthy of being an ornament of 
a celestial damsel. 

NandiSvara said :— 

19. On seeing that she wished for the bangle 
set with nine gems, the liberal-minded merchant spoke 
smilingly. 

Vaifyanatha said :— 

20. If your mind wishes for this excellent gemset 
ornament you can have it with pleasure. But what is the 
price you are willing to pay? 

The prostitute said :— 

21. We are prostitutes flirting here and there and not 
chaste ladies. Undoubtedly the regular practice observed in 
our family is harlotry. 

22. If I take the bangle from you I shall be your wife 
for three full days and nights. 

The merchant said :— 

23. O beloved harlot, if your words are true, let it 
be as you say. I shall give you the gemset bangle. Be my 
wife for three days and nights. 

24. In this deal the witnesses arc the moon and the 
sun. Repeat three times “True” and touch my heart, O 
beloved. 

The prostitute said *— 

35. O lord, I shall be your wife for three days and 
carry out all wifely duties. This is true. This is undoubtedly 
true. 

Nandiivara said :— 

26. After repeating this for three times, with the 
moon and the sun as witnesses, MahSnandS touched his heart 
with pleasure. 

27. After giving her the gemset bangle that merchant 
handed to her a gemset phallic image and spoke thus. 



Sataruirasathhitd 


1177 


Tht nuKhmi said : — 

28. O my beloved, this gemset phallic image is very 
dear to me. It shall be well-preserved strenuously and in secret 
by you. 

NandiSvara said '.— 

29. She said “Let it be so’* and took the gemset 
phallic image. She kept it in the middle of the dancing plat¬ 
form and entered the house. 

30. During the night she had her sexual union with 
the merchant who behaved like a libertine. She then went 
to sleep on the couch brilliant with a soH; bed. 

31. O sage, then at midnight, at the will of the 
lordly merchant, suddenly there arose a fire’® in the middle of 
the dancing platform. 

32. The blazing fire helped by a forceful wind envel¬ 
oped the dancing platform all of a sudden. 

33. When the platform was burning the prostitute 
got up suddenly in her bewilderment and let the monkey 
free untying it. 

34. Freed from the bondage the monkey in its fear 
ran here and there along with the cock and scattered sparks 
of fire. 

35. On seeing the phallic image burnt along with the 
pillar and smashed utterly, the prostitute and the mer¬ 
chant felt endless distress. 

36. On seeing the phallic image as it were his very 
soul burnt, the lordly merchant desired to end his life in 
order to know her mentality. 

37. In great despair and sorrow the merchant told her 
in grief. Lord l§iva who had assumed a human body just for 
pleasure indulged in different sports. 

38. “O my beloved, when the phallic image is smashed 
and burnt I do not desire to live. I am telling you the 
truth. There is no doubt in this. 

39. O gentle lady, prepare a pyre for me immediately 
through your servants. With my mind fixed in Siva, I shall 
enter the fire. 

70. Read for in the printed Skt. text. 



1178 


40. Even if Brahma, Indra, Vi^^u and others were to 

prevent me, O gentle lady, I shall enter the fire this 
moment and shall forsake my life.’* » 

NaniiSottra said :— 

41. On realising his tenacious decision the harlot was 
much distressed. Outside her house she caused the pyre 
to be made through her servants. 

42 • Then the merchant who was only Siva himself 
went round the blazing fire. Desirous of knowing her in¬ 
tentions he entered the fire firmly. 

43. O excellent sage, on seeing him enter die pyre, 
the harlot was dismayed. The youthful maiden sympathised 
with him. 

44. The miserable harlot remembered the sacred vow 
and said piteously glancing at all her kinsmen. 

MakSnandd said :— 

45. Taking the gemset bangle I had taken the pledge 
that I shall be the avowed wife of this merchant for three 
days. 

46 This merchant, the avowed Saivite, died of my 
activities. Hence I shall enter fire along with him. 

47. Truthful preceptors have ordained that a wife 
shall observe her duty. If I do likewise my truthfulness 
will not be marred. 

48. Abiding by truth is a great virtue. Great goal 
can be attained through truth. Heaven and liberation can 
be achieved through truth. Everything is founded on 
truth. 


Jfandiivara said :— 

49. Although prevented by her kinsmen the harlot 
was obstinate in her resolve. The woman eager in the 
attainment of Satyaloka decided on giving up her life. 

50. She gifted away her property to leading brahmins. 
She meditated on Sadiiiva. She circumambulated the fire 
thrice and stood ready to enter it. 

51. As she was going to jump in the fire with her 



SatmidrasathkitS 


1179 


mind fixed in his feet, iSiva, the soul of the universe, appea¬ 
red in front and stopped her. 

52. On seeing the three-eyed lord of the gods, deco¬ 
rated by the moon's digit, and as brilliant as crores of moons, 
suns and fires she stood as if stimned and firightened. 

53. The lord caught hold of the hands of the frigh¬ 
tened and agitated lady, stunned, trembling and shedding 
tears. He consoled her and spoke. 

Siva said :— 

54. It is to test your truthfulness, piety, courage and 
steady devotion to me that I came near you assuming the 
form of a merchant. 

55. With my magic 1 produced the blazing fire and 
burnt your dancing platform. After burning the gemset 
phallic image I entered fire myself. 

56. But you remembered the promise and entered the 
fire along with me. Hence I shall give you such pleasures 
as are inaccessible to gods. 

57. O beaudiiil lady of good hips, whatever you wish 
I shsdl give you. I am delighted by your devotion. There 
is nothing which cannot be given to you. 

KastHioara said :— 

58. When Siva, lord of Parvad, favourably disposed^to 
his devotees said thus, the harlot Mahananda replied to Siva. 

Th» prostitute said :— 

59. I have no desire for enjoyment on die earth, in 
the heaven or in the nether worlds. I do not desire any¬ 
thing except the touch of your lotus-like feet. 

60. My servants, my maids and my kinsmen are in¬ 
terested in seeing you. They have dedicated everything to you. 

61. Take them all along with me to your great region 
and quash the terrible fear of rebirth. Obeisance be to 
you. 

Jfasidlhara said :— 

62. Appreciating her words, the great Siva cook all of 
them to his great region. 



1180 SivapuHb^ 

63. Thus I have described to you the great incarna* 

tion of VaiSyanatha. It was pleasing to Mahananda. It 
yields great bliss to devotees. • 

64. This narrative is great holy and divine. It grants 
desires to good men immediately. This story of the incarna¬ 
tion of 8 iva as the lordly merchant is the source of great 
happiness. It is wonderful. 

65. He who listens to this story with devotion and 
narrates it with purity never swerves from his duties. He 
attains salvation hereafter. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 

{The incarnation of DvijeharaY^ 

Nandiivara said :— 

1. O dear, listen, I shall expound to you the incarna¬ 
tion of Siva the great soul as Dvije^vara (a leading Brah¬ 
min) along with l^iva. It is pleasing to the good. 

2-3. O dear, I have already described to you the 
excellent king Bhadrayu whom l^iva blessed in the form of 
a bull. In order to test his steadfastness and piety the lord 
manifested himself again in the form of a leading brahmin. 
I shall mention that same story. 

4. Conquering the enemies through the power of ^ 9 - 
abha in battle, Bhadrayu attained the throne,- O dear. 

5. O brahmin, the chaste lady Kirtimalini, daughter of 
Gandrahgada and Simantini, became his wife. 

6 . O sage, once after the advent of spring, the king 
Bhadrayu entered a thick forest along with his beloved 
queen, for sport. 

7. In that beautiful forest, the king sported about 
along with his beloved who protected those who sought refuge 
in her. 


71. This Ghaptrr has a close resemblance with the second canto of 
K&Udasa’s Raghuvaihia. 



Antndmsm/iMtd 


1191 

8. Then, in order to test his steadfastness* and pety, 
lord iSiva carried out his'sports there itself along with Sivi* 

9. Siva and Siva in their own divine sports assumed 
the form of a brahmin couple and created an illu8(Hy t^m* 
with their M3yi. 

10. Not far from the place where the king stood^ diey 
beg<in running in great fright on being pursued by the t^ier. 
They cried and shouted too. 

11. O dear, the king Bhadriyu, the leading Kfatriya 
worthy of being sought refuge in, saw both of them highly 
distressed and lamenting. 

12. O leading sage, the illusory brahmin couple, ex¬ 
tremely terrified, spoke to the king Bhadrfiyu. 

Thi brahmin couple said :— 

13. O great king, O foremost of the knowers of virtue 
save us both. O gpreat lord, this tiger is rushing on in order 
to devour us. 

14. This beast of prey is like the god of death. It is 
terrifying to all living beings. Knower of virtue that you are 
save us before it pounces on us and devours us. 

PfandiSvara said :— 

15-16. After hearing the lamentation of the pair, the 
great king of great heroism immediately took up his bow, 
but the rushing tiger of Mayic origin, Seized the brahmin's 
wife. 

17. The terrible tiger grasped the woman even as she was 
lamenting—“O lord, O husband, O Siva, O, preceptor of 
the universe.” 

18. The king struck the tiger with sharp arrows ; but 
it was not at all affected by them. It stood like a lofty moun¬ 
tain, which is not affected by showers. 

19. The powerful tiger, not at all pained by the mis¬ 
siles of the king, seized the woman forcibly and ran away in 
a hurry. 

20. On seeing his wife seized by the tiger, the brahmin 
was much bewildered and following the way of the world cried 
again and again. 

21. After crying for some time that btahmin who was 



1182 


lord Himself wielding his Mayi, spoke to the king Bhadrayu 
dispelling his arrogance. 

DoijtSvara said :— 

22. O king, where are your great weapons ? Where is 
your great bow diat professes to protect ? Where is your 
strength of ten or twelve thousand great elephants ? 

23. Of what avail is your sword ? Your conch ? Of 
what avsul is your learning in the lores of mantras 
and missiles ? Of what avail is your might ? Of what avail 
is the strength of your great missiles ? 

24. All these have become futile, for you are incom¬ 
petent to meet the onslaught of wild animals. 

25. The greatest duty of a K^atriya is the protection 
from injury. When that virtue hereditarily practised in your 
himily is lost, of what avail is your life 

26. Kings protect the distressed people who seek refuge 
in them with their very lives and assets. They are the knowers 
of virtue. Without that they are like a dead body. 

27. Better death than life that does nbt protect the 
distressed. A mendicant is better than a rich householder 
who does not pcMsess charitable nature. 

28. Better to swallow poison or enter fire than cease 
to protect the oppressed, the helpless and the poor. 

JfandUDora said :— 

29. On hearing his lamentation and the decrial of his 
prowess, the king thought within himself thus— 

30. “Alas, my manliness is lost today due to the 
adverse fate. Today my fame has been quashed. Great sin 
has been acquired. 

31. The hereditary virtue has been smothered. I am 
unfortunate and confused in mind. Certainly my riches, my 
kingdom, my longevity will dwindle. 

32. By surrendering my own life,, lovable though it is, 

I shall make this brahmin free from grief, this brahmin 
whose wife has been seized by the tiger and who is pained 
extremely.” 


73. ComiNire Ragbu. II. 53. 



SataninuaiiMtd 


1183 


33. Having decided thus in his mind that excdlent 
king Bhadr£yu fell at his feet and spoke to him in condHatory 
tone* 

BhadrSyu said :— 

34. O Brahmin, I am a base KL^atriya bereft of strengdi. 
You take pity on me. O intelligent one, do not grieve. 1 shall 
give you what you desire. 

35. This kingdom, this queen, this body d* mine, every¬ 
thing is subservient to you. What is die greatest thing that 
you desire ? 

The Brahmin said :— 

36. What can a blind man do with a mirror ? Of 
what avail is a house to him who lives on alms? WThat can 
a fool do with a book ? Of what avail is wealth to him who 
is bereft of his wife ? 

37. Hence 1 who am not satiated with the enjoyment 
of pleasures but I whose wife is snatched away desire your 
crowned queen. Let her be given to me. 

BhadrSyu said :— 

38. I can give all my assets to the extent of the earth, 
my kingdom, horses and elephants and even my body to any¬ 
one but never can I give away my wife. 

39 The sin that accrues by indulging in sexual inter¬ 
course with another man's wife cannot be wiped off even by 
hundreds of expiatory rites. 

TTu Brahmin said :— 

40. Let it be the terrible sin of the slaughter of 
a brahmin; let it be the sin of sipping wine, I shall quell it 
with my power of penance. What then the sin of enjoying 
another man’s wife? 

41. Hence give me your wife. I have no otfier desire. 
Certainly you will go to hell by your inability to protect the 
oppressed. 

Jfandiivara smdi—^ 

42. At the words of the brahmin, the frightened king 



it84 S i9 a ^m§ 9* 

thought to himaelf» **It is a aia to withhold protection. It is 
proper under the drcomstanee to give away my wife.'* 

43. Hence I shall give my wife to this deserving brail* 
min and escape sin. Immediately thereafter I shall enter 
fire. My fame then shall be known.” 

44. After deciding mentally like this, he kindled a blaz¬ 
ing fire. He called the brahmin and gifted away his Wifb 
with water. 

45. He took the ceremonial bath and became pure. 
He bowed to gods went round die fire thrice and meditated 
on iSiva with pure mind. 

46. He was just to fall into the fire with his mind 
fixed at the feet of iSiva, the lord of the universe when 
Dvijefvara revealed himself and stayed him. 

47-49. The king saw in front of him the five-faced, 
the three-eyed lord with die Pinaka in his hand, bedecked 
by the digit of the moon, with hanging matted hair shed¬ 
ding tawny lustre, having the brilliance of a crore of mid¬ 
day blazing suns, white as the lotus stalk fibre, wearing the 
hide of the elephant, with his head drenched by the waves 
of Ganga, having the necklaces of great serpents, bedecked 
in coronet, waistband, shoulderlet and shining bangles, 
holding in his hands, the trident, the sword, the missile 
Khatvanga, the dagger, the shield, the deer, the mystic sign 
of protection, the eight articles of worship and the Pinaka, 
seated on his bull and blue-necked. 

50. Then from the sky divine showers of flowers fell. 
The divine instruments were played. The celestial damsels 
sang and danced. 

51. Vi^nu, Brahma, Indra and other gods excluding 
Nfirada and other sages too came there eulogising. 

52. While the king was watching widi palms joined 
in humility and devotion, there was great jubilation that en¬ 
hanced devotional feelings. 

53. The vision of the lord increased his pleasure. The 
incessant tear-drops smeared his body. He had horripilation 
and choked throat. With palms joined in reverence, he eulo¬ 
gised the lord. 

54. The supreme lord, the storehouse of mercy and 



SataminamtihiUl 1185 

hb conswrt P5nra6 were very much delighted. The lord 
then spoke to him thus. 

55. **0 king, I am satisfied with your devotion more 
than your piety. Mention the boon that you as well as your 
wife wbh to choose. I shall undoubtedly give it to you. 

56. It was to test your feelings and emotions that 1 
assumed the form of a brahmin and sqpproached you. She 
who was seized by the tiger is the goddess Sivfi herself. 

57. It was an illusory tiger which could not be hit by 
your arrows. 1 wanted to test your courage by demanding 
your wife. 

58. On hearing the words of the lord> the king 
Bhadrayu eulogised and bowed to the lord with bent head. 

BhadrSyu said :— 

59. O lord, this alone is a great boon that you became 
visible to me searched by the sun of worldly existence. 

60. O lord, since out of pity you wbh to accord me 
a boon, I choose it as a great devotee'* does from his lord, 
the granter of boons. 

61-62. O great god, my fiither Vajrabfihu with his 
wife, O lord, 1 a servant at your feet, along with my wife, 
the VaiSya Padmikara and his son Sanaya, O great lord, 
make all of us residents near you. 

Xandiivara said :— 

63. Then the queen, his wife, Kirtimalini propitiated 
Siva with devotion and requested for an excellent boon. 

Thi queen said : — 

64. O supreme God, Gandrahgada my father and 
Simantini my mother, I request the two to be joyously 
staying near you for ever. 

J^andUeara said :— 

65. The delighted lord of Gauri, favourably disposed 
to his devotees said—**Let it be so’* and granted them the 
boon they desired and then vanished in a moment. 


73. Read ITRff for i** die printed Skt. text. 



1186 

66. Acquiring the grace of the trident-bearing lord, 
BhadrSyu, enjoyed several pleasures lovingly in the company 
of Kirtim&lin!. 

67. Unimpeded in the exercise of his power he ruled 
the kingdom for ten thousand years. Then he entrusted his 
son with the kingdom and went to l§iva*s presence. 

68. The king GandrShgada and the queen Simantinl 
devoutly worshipped l^iva and attained his feet. 

69. ' Thus the great incarnation of lord Siva as Dvi- 
jelvara has been described by me. It was the bestower of 
great bliss on Bhadrayu. 

70. He who reads or listens to this holy narrative of 
Dvije^a incarnation of Siva of pious fame, goes to Siva’s 
region. 

71. He who listens to this every day or narrates this 
with attentive mind does not swerve from his duty and 
attains salvation hereafter. 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 

( •Siva*s incamaiion as TatinStha harAsa) 

J^andiSvara said :— 

1. O intelligent sage, listen. 1 shall explain the in¬ 
carnation of great bliss named YatinStha, of Siva the supreme 
soul. 

2. O great sage, on the mountain Arbuda^* there lived 
a hunter Ahuka of BhUla tribe. 

3. His wife Ahuki observed some good rites. Both of 
them were great devotees of Siva and worshipped Siva. 

4. O sage, once this Bhiila who was always devoted 
to Siva went far into the forest for fetching food for his wife. 

5. In. the meantime towards the evening, Siva assumed 
the ((uise of an ascetic and came to his house to test hiy" 

74. It can be identified with the ))resent Abu, a lacred hill of the 
Western India, lying in the Sirohi state of Raji^jutana. 



iatani^asarhkitd 


1187 


6. The lord of the house that intelligent man too 
came back then and lovingly worshipped the leading stscetic. 

7. In order to test his feelings, 8iva in the guise of an 
ascetic, indulging in great sports lovingly said to him in a 
piteous tone. 

TatinStha said :— 

8. O Bhilla, give me some place here to stay today. 
I shall by all means leave in the next morning, you will be 
blessed for ever. 

Bhilla said :— 

9. O lord, what you say is true. But please lisfen to 
me. The room is not spacious enough to hold us all together. 

Nandiivara said :— 

10. Thus addressed, the ascetic wanted to leave. By 
that time, considering the trend of thought of her husband 
the Bhilli said. 

11. O lord, give him room to stay. Do not turn out 
a guest. Consider the duty of a householder or virtue will 
be affected. 

12. You stay in the house along with the ascetic. I 
shall remain outside with immense weapons. 

Jiandiivara said :— 

13. On hearing the virtuous and auspicious words of 
his wife, the Bhilla thought thus. 

14. *‘How can I stay in the house after keeping my 
wife out. It will be sinful on my part if the ascetic goes 
elsewhere. 

15. Neither of the two courses is proper for a house¬ 
holder. What is destined to happen will surely happen. I 
shall stay outside.** 

16. After thinking thus and insisting on it, he kept 
both of them within the house joyously, himself stayed out¬ 
side the house keeping all the weapons beside him. 

17. During the night the cruel beasts of prey tormen¬ 
ted him- He too strenuously withstood them to the extent 
of his ability. 



1188 




18. Thus fighting strenuously and although very strox^, 
the Bhilla was devoured the b^ts of prey wfaioh seized 
him forcibly, as dioiigh indted by his own adverse fate. 

19. Getting up in the morning the ascetic saw the 
Bhilla of the forest devoured by the beasts of prey. He fislt 
much dejected at it. 

20. Although the Bhilli too was distressed, she sup¬ 
pressed her sorrow on seeing the ascetic miserable and spoke 
thus. 

Bhilli said 

21. O ascetic, why are you sorry? What has happened 
is for good. Blessed and contented is he since the death has 
happened in this manner. 

22. O ascetic, reducing myself to ashes, I too shall 
follow him. Be pleased to arrange for the pyre. This is the 
eternal duty of women. 

23. On hearing her words which he thought to be 
proper, the ascetic arranged the pyre. She entered the pyre 
dutifully. 

24. In the meantime 8iva himself appeared before her 
and ^>oke praising her lovingly blessed lady, O blessed 
lady.’* 

Siva iaid :— 

25. O sinless lady, mention the boon you wish to 
have. I am pleased with your conduct. There is nothing 
which cannot be granted to you. 1 am utterly subservient to 
you. 

Manddvara said :— 

26. On hearing the words of Siva yielding the greatest 
bliss she felt the highest pleasure. She did not remember any¬ 
thing. 

27. On seeing her in that state, $iva was much deli¬ 
ghted. He asked her again to mention the boon she wished 
to have. 

Swa said :— 

28. This ascetic who is in my own form will assume 



iaiandnuattJ^ 1189 

die ibnn of a swan in the next birth. He will lovingly 
unite both of you. 

29. This Bhilla will be born as Nala, the son of Vira- 
sena> in the excellent city of Ni^adha.^* There is no doubt in 
this. 

30. you will be born in the illustrious city of Vidarbha’* 
as the daughter of king Bhima. You will be famous as Dama- 
yanti endowed with all good qualities. 

31. After coming together you will enjoy royal plea¬ 
sures. You will attain salvation too, inaccessible even to 
leading Yogins. 

Nandiivara said :— 

32. After saying this, l§iva assumed the form of phallic 
image. He became stationary. He is thereafter remembered 
as Acale&a. 

33. O dear, the Bhilla Ahuka was born as the son of 
Virasena in the city of Nisadha. He was the great king 
Nala. 

34. That great Bhilli, Ahuka was born as the daughter 
of king Bhima in the city of Vidarbha. She became famous 
as Damayanti. 

35. Siva in the form of Yatinatha was born as a swan. 
He managed the marriage of Damayanti with Nala. 

36. It was due to the merit accruing from hospitality 
that lord Siva gave them pleasure after assuming the form 
of a swan. 

37. The incarnation of Siva as the swan adept in the 
art of intelligence, was the bestower of great bliss to Dama¬ 
yanti as well as to Nala. 

38. This great and holy narrative of Siva’s incarnation 
of illustrious fame as swan is wonderful and indeed the bes¬ 
tower of sidvation 

39. He who narrates or listens to the auspicious story 
of incarnation of Yatinatha hariisa, attains the greatest goal. 

75. The city of Ni^dha or Nai^adha associated with King Nala 
can be identified with Nalapura, modern Narwar situated on the river 
KSlisindhu to the south-west of Gwalior. 

76. The capital of Vidarbha is placed in MahSrfiftra. It is the same 
asKup^inpur modern Seder to the east of Amarivati in Berar. 



1190 


Sivapurltfa 

40. The story is faultless, bestower of the fruits of all 
desires and very excellent. It is conducive to the attainment 
of heaven, fame and longevity. It enhances devotion.* 

41. After hearing this narrative of Siva in the forms 
of an ascetic and a swan, the hearer enjoys all pleasures here 
and goes to Siva*» abode hereafter. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 

{The incarnation of Siva as Kr^nadarSana) 

^andUvara said '.— 

1. O Sanatkumara, listen lo the description of the 
great incarnation of Siva, the excellent Krsnadar^ana who 
gave perfect wisdom to Nabhaga. 

2. Iksvaku and others were the sons of Sraddhadeva’^ 
of whom Nabhaga, was the ninth. His son was Nabhaga. 

3. Ambarisa was his son who was a devotee of Vijnu 
with whom the sage Durvasas was much pleased due to 
his devotion for Brahmins. 

4. O sage, the grandfather of Anibarisa was Nabhaga 
to whom Siva imparted perfect knowledge. Listen to his 
story. 

5. Nabhaga the son of Manu, highly intelligent, and 
with perfect control of his sense-organs stayed in the abode 
of his preceptors for studies for a long time. 

6. During this interval Iksvaku and other sons had 
their due shares in the property without leaving any share 
for Nabhaga. 

7. At the behest of their father, the shrewd sons took 
their shares and enjoyed the kingdom with out any misery. 
They were fortunate. 

77. According to this PurSoa, Sraddhadeva had several sons, Ik|v&ku 
and others, of whom Nabhaga was the ninth. Nabhaga had a son named 
Nabhaga. The latter had a son named Ambarifa. Pargiter omits Sr&dd- 
badeva and Nabhaga and mentions NabhSga instead of Nftbhaga as the 
father of Ambarifa. 



^atarudfdsai/^tS 


1101 


8. After learning the Vedas with their sections and 
sub-sections, in due course, the Brahmacarin Nabhga 
returned. 

9. O sage, on seeing his brothers Ik$vaku and others 
having taken their shares, Nabhaga desirous of his share told 
them affectionately. 

Nabhaga said :— 

10. O my brothers you have taken your shares 
duly without leaving anything for me. I have now come for 
my share. Please give me mine. 

11. Then we had forgotten to allow your share. We 
shall certainly do it now. Our father is your share. Take him. 

12. On bearing the words of his brothers Nabhaga 
was surprised. He approached his father and said. 

Nabhaga said :— 

13. O father, my brothers have taken their shares 
leaving me out. I had been to the preceptor’s abode for study 
as a student. 

14. When I returned I asked them to allot my share; 
they replied that you are my share. I have now come for 
that purpose. 

Nandiivara said: — 

15. O sage, on hearing his words, his father 8raddha- 
deva was surprised. He consoled his son who was devoted to 
truth and virtue. 

Mam said :— 

16. O dear, do not pay heed to what they said. It was 
only to deceive you. I am not a share by any means, an 
instrument Of enjoyment. 

17. Still since I have been given as a share by the 
deceitful persons I shall tell you the means of livelihood. 
Hear attentively. 

18. The intelligent Ahgirasa brahmins are performing 
a sacrifice. Every sixth day the rites are marred. 

19. O wise Nabhaga, you go there and praise them. 



Redte two VaHvadcva sukatas there. That sacrifice will then 
become perfect. 

20. As soon as the sacrifice is concluded those Brahmins 
going heavenwards will give you delightedly the wealth 
left over in the sacrifice. 

Nandiivara said :— 

21. On hearing the words of his father, Nabhaga who 
considered truth as virtue went eagerly where the excellent 
sacrifice was on. 

22. O sage, in that sacrifice during the diurnal rites 
the intelligent son of Manu recited two Vai^vadeva suktas 
clearly. 

23. When the sacrifice was concluded the Aiigirasa 
brahmins gave him the wealth left after the sacrifice. 

24. Realising that he was taking the wealth left after 
the sacrifice, l§iva of divine sports manifested himself all of a 
sudden. 

25. He was beautiul in every limb, a glorious Purusa 
Krsnadar^ana. It was to survey his emotional reaction and 
to bestow on him the perfect knowledge as his share that the 
lord manifested himself. 

26. Lord Siva desirous of testing Nabhaga the son of 
Manu approached from north and said. 

Siva said :— 

27. O man, who are you that take away my assets and 
wealth ? Who has sent you here ? Tell me the whole truth. 

Nandiivara said :— 

28. On heaving his words, O dear, the poet Nabhaga, 
son of Manu humbly replied to the Puru§a Kr§nadar^ana. 

Nabhaga said :— 

29. This wealth of the sacrifice has been given to me 
by the sages. Why do you, O Kr...adarsana prevent me from 
taking it. 

NandiSvara said :— 

30. On hearing these truthful words uttered by 
Nabhaga, the delighted purusa Kr^nadarSana spoke. 



SaUtrwir4tsaihhitd 


1193 


Kfff^adariana said:^ 

31. O dear, in our dispute the ultimate authority is 
yoitf father. Go to him and ask him. What he says will be 
true and final. 

NindUvofa said :— 

32. On hearing his words, the wise Nabhaga son of 
Manu, approached his father anxiously, O sage, and asked 
him about what he said. 

33. On hearing what his son said, Manu iSraddha- 
deva remembered the lotus-like fbet of Siva and afler re¬ 
collecting spoke to him. 

Manu said:-^ 

34. O dear, listen to my words : that Puru$a is lord 
Siva. Every object is his and particularly what is obtained 
from the sacrifice. 

35. That what is left over atter the sacrifice is 
Siva’s share. This argument is current among some in¬ 
telligent people due to his will. 

36. Undoubtedly lord Siva deserves everything. What 
then of the wealth left over in a sacrifice ? More depends on 
the lord’s wish. 

37. O Nabhaga, the lord has come in that form 
in order to bless you. Go there. Propitiate him properly, 

38. Request him to forgive your fault. Bow to him 
well and eulogise him. That Siva alone is the lord of all, 
the lord of sacrifice, the lord of everything. 

39. Vi^nu, Brahma and other gods, Siddhas and the 
sages, O dear, arc competent in their respective duties only 
due to his blessings. 

40. O foremost of my sons, go there quickly. Do not 
delay. Propitiate the great god, the lord of all by every 
means. 

Nandiivara said :— 

41-42. After saying this, Manu Sraddhadeva, sent his son 
immediately to Siva. After approaching him and bowing to 
him with palms joined in reverence and head bent down, the 
delighted Nabhaga of great intellect spoke to him humbly. 



1194 ^wapurifu 

Nabhaga said :— 

43. O lord, my father says that whatever there is in 
the three worlds is yours to be sure. What then, about 
the wealth left over in a sacrifice ? 

44. O lord, what I said before was done in error and 
ignorance. Please forgive the same. I propitiate you with 
my head bent down. 

45. After saying this, Nabhaga of dejected mind, eu¬ 
logised lord Siva Kfsnadarsana with palms joined in 

reverence and with his head bent down. 

46. The pure-souled Sraddhadeva too with head bent 

and palms joined eulogised the lord and requested him to 
forgive his fault. 

47. In the meantime, Visnu, Brahma, Indra and the 
gods, Siddhas and the sages came there. 

48. They were jubilant. They joined their palms In 
reverence. With great devotion they severally bowed down 
and eulogised. 

49. Then the delighted Rudra, Kr^nadar^ana glanced 
at them with sympathetic eyes and smilingly spoke to 
Nabhaga. 

Kff^darSana said :— 

50. Wltat your father said is virtuous and true. You 
too spoke the tnuth. Hence you are good. There is no doubt 
in this. 

51. Hence I am delighted with your holy rites. 
Sympathetically I ata conferring on you the eternal Brahman, 
the perfect knowledge. 

52. Be great aiifi wise, O Nabhaga, along with the 
brahmins immediately.'; Take all this wealth granted by me 
out of compassion. 

53. O intelligent one, enjoy all pleasures without any 
aberration. By my grace you will attain the good goal along 
with the brahmin sacrificers. 

NandUvara said :— 

54. ' O dear, after saying this, lord $iva, favourably 
disposed to truth, vanished there itself even as all were 
watching. 



S(Uarudras(ahhitS 


1195 


55. Vijnu, Brahma, the gods and all others, O ex¬ 
cellent sage, went to their respective abodes after joyously 
bowing to that direction. 

56. iSraddhadeva too, accompanied by his son, went 
joyously to his abode. After enjoying extensive pleasures he 
went to Siva’s city in the end. 

57. Thus, O Brahmin, the incarnation of Siva, named 
Kr$nadarlana, bestower of bliss on Nabhaga, has been 
narrated to you. 

58. This narrative is holy and conducive to worldly 
enjoyment. It grants salvation to the good. It yields the 
fruits of desires to those who read and listen to it. 

59. The intelligent man who remembers this narrative 
both in the morning and in the evening becomes wise and 
knower of mantras. He attains the greatest goal in the end. 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

{The incarnation of Siva as AoadhUteSvara) 

Nandiivara said :— 

1. O son of Brahma, listen to the first incarnation of 
the great lord, named Avadhute^vara, who dispelled the ar¬ 
rogance of Indra. 

2. O sage, formerly Indra accompanied by Bfhaspati 
and the other gods went to Kailasa in order to see Siva. 

3-4. On knowing that Brhaspati and Indra wer6 
coming and in order to test their mind in their eagerness to 
see him, the lord indulging in different kinds of sports as¬ 
sumed the form of an Avadhuta. He was naked. He looked 
fierce and had the lustre of blazing fire. 

5. The Avadhuta, the goal of the good, blocked their 
way. He stood there with matted hair hanging loosely , and 
the whole feature shining brilliantly. 

6. Passing that way towards Siva, Bfhaspati and Indra 
saw the gigantic figure of wonderful features on the way. 



1196 Simpttrdfa 

7. Without jtnowmg that the Puru^ was iSiva himself, 

O sage, Indra who was arrogant due to his authority asked 
him as he stood in his way. » 

Indra said :— 

8. Who are you? Whence have you come in this 
form of a naked Avadhuta? What is your true name? Tell 
me quickly and factually. 

9. Is iSiva in his abode? Or has he gone out? I am 
now going to see him along with my preceptor and the gods. 

NandOvara said :— 

10. When asked by Indra that Puru^a who was lord 
Siva himself who had taken that body sportively in order to 
quell his arrogance did not say anything. 

11. Indra asked him again; but Siva whose ways are 
unknown, who was in the naked form and who was the 
creator of fanciful things did not say anything. 

12. Again Indra, the lord of heaven and the master 
of the three worlds, asked him. The great Yog^n of great 
sports remained silent. 

13. Though asked by Indra again and again thus, lord 
Siva remained silent desirous of quelling the arrogance of 
Indra. 

14. Then the lord of the gods proud of his suzerainty 
over the three worlds became furious and said rebuking the 
lord having matted hair. 

Indra said :— 

15. O you fool, even though I am asking, you are 
not giving me any answer. Hence I am going so kill you 
with' my thunderbolt. O wicked fellow, who is there to 
protect you? 

16. Afler saying this and staring at him in fury Indra 
raised his thunderbolt in order to kill the naked persori. 

17. On seeing Indra lifting up the thunderbolt, Siva 
made his hand stunned. 

18. Then that Puru$a, furious and terrific, with terrible 
eyes, blazed with his brilliance as though he would burn 
everything. 



SatarudrasamhitS 


1197 


19. The lord of iSaci burnt within himself due to the 
anger resulting from the benumbed state of his hand like a 
serpent whose fury had been curbed by a magical formula. 

20. On seeing the Purusa blazing thus in his own 
brilliance Brhaspati knew him to be Siva and bowed to 
him soon. 

21. Brhaspati of liberal mind kept his palms joined 
together and prostrated on the ground like a staff and eu¬ 
logised him with devotion. 

Brhaspati said : - 

22. O great god, lord of the gods, favourably disposed 
towards those who seek refuge in you, O lord of Gaurl, be 
pleased. O lord of all, obeisance be to you. 

23. Even Brahma, Visnu and others are all deluded 
by your Maya, They do not know you really. If at all 
they know, it is only by your blessings. 

Nandiioara said :— 

24. After eulogising lord Siva, Brhaspati made Indra 
fill at his feet. 

25. O dear, then the liberal-minded preceptor of the 
gods, Brhaspati, the intelligent one, bowed humbly and 
spoke thus. 

Brhaspati said :— 

26. O great god, lord of the distressed, please raise 
me up, who have fallen at your feet. Do not be furious. 
Be kind and loving. 

27. O great god, be satisfied. Save Indra who has 
sought refuge in you. Fire originating from your eye in the 
forehead i.s coming out. 

jVandii'vara said :— 

28. On hearing the words of Brhaspati, the lord in 
the form of Avadhuta, the ocean of mercy, indulging in good 
sports, laughingly said. 

Avadhuta said :— 

29. How can I withhold the fiic that has come out of 



1198 


my eye due to anger ? How can a serpent take up a slough 
that has been cast oif. 

NandUvara said :— 

30. On hearing these words of 8iva, Bfhaspati with 
his mind agitated due to fright spoke again with palms 
joined in reverence. 

Brhaspati said ;— 

31. O lord, devotees are always to be pitied. O Siva, 
thus make your name Bhaktavatsala true. 

32. O lord of the gods, it behoves you to cast off this 
fire elsewhere. Please lift up Indra since you arc the up- 
lifter of all devotees. 

Nandiioara said ;— 

33. Thus requested by Brhaspati, Siva who bore the 
name of Bhaktavatsala, the delighted soul and the dispcller of 
the distress of those who bow down, replied. 

Siva said :— 

34. O preceptor of the gods, I am pleased with you. 

I shall grant you excellent boon. You will be famous as 
*Jiva* because you have gifted life to Indra. 

35. I shall cast off this fire which has cofne out of the 
eye in my forehead, and which is unbearable to the gods, 
so that it will not afflict Indra. 

Nandiivara said 

36. After saying this he took the wonderful fire, origi¬ 
nating from his eye in the forehead in his hand and cast it 
off into the briny sea.^® 

37. Then that fire originating from the eye in the 
forehead of Siva and cast off into the briny sea became a 
boy immediately. 

38. He became tbc lord of Asuras known as Jalandhara 
and Sindhuputra (Son of the Sea). At the request of the 
gods, lord Siva slew him. 

78. It refers to the briny ocean lying to the west of Bhfirata. 



Saiarudrasa ihhitd 


1199 


39. After carrying out this task §iva, the benefactor 
of the worlds in the form of Avadhuta, vanished from there. 

40. The gods became happy and fearless. Bfhaspati 
and Indra became free from terror and attained supreme 
happiness. 

41. After seeing the lord for which they had come 
there, Brhaspati and Indra returned to their respective abodes 
joyous and contented. 

42. Thus the incarnation Avadhute§vara of lord Siva 
has been narrated by me. It yields the highest bliss and 
punishes the wicked. 

43. This narrative is faultless and conducive to heaven 
and fame. It yields worldly pleasures and salvation. Jt is 
divine and it gives the fruits of all desires. 

44. He who listens to this or narrates this with atten¬ 
tive mind enjoys all pleasures and attains the goal of Siva 
in the end. 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 

{The incarnation of Siva as Bhiksmarya) 

NandiSvara said :— 

1. O excellent sage, I shall now narrate the incarna¬ 
tion of Siva in which he dispelled the suspicion of a brahmin 
woman. 

2. There was a king in the land of Vidarbha, named 
Satyaratha. He was virtuous, regularly observing truthfulness 
and a favourite of great devotees of Siva. 

3. O sage, as the king ruled over the kingdom virtuously 
observing piety to Siva, a long time elapsed very happily. 

4. Once a great fight ensued between that king and 
the Salvas who laid siege to his city with many armies 
puffed up with their strength. 

5. The king of Vidarbha had a terrible fight with them. 
But his armies were destroyed and he was killed by Salvas 
due to adverse fate. 



1200 SivapurS^ 

6. When the king was. kiJied in the battle by the 
$alvas, the terrihed soldiers who survived death ded along 
with the ministers. 

7. His crowned queen who was pregnant and who had 
been imprisoned by the enemies escaped from the city, O 
sage, during the night. 

8. Coming out of the city the grief-stricken crowned 
queen slowly went very far in the eastern direction with her 
heart set on the lotus-like feet of Siva. 

9. Early in the morning next day after she had 
traversed a long way, the queen saw a pure lake, thanks to 
the mercy of Siva. 

10. After reaching the banks of the lake the distressed 
beloved of the king, of tender body, resorted to a shady tree 
for rest and stay. 

11. Fortunately in an auspicious and meritorious hour 
the queen gave birth to a son endowed with all divine 
characteristics. 

12. The thirsty mother, the wife of the king, entered 
the lake for drinking water but as willed by fate she was 
devoured by a crocodile in the water. 

13. The son bereft of father and mother, distressed by 
hunger and thirst at the time of birth, cried out. 

14. O sage, when the new born babe was weeping and 
wailing in the forest, lord Siva, the immanent soul and pro¬ 
tector, was moved to pity. 

15. A wandering beggar woman came there acciden¬ 
tally, urged mentally by Siva, the dispeller of fear. 

16. She was a widow and was herself carrying her one 
year old son. She saw an orphaned child weeping there. 

17. O sage, on seeing an infant boy in the desolate 
forest that brahmin woman was surprised and pondered over 
the situation in diverse ways. 

18. “An extremely wonderful thing has been seen by 
me now. It cannot be conceived by the mind or explained in 
words. 

19. This infant who.se umbilical cord has not been cut 
lies on the bare ground. He has no mnther. He is weeping 
but he is very brilliant 



^ alarudrasarhhitS, 


1201 


20. He has no parents or persons to help him. What 
might have caused this ? A/as, haw strong is power of fate ! 

21. I do not know his parentage. There is none who 
knows him. Whom can I enquire about the details of his 
birth ? But I feel drawn towards him. 

22. Without knowing his birth and parentage I shall 
not touch him’" although I wish to nourish him and bring 
him up as a child born of me.” 

NandiSvara said :— 

23. While the excellent brahmin lady was musing thus, 
Siva favourably disposed to his devotees, took pity. 

24. Lord Siva of great sports, bestower of happiness 
on devotees in every respect, unconditionally for ever, by 
himself assumed the form of a mendicant. 

25. The mendicant who was lord Siva himself suddenly 
came to the place where the doubting brahmin lady, desi¬ 
rous of knowing the details, was standing. 

26. The lord whose ways are unscru table, who is the 
storehouse of mercy and who assumed the form of the leading 
mendicant, laughed and told the brahmin lady. 

The mendicant said :— 

27. O brahmin lady, do not entertain any doubt in 
your mind. Do not be sorry. Protect this pure boy, your 
adopted son, lovingly. 

28. Ere long you will attain a great glory through this 
infant. Nourish this extremely brilliant infant by all means. 

JfandUvara said :— 

29. That brahmin lady respectfully and lovingly asked 
Siva, the storehouse of mercy, in the form of a mendicant 
who spoke thus. 

The brahmin lady said : — 

30. At your behest I shall nourish and bring up this 
boy as though he is my own son. There shall be no ; doubt 
in this. You have come here by my good fortune. 

79. Read »TfSrCI for of tho printed Ski. text. 



1202 


31- Still I wish to know the particular details and 
facts about him. Whose son is he ? Who are you, that 
have come here ? 

32. O lord, O excellent mendicant, again and again 
the thought occurs to me that you are Siva, the ocean of 
mercy and this infant had been your devotee formerly. 

33. Through some defect in his past actions he has 
attained this plight. After experiencing it he will surely 
attain glory, thanks to your bliss. 

34. It is by your Maya that I have been deluded. I 
had lost my way. In order to protect him I have been 
urged by you to come over here. 

XandtSvara said :— 

35. Siva in the guise of a mendicant spoke to the 
brahmin lady who had attained perfect knowledge by seeing 
him and who evinced the desire to know the details. 

The mendicant said :— 

36. O brahmin lady, listen with pleasure to the an¬ 
tecedents of this boy. O sinless one, I shall mention all the 
details to you. 

37. This boy is the son of Satyaratha, king of Vidarbha 
a great devotee of Siva and devoted to his duty. 

38. Listen, the king Satyaratha was killed by his 
enemies in the battle. His excited and distressed wife set out 
from the palace at night. 

39. She came here in the morning and gave birth to 
this boy. Due to thirst she got into the lake and as fate 
would have it, was seized by the crocodile. 

Nandiivara said :— 

40. Thus he narrated to her all the details, the manner 
of his birth, the death of his father in the battle and that 
of his mother due to the crocodile. 

41. O great sage, then the brahmin lady who was 
surprised asked the mendicant of perfect knowledge in the 
form of a Siddha, again. 



^atarudrasariihitS 


1203 


7 ^ brahmin lady said :— 

42. O mendicant, how was his father, the king, killed 
in the midst of his enjoyment of excellent pleasures, by his 
enemies the 3alvas in a few days ? 

43. How was the mother of this infant devoured by 
the crocodile so suddenly ? How did he happen to be or¬ 
phaned and helpless ever since his birth ? 

44. How is it that my son too is very poor and a 
beggar ? O mendicant, how will these two sons attain 
happiness ? Please tell me. 

yfandiivara said :— 

45. On hearing these words of the brahmin wife, the 
delighted mendicant, lord Siva himself, said laughingly. 

The mendicant said :— 

46. O brahmin lady, I shall answer all questions in 
detail. Listen with attention to this excellent narrative. 

47. The father of this boy, the king of Vidarbha, was 
the excellent king Pandya®® in his previous birth. 

48. That king was a devotee of Siva. He ruled over 
the entire earth virtuously. Qjaelling all disturbances he made 
all the subjects happy and contented. 

49. Observing fast and other rites in the day and night 
on a Trayodali (thirteenth) day, once he worshipped Siva, 
the lord of all, at dusk. 

50. As he was worshipping Siva at dusk in the course 
of his holy rites there arose a great noise, in the city, 
hideous in every respect. 

51. On hearing that noise, the king left the worship 
of Siva unfinished and went out of his palace suspecting the 
arrival of enemies. 

52. In the meantime his powerful minister came 
near the king catching hold of the enemy king.*' 

53. On seeing the enemy king, he was extremely 

80. The Purarjia docs not motion the P 4 ndya king by name. 

8 1, Read for 'f the printed Skt. text. 



1204 ^wapufona 

agitated by anger. Disregardful of the right course he caused 
him to be beheaded. 

54. Without concluding the worship ofl&iva, the*defiled 
king, confused in mind and bereft of auspiciousness, took his 
food at night with pleasure. 

55. He was born as the king of Vidarbha. He observed 
holy rites of Siva during this birth also, since there was a 
hindrance to his worship of Siva (during the previous birth) 
he was now killed in the midst of his enjoyment. 

56. His son in the previous birth was born as his son 
in this birth too but he was bereft of riches due to the break 
in the worship of Siva. 

57. The mother of this boy had killed her co-wife in the 
previous birth. Hence due to that sin, she was devoured 
by the crocodile in this birth. 

58. Thus their activities have been narrated to you. 
People having no devotion to Siva and not worshipping 
him attain poverty, 

59. This son of yours was an excellent brahmin in 
his previous birth. He spent his life in accepting gifts but 
he did not perform holy rites, like sacrifice etc. 

60. O brahmin lady, hence your son has incurred 
poverty. Seek refuge in S’va in order to ward off that sin. 

61. Let the worship of Siva be performed by these two 
sons. Only after the investiture with the sacred *'^read will 
Siva bestow glory. 

jVandiivara said :— 

62. After instructing her thus, Siva in the form of a 
mendicant, favourably disposed towards his devotees, revealed 
his real self to her. 

63. On coming to know that he was lord Siva the 
brahmin lady bowed to and eulogised liirn with choking 
words full of devotion. 

64. Even as the brahmin lady stood watching, Siva 
who had taken the form of a mendicant vanished there itself. 

65. When the mendicant disappeared, the care-free 
brahmin woman took that boy and her son home. 



iatarudrasaitihiti 


1205 


66. She took up residence in the beautiful city Eka- 
cakra®** and nourished the prince and her own son with 
excellent food. 

67. Their sacred rites and the investiture with the 
sacred thread were performed by the brahmins. They grew 
up thus devoted to the worship of Siva in their own house. 

68. O dear, at the behest of the sage Sandilya they 
observed vows and restraints and performed the worship of 
Siva during dusk. 

69. Once when the prince went to the river for his 
bath without the brahmin boy, he found an excellent pot 
of treasure. 

70. Thus four months elapsed as the two boys con¬ 
tinued their worship of Siva. 

71. As they continued the worship of Siva again with 
great joy, a year elapsed in the very same house. 

72-73. O sage, after a year had elapsed, the prince 
once went to a forest along with the brahmin boy. There a 
Gandharva came by chance and gave his daughter in mar¬ 
riage to the prince. The prince ruled over the kingdom without 
any check or hindrance. 

74. He considered the brahman lady who brought 
him up as his mother and the brahmin boy as his brother. 

75. In name of Dharmagupta he continued to propi¬ 
tiate the lord of gods and enjoyed pleasures along with the 
princess in the kingdom of Vidarbha. 

76. Thus the incarnation of Siva as the Bhik§uvarya 
bestowing happiness on the prince Dharmagupta has been 
narrated by me now- 

77. This narrative is pious, extremely sanctifying and 
holy. It is an instrument for attaining virtue, wealth, Jove 
and liberation. It yields all pleasures. 

78. He who listens to this talc or narrates this to others 
with pure mind enjoys all pleasures here and goes to the 
region of Siva hereafter. 


83. It was the town of Kicakas according to the Mhh. 



1206 


Sioapwrdt^ 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 

( The incarnation of Siva named SureSvara) • 
Nandiivara said :— 

1. O dear, listen, I shall narrate the incarnation of 
Siva, the great soul, as Indra in which he was beneScial to 
Dhaumya’s elder brother. 

2. The intelligent son of Vyaghrapada, Upamanyu, 
the beloved of the good, became the son of a sage in another 
birth. He achieved great attainments then. 

3. Upamanyu, the son of Vyaghrapada, while yet a 
small child stayed in his uncle’s house along with his mother. 
Due to adverse fate he was very poor. 

4. Once he tasted a little milk in his uncle’s hermitage. 
Approaching his mother he implored for milk, yearning for it. 

5. On hearing the words of her son the pitiable mother 
went in and thought of a proper means to satisfy the child. 

6. She ground some seeds and grains she got by 
gleaning, into a paste with water. She gave this artificial 
milk to her son after fondling and coaxing him. 

7. After drinking the artificial milk given by his mother 
the boy said “O, this is not milk” and cried again. 

8. On hearing the cry of her son, she wiped off his 
lotus-like eyes and said in grief. 

The mother said :— 

9. How can we the dwellers of the forest for ever have 
milk ? Without the grace of Siva we can never have milk. 

10. O son, only that can be attained what we had 
dedicated to Siva in our previous birth. We need not worry 
in this matter. 

11. On hearing the words of his mother, the son of 
Vyaghrapada excessively fond of his mother, freed of his 
grief, replied to her. 

12. “O blessed mother, do not grieve. Cast off this 
sorrow. If Siva is the benefactor, everything will result in 
welfare. 

13. O mother, listen to me. If there is lord Siva 
anywhere, sooner or later I shall achieve, the ocean of milk”. 



iatanidrasathhiti 


120:^ 


NandUvara said :— 

14. After saying thus with pleasure and repeating “Let 
there be a welfare*’, he bowed to his mother and left her. 
He began to perform penance. 

15-16. It was on the mountain Himavat that he went 
to perform his penance with pure mind taking nothing in 
except air. He installed !§iva’s phallic image of clay after 
making a pedestal for it with eight bricks. He invoked Siva 
along with Parvati into the phallic image with devotion. He 
repeated the five-syllabled mantra.®^ The boy worshipped 
Siva with leaves, flowers and other things. 

17. He meditated on Siva along with Parvati repeating 
the five-syllabled mantra. Worshipping thus he performed 
great penance for a long time. 

18. O sage, due to the penance of the boy Upamanyu, 
the great soul, the whole world consisting of the mobile and 
immobile beings blazed as it were. 

19. In the meantime, requested by Visnu aud others, 
Siva assumed the form of Indra in order to test his devotion. 

20. Parvati took the form of Saci. The Ganas became 
the gods, Nandin became the elephant Airavata. Everything 
belonging to Siva became that of Indra. 

21. Then Siva accompanied by Parvati and the Ganas, 
and assuming the form of Indra went to the hermitage of 
Upamanyu in order to bless him. 

22. O great sage, in order to test his devotion, Siva 
in the form of India, spoke to the boy in a grave tone. 

Indra said: — 

23. **0 boy of good rites, ,1 am pleased with you 
and your penance. Mention the boon you wish to have. 
I shall give you whatever you desire. There is no doubt 
about this.” 

24 . Thus addressed by Siva in the form of Indra, the 
boy replied with palms joined in reverence, “I choose 
devotion into Siva.” 

83 . The five-syllabled mantra of Siva is “Namab Sivftya”, 

84. The dialogue between Indra and Upamanyu is rminiscent of the 
talk between Pftrvatl and the student ascetic. Gp. KftlidSsa’s KumAra. 
Canto V. 



1208 Sivapurd^ 

25. On hearing it Indra said—“You do not know me 

the lord of the gods, the lord of the three worlds, Indra, 
bowed to by all the gods. * 

26. O brahmin sage, be my devotee. Worship me 
alone on every occasion. I shall grant you every benefit. 
Leave off Rudra devoid of attributes. 

27. Enough of Rudra devoid of attributes. What pur¬ 
pose of yourg can be achieved by his worship ? He is out of 
the caste of ihe gods. He has become a Pisaca. 

Nandiivara said :— 

28. On hearing these words, the son of the sage con¬ 
sidered them an obstacle to his austerities. Repeating the 
five-s' llabled mantra he told him who had come to create 
obs'acles. 

Upamanyu said :— 

29. All this has been mentioned by you indulging in 
insult of Siva. Incidentally you have mentioned that Siva, 
the lord of the gods, is attributeless as well as Pisaca. 

30. You do not know Siva, lord of the chiefs of gods, 
the father and progenitor of Brahma, Vtsnu and Mahe!5a 
and greater than Prakrti. 

31. I choose the boon from that deity, whom the philo¬ 
sophers call eternal, the single, the multitude, separate from 
the existent and non-existent and the unmanifest. 

32. I choose the boon from that deity whom the 
knowers of reality consider free from causations, disputes and 
the bestower of the principles of Sahkhya and Yoga. 

33. There is no greater entity than lord Siva who is 
beyond the attributes. He is the cause of all causes. He is 
the most excellent of Brahma, Vi§nu and other gods. 

34. I do not wish to take a boon from you or Bra¬ 
hma or Visnu. Nor do I want any boon from any other 
god. Let Siva be the bestower of boons on me. 

35. Of what avail is speaking much ? I tell you the 
truth and my decision. I do not request any other god ex¬ 
cept Siva. 

36-37. O enemy of mountains, listen to my feeling in 



SatarndrasaThhitd 


1209 


this matter. I infer that I have committed sins in the pre¬ 
vious birth since I am forced to hear the insult to Siva, on 
hearing which one shall shed his own mortal body at the 
very same moment. He goes to Siva’s region thereby. 

38. O base god, let it be that I had yearned for milk. 
I shall kill you by Siva’s missile and then leave off my 
mortal frame, 

Nandiivara said ’.— 

39. After saying thus, Upamanyu who was prepared 
to die, cast off his desire for milk and got ready to kill 
Indra. 

40. He took some ashes from the receptacle and in¬ 
voked it with the mantra Aghorastra, The sage, thereafter 
discharged it against Indra and roared. 

41. Remembering the feet of Siva, his favourite deity, 
he got ready to burn himself. He stood there bearing the 
fiery pose. 

42. When the brahmin was engaged thus, the lord in 
the form of Indra warded off the fiery pose of the Yogin 
by gentle means. 

43. At the behest of Siva, Nandin the favourite of Siva 
delightedly caught hold of the Aghorastra discharged by 
him, in the middle. 

44. Assuming his own form with the moon for his 
crest, lord Siva revealed it to the brahmin. 

45. The lord then showed him a thousand milk 
oceans, the ocean of curds and the ocean of different food¬ 
stuffs. 

46. Thus Siva was seen seated on his bull accompained 
by the goddess. He was surrounded by the leading Ganas 
and the divine weapons, the trident and others. 

47. The drums were sounded in the heaven. There 
was a shower of flowers. All the ten quarters were covered 
by Brahma, Visnu and other gods. 

48. Then Upamanyu was swept by the waves of the 
ocean of delight and he prostrated on the ground like a 
staff, with his mind humble with devotion. 

49. In the meantime the smiling lord Siva called him 



1210 SuM^rS^ 

saying *<Gome on, Come on’* and kissed him on the head. 
He granted him boons. 

Siva said :— 

50. “Dear Upamanyu, I am pleased with your ex¬ 
cellent behaviour. O brahmin sage, you are very firm in 
your devotion. I just desired to know you thoroughly. 

51. Enjoy the pleasure of eating sumptuously for¬ 
ever along with your kinsmen. Be ever happy and free from 
misery. Be devoted to me. 

52. O fortunate Upamanyu, you have been made 
eternally my son today. Parvati, here, is your mother. 

53-54. O great sage, thousands of oceans of milk, 
curd, ghee and honey, and of different foodstuffs I grant 
you lovingly. Accept them. I confer on you the state of a 
god and the eternal chieftainship of Ganas. 

55. I, l§iva, am your father and she, Parvati, is your 
mother. Choose your boons whatever you desire. 

56. Be unaging and undying and free from misery. 
You will be famous, brilliant and endowed with divine 
knowledge. You will be a great lord.” 

57-58. Then considering his great penance, the de¬ 
lighted !§iva gave ten boons to the sage Upamanyu. He 
bestowed on him the knowledge of Siva and his rites. He 
instructed him in the vows of Siva. He gave him fluency of 
speech and efficiency. He bestowed his own region on him. 

59. After granting him the boons, lord Siva took him 
with both the hands, sniffed at his head and showed him to 
the goodess saying : “This is your son.” 

60. Listening with pleasure and placing her hands on 
his head she granted him the everlasting status of a son. 

61-62. She gave him undecaying, compressed ocean of 
milk, the prosperity and power of yoga, the undying 
knowledge of Brahman and the great assets. 

63. After receiving from Siva and Siva the excellent 
boons, and the eternal status of their son, he rejoiced much. 

64. Then the delighted sage requested the lord of the 
gods affer bowing to him with palms joined in reverence. 



Satarudrasaifihitd 


1211 


Upamanyu said :— 

65. O lord of gods, be pleased. O supreme lord, be 
pleased. Grant me the greatest devotion unto you, divine 
and unswerving. 

66. O great god, give me great faith in persons de¬ 
voted to you, the state of being your servant, your great 
affection and your constant presence. 

NandiSvara said :— 

67. After saying this, the delighted excellent brahmin 
Upamanyu eulogised great lord with words choked in de¬ 
light. 

68. Thus requested, !§iva, the lord of all, replied 

to Upamanyu, delightedly while everyone listened. 

Siva said :— 

69. O dear Upamanyu, O sinless one, you are blessed. 
You are especially my devotee. Whatever has been chosen 
by you has been given to you. 

70. Be unaging and undying and free from misery. 
Be respectable to all, free from aberrations and the foremost 
among devotees. 

71. O excellent brahmin, yon will have undwindling 
kinsmen, family and race. Your devotion to me will be 
permanent. 

72. O sage, I shall be ever present in your hermitage. 
Stay at ease. Do not be anxious. 

Nandiivara said :— 

73. After saying this and granting him all excellent 
boons, the lord vanished from there, accompanied by Parvatl 
and the Ganas. 

74. After receiving excellent boons, the delighted 
Upamanyu went to the abode of his mother and described 
everything to her. 

75. On hearing it, his mother was highly delighted. 
He became worthy of honour and respect of all. He attained 
great happiness. 

76. O dear, thus, the incarnation of Siva the great 



1212 Sivafmr^a 

soul, as Indra has been explained to you. It bestows hap¬ 
piness to the good always. 

77. This story is pious and it yields the /ruits of all 
desires. It is conducive to heaven, fame and longevity. It 
yields worldly pleasures and salvation to the good. 

78. He who listens to this with devotion and narrates 
this with purity of mind enjoys all pleasures here and attains 
Siva’s goal hereafter. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

{diva’s incarnation as the student-ascetic) 

Nandiivata said : — 

1. O Sanatkumara, listen to the incarnation of Siva 
the great soul. It is named Jatila and is very sanctifying. 

2. After abandoning her body when she was insulted 
by her own father in the sacrificial hall, Satl, the daughter 
of Daksa, was born of Mena and the mountain Himavat. 

3. Desiring to attain Siva as her husband, she went to 
the dense forest and performed a pure penance. She was 
attended upon by two of her friends. 

4. In order to test her penance, Siva an expert in 
various kinds of sports sent the seven sages®® to the penance 
grove of Parvati. 

5. The sages went there and thoroughly tested her. 
As she was strenuous in her effort they could not dissuade 
her from her penance. 

6. They returned and bowed to Siva. After mention¬ 
ing all the details to him and obtaining his permission they 
returned to heaven eagerly. 

7. When they had gone to their abodes, lord Siva, 
the cause of excellent sports, desired to test Siva’s activity 
himself. 

83. The seven sages are : Marici, Atri, AAgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
K.ratu and Vasi^tha. See P. 163 note. 



SatarudrasathhitS 


1213 


3. Then the lord assumed the pleasant, self-controlled 
and wonderful form of a student-ascetic. 

9. He looked very old and had assumed the body of a 
brahmin. He was shining with brilliance. He had a staff 
and an umbrella. He was mentally delighted. 

10. Assuming this form of a Ja^ila (one with matted 
hair), the delighted Siva, favourably disposed to his devotees 
went to the penance-grove of Parvati. 

11. There he saw the goddess Parvati, seated on the 
dais surrounded by her friends. She appeared like the pure 
digit of the moon. 

12. On seeing the goddess, Siva who is favourably 
disposed to his devotees and who had assumed the form of a 
student-ascetic approached her eagerly and lovingly. 

13-14. On seeing the brahmin visitor of wonderful 
splendour, quiet with hairy limbs, bearing the staff and hide 
of deer, the aged bachelor with matted hair and the 
water-pot, she welcomed and worshipped him with all the 
articles of worship. 

15. The goddess Parvati enquired after the health of 
that aged bachelor respectfully after worshipping him with 
great joy. 

16. “O most excellent one among the knowers of the 
Vedas, who are you, please, in the guise of a student-ascetic 
and whence have you come illuminating this forest ? 

NandiSvara said :— 

17. On being asked thus by Parvati, that brahmin 
replied immediately with great pleasure in order to test the 
feelings of Siva. 

The student-ascetic said : 

18. I am a brahmin bachelor going about here and 
there as I please. I am a saint pleasing and helping others 
undoubtedly. 

Nandiiuara said :— 

19. After saying this, the bachelor Siva, who is favour¬ 
ably disposed to hi«» devotees, stood near her concealing his 
real form. 



Sioapurd^ 


1214 

The student-ascetic said : 

20. Wh.it shall I say, O great lady ? There is nothing 
to be mentioned. A great calamity seems to have happened, 
extremely confusing.®® 

21. In your fresh youth, the means of good enjoyment 
and the cause of happiness through all requisite articles of 
pleasure, you are performing this penance in vain. 

22. Who are you ? Whose daughter are you ? Why 
are you performing a penance in this desolate forest ? Your 
penance is such as cannot be outdone even by sages of 
elevated souls. 

Nandiivara said :— 

23. On hearing his words, Parvati laughed and spoke 
to the excellent student ascetic with reverence. 

Parvati said :— 

24. O sage, O brahmin bachelor, listen to the details 
of my wife. I am born in Bharata in the house of Himavat. 

25. Formerly my birth was in the house of Daksa. I 
was then Sati, the wife of Siva. On account of my father’s 
insulting my husband I cast off my body by means of 
Yoga. 

26. O brahmin, in this birth too, Siva came my way 
due to merit but he reduced Kama to ashes, abandoned 
me and went away. 

27. When Siva went away I was overwhelmed with 
grief. A bit ashamed, I came away from my house to this 
place for performing penance after being initiated by the 
statement of my preceptor. 

28. Mentally, verbally and through activities too, Siva 
has been chosen by me as my husband. I am telling you 
the truth and not falsehood. 

29. I know that this is an extremely inaccessible object. 
How can I achieve it ? Still, thanks to the great zeal, this 
penance is being pursued by me now. 

86. For the close similarity of ideas and verbal expressions in 
verses 20 to 61, see Kalidasa’s Kumira V., also RudrasamhitS, Ffirvati- 
kharjda, Cbs 26, 27. 



Satarudrasarfihitd 


1215 


30. Leaving off Indra and other gods, Vi?nu and 
Brahma I wish to obtain iSiva as my husband really. 

NandiSvara said : — 

31. O sage, on hearing these firm words of Parvat! 
that Jatila Rudra laughingly spoke again. 

Jafila said :— 

32. O gentle lady, O daughter of Himavat, what is 
this idea that has struck you ? You are performing this great 
penance for obtaining I^iva after leaving off all the gods. 

33. I know that iSiva. Listen. I shall tell you that 
bull-bannered Siva wears matted hair and is ill-mannered. 

34. He is an isolationist for ever. Particularly he is 
a detached fellow. Hence it does not behove you to get 
mentally entangled with him. 

35. O gentle lady, your features etc. and those of 
Siva are ill-matched. I do not like this. But do as you 
please. 

Nandifvara said :— 

36. After saying this, Siva in the guise of a student- 
ascetic rebuked himself in her presence in order to test her. 

37. On hearing his intolerable words, Parvati replied 
extremely infuriated at him who was engrossed in insulting 
l^iva. 

38. Till now I thought that you would be some one 
fit to be killed. But now it is quite clear that you are not 
to be killed. 

39. You are some foolish knave in the guise of a 
student-ascetic. O fool, l§iva has been insulted by you. 
Hence, I am infuriated. 

40. You do not know Siva, You are averse to 
Siva. Since I had already welcomed and honoured you I 
am now distressed. 

41. The accumulated merits of the person who insults 
Siva without knowing reality are reduced to ashes. 

42. One should perform, expiation after touching a 
Siva-hater. 



1216 Sioapurd$a 

43. O wicked fellow, you said I know Siva. Certainly he 
is not known to you. Siva alone is the great lord. 

44. Assuming many guises through his Maya,*Rudra 
may appear in any form. But the beloved of the good, 
having no aberrations, lavishly bestows all desired things 
on me. 

MandUvara said :— 

45. After saying this, Parvati expatiated on Siva’s 
principle, where Siva was explained as attributeless and un> 
changing performing the penance of Brahman. 

46-47. On hearing her words, the brahmin began to 
say something ; but by that time, Parvati whose mind was 
attached to Siva and who was averse to Siva being insulted, 
immediately spoke to her friend Vijaya. 

Parvati said :— 

48. Friend, this base brahmin must be prevented. He 
is going to speak again. He is sure to insult Siva. 

49. It is not only the censurer of Siva who becomes 
sinful but also he who listens to such insults. 

50. A rebuker of Siva shall be slain by all means by 
Siva’s attendants. If he happens to be a brahmin he shall 
be abandoned. He shall go away from that place imme¬ 
diately. 

51. This wicked fellow will insult Siva again. Being a 
brahmin he cannot be killed. He shall be abandoned. He 
should not even be looked at. 

52. Let us leave this place and go elsewhere. Do not 
delay, lest there should be any further talk with this igno¬ 
rant man. 

Nandiivara said :— 

53. O sage, after saying this Parvati was just to walk 
away when Siva revealed himself and caught hold of her 
cloth. 

54. After assuming that divine form which Parvati 
was meditating upon, Siva spoke to her as she stood face 
downwards. 



JSatarudrasarhhitd 


1217 


Siva said :— 

55. ‘‘O Parvati, where are you going, leaving me ? 
You cannot be forsaken by me. You have been tested by 
me O faultless one, you are really steady in your devotion 
to me. 

56. Desirous of knowing your feelings I have ap¬ 
proached you in the guise of a student-asectic and spoke 
these diverse words. 

57. O Parvati, I am delighted at your steady devotion. 
Mention the boon that you have cherished in your mind. 
There is nothing that cannot be given to you. 

58. O loving lady, I have been made your slave from 
now onwards by means of your penance. Due to your 
beauty, even a moment seems to expand into a Yoga. 

59. Leave off your bashfulness. You are my eternal 
wife. O beloved, come on, I shall go to my hilly abode 
along with you.** 

60. When the lord of gods said thus, Parvati rejoiced 
much. Whatever misery she experienced in performing the 
penance, she cast off immediately. 

61. On seeing that divine form of Siva, Parvati replied 
to the lord with face lowered due to bashfulness. 

Parvati said :— 

62-63. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, if you 
have pity on me, be my lord and husband.” 

Nandiivara said :— 

Thus requested by Parvati Siva took her hand duly 
and went to Kailasa along with her. On getting him as her 
lord, she carried out the task of the gods. 

64. O dear, thus the incarnation of Siva in the form 
of a student-ascctic wherein he tested the feelings of Parvati 
has been narrated to you. 

64. This narrative explained by me is faultless and 
magnificent. He who listens to this with pleasure becomes 
happy and attains salvation. 



1218 


Sivapvr&$a 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

{The incarnation of Siva as Sunartaka na(a) • 
Nandiivara said :— 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumara, listen to the incarna* 
tion of lord Siva, the great soul, as Sunartaka nata. 

2-3. O sage, when goddess Parvatl, daughter of Him- 
avat, performed the pious penance in order to attain Siva, 
after going to the forest, Siva was much delighted at her 
austerity. He approached to test her conduct and out of 
pleasure to grant her the desired boon. 

4. O sage, the delighted Siva revealed his real form 
to her and told Parvatl, “Mention the boon you wish to 
have.” 

5. On hearing the words of Siva and on seeing his 
excellent form, Parvati was delighted. She spoke to him 
after paying her homage. 

Parvatl said : — 

6. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, if a boon shall 
be granted to me, O Siva, you be my lord and husband. 
Please take pity on me. 

7. With your permission I shall go to my father’s 
abode. O lord, you shall approach my father. 

8. In the form of a mendicant and making your 
spotless fame known, beg me of my father and make the 
householder’s life fruitful. 

0. O lord Siva, it behoves to marry me with due rites 
for the fulfilment of the task of the gods. 

10. O lord, you are without aberrations. Please 
fulfil my desires. You are favourably disposed to the devotees. 

I am always your devotee. 

J{andUvara said :— 

11. Thus requested by her, Siva who is favourably 
disposed towards his devotees said “So be it” and vanished 
from there. He returned to his mountainous abode. 

12. After making her beauty fruitful, Parvatl returned 



iSatarudrasaThhitS 1219 

to her father’s abode jealously in the company of her fe¬ 
male friends. 

13. On hearing Parvati’s return, Himavat accompanied 
by his attendants and his wife Mena joyously came to see 
his daughter. 

14. On seeing her delighted, both of them received 
her suitably wiihin the house and glad at heart celebrated 
the event with pleasure. 

Mena and the lord of mountains made gifts to brah¬ 
mins and others* The auspicious mantras of the Vedas 
were chanted. 

16. Then Mena joyously stayed for a while in the 
yard with her daughter and Himavat went to the Ganges 
for a bath. 

17. In the meantime Siva, favourably disposed towards 
his devotees and indulging in good sports, assumed the form 
of a dancer and approached Menaka. 

18. He held the horn in his left hand and the small 
drum in his right. He carried a bundle of patched garments 
on his back. He wore a red cloth. He appeared to be an 
expert in dance and music. 

19. Then the lord in the form of a dancer performed 
various dances joyously in the yard of Menaka and sang 
sweetly. 

20. He blew on the horn and played on Damaru pro¬ 
ducing sweet notes. With great pleasure he exhibited a 
variety of splendid sports. 

21. The citizens including men, women, children and 
old women gathered there suddenly to see him. 

22. O sage, hearing the sweet song and witnessing 
the splendid dance, the people were fascinated and Mena too 
was highly delighted. 

23. Immediately Mena whose mind was in exultation, 
thanks to his clever feats, went to give him potfuls of gems 
and jewels. 

24. He did not accept those gems. He wished to 
have Parvati for his alms. Eagerly he began to dance and 
sing again. 

25. On hearing his words Mena was surprised. She 



1220 SivatmrSffa 

Decame furious as well. She rebuked the mendicant and 
wanted to drive him out. 

26. In the meantime the lord of the mountains re¬ 
turned from the Ganges. He saw the mendicant in the 
form of a man standing before him in the yard. 

27. On hearing from Mena all the details he too 
was infuriated. He ordered his attendants to drive out the 
mendicant. 

28. O excellent sage, no one could drive him out. 
He was blazing and brilliant like a big fire and could not 
be touched. 

29. O dear, then that mendicant, an expert in differ¬ 
ent sports, exhibited his infinite power to the mountain. 

30. Immediately the mountain saw him assuming the 
form of Visnu, then the form of Brahma and in a trice that 
of the sun. 

31. O dear, then he saw him in the excessively 
wonderful form of Siva accompanied by Parvatl. He was 
exquisitely handsome and brilliant. He was laughing. 

32. Thus he saw him in various forms. He was 
much surprised and extremely delighted. 

38. Then the leading mendicant of good sports beg¬ 
ged for Durga as his alms, of her (Mena) and of him (the 
mountain). He did not accept anything else. 

34. Then lord Siva in the form of the mendicant, 
urged by Durga’s words vanished and went away to his 
abode suddenly. 

35. Perfect knowledge then dawned on Mena and the 
lord of mountains. They thought : “The lord Siva has 
deceived us and returned to his abode. 

36. Our Parvatl who has performed a hard penance 
shall be given to him”, thinking thus they became extreme¬ 
ly devoted to Siva. 

37. Thence after performing great sports, Siva per¬ 
formed the marriage rites duly with Parvati delighting all 
devotees. 

38. O dear, thus the incarnation of Siva as Sunart- 
aka nata in which the desire of Parvati was fulfilled has been 
explained to you by me. 

39. Thus the pious narrative of great value has been 



^atarudrasarhhitS 


1221 


explained by me. He who listens to this with pleasure^ 
becomes happy and attains salvation. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 

{The incarnation of Siva or a saintly brahmin) 

NandiSvara said :— 

1. O omniscient Sanatlcumara, listen to the incarnation 
of Siva, the supreme soul, as Brahmin in the garb of a saint. 

2. On realising the excellent devotion of Mena and 
Himavat towards Siva, the gods became worried and they 
consulted one another eagerly. 

3. If the mountain were to give his daughter to Siva 
with undiluted devotion, certainly he will attain salvation 
immediately. 

4. He is the receptacle of infinite gems. If he attains 
liberation, the name of the earth, Ratnagarbh.a (having gems 
within) will certainly be meaningless. 

5. He will cast off the stationary state of a mountain 
and assume a divine form. After giving his daughter in 
marriage to the trident-bearing lord he will go to Siva’s 
region. 

6. With the blessings of Siva he will attain identity 
in form with the great god. He will enjoy all great plea¬ 
sures there and then attain liberation. 

7. O sage, after discussing like this, the gods went 
to the abode of their preceptor. In order to achieve their 
self-interest they submitted to the preceptor thus. 

The gods said :— 

8. O preceptor, please go to the abode of Himavat 
for the accomplishment of our task. Reproach lord Siva 
and try to prevent the mountain’s excessive devotion to him. 

9. O preceptor, if the mountain gives his daughter 
to Siva 'with great faith he will attain salvation. Lei him 
stay on the Earth itself. 



1222 l^ivaJntrS^a 

10. On hearing the words of the gods, he thought over 
that and spoke to them. 

The preceptor said :— 

11. O gods, one of you shall go to the mountain for 
achieving the end. I am incapable of doing it. 

12. Or you all, including Indra, go to Brahma’s region. 
Tell him all your details. He will carry out your work. 

PfdndiSvara said :— 

13. On hearing these words and reflecting thereon, 
the gods went to Brahma’s assembly. They submitted all 
the details to Brahma. 

14. On hearing their words and reflecting deeply 
Brahma told them—'‘I shall not censure him, for that will 
yield misery to us and dispel out happiness for ever. 

15. O gods, you go to Kailasa and propitiate Siva. 
Reques! that lord to go to the abode of Himavat. 

16. Let him approach the lord of mountains and cen¬ 
sure himself. Censuring others is conducive to destruction 
and censuring oneself is conducive to glory. 

jVandiivara said :— 

17. Then the gods hastened to Kailasa®’ and bowed to 
Siva with great devotion. They mentioned everything in 
detail to him. 

18. On hearing the words of the gods, lord l§iva ac¬ 
cepted their proposal. He laughingly consoled the gods and 
made them return without worry. 

19. Then lord iSiva, who is favourably disposed towards 
his devotees, who is the wieldcr of Maya and who is free 
from aberrations, desired to approach Himavat. 

20-21. He assumed the form of a brahmin Saint. He 
held a staff and an umbrella. He wore divine garments. A 
brilliant caste mark shone on his forehead. He had tied a 
l^alagrama stone round his neck and held a string of crystal 
beads in his hand. He frequently repeated the names of 


87. S«*f P. 54 note; 941 note. 



SatarudrasarfihitS 


1223 


Visnu with devotion. He approached Himavat who was 
accompanied by his kinsmen. 

22. On seeing him, Himavai and his attendants stood 
up and then prostrated before him. They performed A§tahga 
salvation on the ground. 

23. Then the lord of mountains asked him “Who are 
you please?” The brahmin Yogin replied immediately with 
reverence. 

The Saintly brahmin said :— 

24. O niouniain, I am a devotee of Visnu known as 
Sadhudvija. I possess true vision. I am omniscient and 
I assist others. By the power of the preceptor I can go 
everywhere. 

25. O excellent mountain, by my divine knowledge, I 
have known something while I was in my abode. Listen. 
I shall mention the same with pleasure to you without any 
arrogance. 

26. You wish to give your daughter who is as comely 
as Laksmi to 6iva whose family and conduct are unknown. 

27. O lord of mountains, this idea of yours is not 
conducive to auspiciousness. O most excellent one among 
the wise, born of Visnu’s race, you should knov^ this. 

28. O lord of mountains, see for yourself. He has no 
single relative. You can verify your relatives and your 
beloved. 

29. Ask Mena and others excluding Parvati. O mount¬ 
ain, the patient never likes *^he medicine but relishes undesir¬ 
able diet. 

30. In the matter of gifting away Parvati, he is not 
the deserving person. As soon as this alliance is announced, 
the public will smile derisively. 

31-32. He is without support. He is unattached. He 
is ugly, devoid of attributes and unchanging. He is hideous. 
He resides in the cremation ground. He is naked and 
handles serpents He smears ashes as decoration. Serpents 
twine round his head. He has fallen from all stages of life. 
His ways are ever unknown. 



1224 


SivapurSna 


Brahma said :— 

33. After saying these factual statements insulting to 
Siva, Siva of diverse sports, quickly returned to his 5bode. 

34. On hearing the words of the brahmin, they thought 
thus—“What can we do with regard to him who is engrossed 
in adverse things?” 

35. Then Siva performed great sports delighting the 
devotees. He married Parvati aud carried out the task of 
the gods. 

36. O dear, thus the incarnation of lord Siva as Sadhu- 
vesadvija, that carried out the task of the gods has been 
narrated to you. 

37. He who reads or listens to this pious narrative, 
conducive to heaven and longevity, becomes happy and 
attains salvation. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 

( diva's incarnation as Aivatihdman) 

JSfandisvara said :— 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumara, listen to the incarnation 
of lord Siva, the great soul Asvatthaman. 

2. O sage, though a part of the celestial sage of great 
intellect Brhaspati, the self-possessed and prudent Drona was 
born of Bharadvaja but not of any womb. 

3. He was the foremost among the archers, heroes, a 
brahrninical sage, well-versed in all lore, of great fame and 
brilliance and the most excellent of all the wielders of wea¬ 
pons and missiles. 

4. Learned men knew Drona as the most excellent, 
skilful in the lore of archery as well as the Vedas, of varie¬ 
gated activities, and as one who made his race flourish. 

5. O brahmin, thanks to his strength, he was the inst¬ 
ructor of the Kauravas. He was the most well known among 
the six Maharathas among the Kauravas. 



Satafudrasarhhiti 


1225 


6. The most excellent brahmin Drona performed an 
elaborate penance with Siva in view for obtaining a son in 
order to help the Kauravas. 

7. O excellent sage, then the delighted lord Siva, 
favourably dispensed lo his devotees, appeared in front of 
Drona. 

8. On seeing him, the brahmin Drona whose heart 
was highly delighted bow’ed to him with palms joined in 
reverence and eulogised him. 

9. Satisfied and pleased with his eulogy and penance, 
lord Siva, favourably disposed towards his devotees told 
Drona—-“Mention the boon you wish to choose”. 

10. On hearing the words of Siva, Drona bowed low 
and said—“Please give me a son born of your part who 
will be invincible to every one and who will be very power¬ 
ful. 

11. On hearing the words of Drona, Siva said, “So 
be it.” O dear sage, the lord who bestows happiness, theii 
vanished. 

12. Drona returned to his abode highly delighted and 
free from illusion. He joyously narrated all the details to 
his wife. 

13. Taking the due opportunity, lord Siva, the anmhi- 
lator of all and very powerful was born as Drona’s son 
through a part of himself. 

14. O sage, he became well known as A-^Vatthaman 
on the earth. He was heroic, had lotus-like eyes and he could 
reduce the strength of his enemy. 

15. Securing the permission and behest of his father 
that famous hero helped the Kauravas in the Mahabharata 
war. 

16. By resorting to that powerful hero, Bhisma and 
other Kauravas became invincible even to the gods. 

17. Fearing him, the Pandavas, though they were 
gieat heroes and very skilful, became incapable of conquering 
the Kauravas. 

18. At the instance of Krsna, Arjuna perfoimed the 
severe penance of Siva and obtained a dicine missile due 
to Siva’s boon. He then conquered the Kauiavas. 



1226 


Sinapurdna 


19. O sage, although the great hero A^vatthaman was 

born of a part of lord Siva. Still due to his devotion to the 
Kauravas, he exhibited his full vigour. * 

20. He destroyed the sons of Pandavas though they 
were trained in warfare by Krsna and other great heroes. 
He had the strength that could not be withstood bv the 
enemy. 

21. On seeing Arjuna dejected by the death of his son 
but rushing on him along with Krsna he fled away from 
the battle-field. 

22. He discharged the divine missile Brahma^iras on 
Arjuna. Then a fierce splendour enveloping all the quarters 
manifested itself. 

23. Sensing danger to his own life Arjuna was much 
distressed. Losing all his brilliance and highly frightened he 
spoke to Krsna becoming utterly exhausted. 

Arjuna said :— 

24. O Krsna, O Krsna, what is this? Whence it has 
arisen I do not know. This unbearable fiery splendour comes 
from all sides. 

Nandiivara said '.— 

25 On hearing the words of Arjuna, Krsna the most 
excellent among the devotees of Siva meditated on Siva and 
Parvati and then spoke to Arjuna. 

Krsna said '.— 

26. Know this to be the most powerful Brfihma missile 
of Asvatthaman. There is no other missile to counteract this. 

27. Immediately think of Siva, your loul, the protector 
of the devotees who liad given you a weapon capable of every 
action. 

28. Counteract the fiery splendour of the Brahma 
missile with your Saiva missile. After saying this Krsna 
himself meditated on Siva for that purpose. 

29. O sage, on hearing the words of Krsna. Aijuna 
remembered Siva, touched water, bowed to Siva and dis¬ 
charged the Saiva missile. 

30. O great sage, although the Brahmasiras missile 



Satarudrasarhhitd 


1227 


never goes futile and cannot be counteracted, it subsided 
before the splendour of the l^aiva missile. 

31. Do not consider this very surprising in Siva 
who is full of wondrous things and who, the unborn, creates, 
protects and annihilates the entire universe by his own 
power. 

32. O sage, knowing that this happened by the in¬ 
fluence of Siva, A^vatthaman, born of Siva’s part and delighted 
in heart at Siva’s wish, was not at all sorry. 

33. Then the son of Drona wishing the world to be 
rid of Pandava lineage desired to kill the child in the 
womb of Uttara. 

34. The powerful A4vatthaman hurled the excessively 
lustrous Brahma-missile that could not be countermanded 
by any other missile, aiming it at the womb of Uttara. 

35. Then Uttara the daughter-in-law of Arjuna, burning 
within due to that missile and agitated in the mind eu¬ 
logised Krsna, the lord of Laksmi. 

36. Then meditating on Siva mentally, bowing to and 
eulogising him, Krsna understood that to be the missile of 
the son of Drona. 

37. By means of his missile—the brilliant Sudari5ana, 
bestowed on him by Siva for his protection, he saved 
her at the behest of Siva. 

38. A^vatthaman then knew that Krsna had assumed 
his form at the behest of Siva and did it as he was the fore¬ 
most among the devotees of Siva, slowly refrained from the 
thought of destroying Uttara. 

39. Then the leading devotee of Siva, the delighted 
Krsna, made all the Pan^avas fall at the feet of Asvat- 
thaman for pleasing him. 

40. Then Aiivatthaman, son of Drona, highly delighted 
in the mind, blessed the Panclavas and Krsna with various 
boons. 

41. O e.xccllent sage, incarnating thus on the earth in 
the form of Drona’s son, lord Siva performed various sports. 

42. The incarnation of Siva Afvatthaman of great 



1228 



strength and exploit is even now alive on the banks of the 
river Gang a bestowing happiness on the three worlds. 

43. The incarnation in the form of AiSvatthSman of 
lord Siva has been explained to you. It is the cause of all 
Siddhis and it fulfils all desires of the devotees. 

44. He who listens to this with devotion or narrates 
it with pure mind attains all Siddhis here and attains Siya’s 
abode hereafter. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 

(Instruction of Vyasa in the context af diva's incarnation as Kirata) 
Nandiivara said :— 

1. O intelligent one, listen to the incarnation of the 
Pinaka-bearing lord Siva as Kirata who killed Muka and 
delightedly granted the boon to Arjuna. 

2. Defeated by Suyodhana, the excellent Pandavas 
went to the forest Dvaita*® accompanied by their chaste wife 
Draupadi. 

3. Depending upon the cooking-pot given by the sun, 
the Pandavas spent their time happily. 

4. O leading brahmin, Durvasas the leading sage 
was induced by Suyodhana to go to the Paijdavas in order 
to deceive them. 

5. Accompanied by his ten thousand disciples he ap¬ 
proached them and asked for foodstuffs and other things 
for his disciples. 

6. After accepting it, Durvisas and other sages and 
saints were sent by the Pandavas for their ablution. 

7. O great sage, by want of food, all the Pandavas 
were sad and resolved to cast off their lives. 

8. Kr$9a appeared on being remembered by Draupadi 

88. According to the Mah&bhSrata (III. 24. 13) it was a sacred 
forest where Yudhisthira retired with his brothers after the loss of his 
kingdom at the gambling table. It has been identified with Devabandh 
or Deoband in the Saharanpur district Uttara, Pradesh. 



Sataruirasarhhitd 


1229 

Draupadl. After eating a bit of vegetable he made them 
satiated at the very moment. 

9. On coming to know that the disciples were fully 
satisfied Durvasas went away. By the grace of Kr^na, the 
Pandavas were freed from a difficult situation. 

10. Then they asked Krsna “O lord, what will 
happen now ? A very powerful enemy has arisen. What 
shall be done at this moment.’* 

Nandiivara said :— 

11. O sage, on being asked thus by the Pancja- 
vas, lord Krsna remembered the lotus-like feet of Siva and 
spoke to them. 

LordKr^na said :— 

12. O excellent Pandavas, now listen to the details of 
my experience involving service to Siva. After hearing you 
shall act accordingly. 

13-14. I went to Dvaraka to conquer my enemies. 
After obeying the instructions of noble Upamanyu I pro¬ 
pitiated lord Siva. I propitiated him for seven months in the 
excellent mountain Batuka.*® Thus Siva was pleased with me. 

15. Standing there himself he fulfilled all my desires. By 
his power I acquired excellent efficiency in everything. 

16. The lord, the bestower of worldly pleasures and 
salvation is propitiated by me even now. You too serve Siv:. 
who is the bestower of happiness to all. 

Nar^Uoara said :— 

17. After saying thus and cheering the Pandavas, 
Kr?na vanished from there and remembering the lotus :cet 
of Siva he hastened to Dvaraka.*® 

18. Pandavas then sent a Bhilla to test the virtues and 
the strength of Duryodhana. 

8 g. Not identified. 

<)o. Dvaraka or D^aravatl, associated with loicl Ki'h.t is idniiificd 
with the town of the same name in Kathiawar. li fninxlrd bv 

Ki-siia owing to constant invasions and harassment b> jaiahandha. D.t 
details see OEAMl.- 



1230 


19. He understood the prosperity, rise and the virtues 
of Duryodhana and returned to the Pancjlavas again. 

20. On hearing what he had said, O great sflge, the 
Pant^avas were very sad and in their distress spoke to one 
another. 

21. What shall be done now ? Where shall we go ? 
Though we can fight now we have been restrained by the 
bonds of truth. 

NandiSvara said '.— 

22. In the meantime Vyasa came there with the 
ashes decorating his forehead, with Rudraksa as an orna¬ 
ment and well bedecked in matted hair. 

23. He was repeating the five-syllabled mantra. He 
was fully engrossed in the love of Siva. He was a heap of 
lustrous brilliance, a manifestation of virtue itself. 

24. When they saw him they were delighted and they 
stood up to welcome him. Offering him a seat of deer-hide 
brightened by Kusa grass they waited in front of him. 

25. When he was duly seated they honoured him 
with great delight after eulogising him in various ways and 
saying “Ah ! we are blessed’*. 

26. *‘0 holy lord, by seeing you, we are all satisfied. 
We have attained the fruits of our austerities and our diverse 
charitable gifts. 

27. O grandfather, by seeing you, all our misery has 
disappeared, the misery that had been inflicted on us by 
the wicked people of ruthless activities. 

28. Misery disappears at your sight. Was there 
ever a time when it did not disappear ? We know it truly. 

29. When a person reaches the hermitage of a sage 

efficient in all activities, if misery is not dispelled, fate alone 
is the cause there. 

30. Poverty, the cause of misery, will surely be dis¬ 
pelled. Such is the nature of great men. In the fulfilment 
of desires they are equal to the wish-yielding Kalpa tree. 

31. Thus the qualities of the great shall be observed 

objectively. A person becomes famous by merely resorting 
to them. 

32. The difference between the small and the great 



SatarudrasarhhitS 


1231 


shall not be thought of. This is the nature of the great that 
they will always protect the distressed. 

33. The characteristics of the wretched and the misera¬ 
ble are conducive to his glory, for there lies before him an 
opportunity for strenuous efforts and for serving the good 
people. 

34. Thereafter it is one’s own destiny. No one is to 
blame for it. Hence O lord, when you arc seen, everything 
auspicious takes place. 

33. By your mere arrival our minds are satisfied. 
Give us instructions whereby our misery can be dispelled. 

J^andiSvara said : — 

36. On hearing the words of the Pandavas the great 
sage Vyasa was delighted in the mind and said thus. 

37. O Pandavas, you need not be over-anxious. You 
are all blessed and contented. You have not let truth 
slip by. 

38. The noble nature of the good remains unchanged 
even at death. They do not forsake virtue. They fruitfully 
resort to Truth. 

39. As far as we are concerned, you and the Kauravas 
ought to be equal. Still our partiality is towards the virtuous. 
This partiality is approved by the learned. 

40. Virtue was at the outset abandoned by the wicked 
and blind Dhrtarastra due to greed. Your kingdom was 
seized. 

41. Undoubtedly you and they arc his sons when your 
real father is dead. You are noble souls and hence you 
deserve to be viewed sympathetically. 

42. Afterwards his son was never dissuaded by him. 
If only he had done so, this calamity would not have occurred. 

43. Whatever has happened cannot be otherwise. He 
is wicked while all of you are virtuous and truthful. 

44. Hence evil will befall only him in the end, to be 
sure. The seed that has been sown will germinate into a 
sprout. 

45. Hence you need not feel distressed at all. Welfare 
will dawn on you. You need not entertain any doubt. 





1232 

J/andUvara said :— 

46. Thus the paQ(javas were consoled and cheered by 
Vyasa. Yudhi$thira and others then spoke these woitls. 

Thi PSi^4^as said :— 

47. O lord, I have mentioned the truth. Even 
in the forest misery is being inflicted on us incessantly by 
the wicked and the evil-minded Kauravas again and again. 

48. O holy lord, please dispel our distress. Something 
auspicious shall be bestowed upon us. We have been advised 
by Kfsna that Siva shall be propitiated always. 

49. We have committed a blunder in not following his 
advice. May divine lead be given to us again now. 

Nandiivara said :— 

50. On hearing these words, the delighted Vyasa, 
remembered the lotus-like feet of Siva and spoke to the 
Pandavas with pleasure. 

VySsa said :— 

51. O Pandavas, of virtuous mind, listen to my words. 
It has been truly stated by Kr$na. Siva is being served by 
me too. 

52. Let him be served by you with pleasure. Un¬ 
equalled happiness shall always follow. It is only by not 
serving Siva that miseries crop up. 

Nandiivara jatd;— 

53-54, After considering everything, the great sage 
Vyasa pronounced Arjuna the most deserving among the five 
brothers in the worship of Siva. Then pondering over the 
place worthy of the penance, the excellent sage spoke again 
to the Pandavas who were firmly established in virtuous rites. 

Vydsa said :— 

55-56. O Pa^d^vas, all of you hear. I shall tell you, 
what is ever good and wholesome. Siva shall be viewed as 
the great Brahman and the goal of the good. Beginning with 
Brahma and ending with infinity whatever is seen in the 



^atarudrasaihhitS 1233 

universe is Siva’s form. It shall be honoured and meditated 
upon. 

57. Siva, the dispeller of all misery shall be served by 
all. Due to devotion, Siva becomes pleased in a short time. 

58. It is certain that the delighted Siva bestows every¬ 
thing on his devotees. He gives worldly pleasures here and 
salvation hereafter. 

59. Hence Siva shall be always served by those who 
desire the fruits of worldly pleasures here and salvation here¬ 
after. Siva, the divine Purusa himself, is the slayer of the 
wicked and the goal of the good. 

60. But one shall repeat the lore of Indra at the out¬ 
set with steady mind. For a Ksatriya of great lustre this 
alone is conducive to welfare. 

61. Hence let Atjuna repeat the lore of Indra at first, 
steadily. In the beginning the lord will test him and will 
like to be satisfied with the test. 

62. If he is delighted he will remove all obstacles. 
The lore will yield the granting of the boon by Siva. 

NandiSvara said :— 

63. After saying this he called Arjuna and instructed 
him in the lore of Indra. Arjuna had his ceremonial bath 
and facing the cast, he, of powerful intellect, received the 
lore. 

64. The great sage gave him the rules of procedure 
for a king. The liberal-minded Vyasa thus spoke to Arjuna. 

Vydsa said :— 

65. O Arjuna, start from here and go this way to the 
beautiful mountain Indrakila.*^ There standing beside the 
river Ganga perform the penance well. 

66. The invisible lore will be beneficial to you. He 
gave him the blessings thus. The sage then spoke to all. 

67. May all the excellent kings stand by virtue. The 

gi. Read Indraloke for l^idrakile of the printed Skt. text, Varaha 
pur^na (Ch. 141) refers to a number of holy spots including Indraloka in 
the region of the DadrinSrkyai'a. 



1234 Sioapurds^h 

result will be excellent in every respect. No doubt need be 
entertained in this respect. 

Mandlivara said :— 

68. Blessing the Pandavas thus and remembering the 
lotus-like feet of Siva, the great sage Vyasa vanished in a 
moment. 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 

{The description of Arjuna's penance) 

NandUvara said ;— 

1. Arjuna then appeared very brilliant and lustrous 
assuming unequalled splendour by means of Siva mantra. 

2. On seeing Arjuna the Pandavas were convinced. 
“Surely success will be ours, since Arjuna has achieved an 
extensive splendour. 

3. The task can be achieved only by you and not by 
anyone else. It appears so through the words of Vyasa. 
Make your life fruitful.” 

4. After saying this, all of them, dejected by the im¬ 
pending separation, reluctantly bade farewell to Arjuna. 

5. The grief-stricken, chaste DraupadI, controlling her 
tears, bade farewell to Arjuna and said. 

Draupadi said :— 

6. O king, you shall strenuously act according to the 
instructions of Vyasa. May your path be auspicious. May 
i^iva be the benefactor. 

NandUvara said :— 

7. After bidding farewell to Arjuna lovingly all those 
five, remained there, highly distressed. 

8. O excellent sage, remaining there they spoke to 
one another. Listen. “Even in misery, if there is a meeting 
with beloved persons it lessens sorrow. 



Satarudrascahhita 1235 

9. In separation, misery is doubled. Even the boldest 
cannot retain his courage.” 

10. O great sage, while the Pandavas were thus in 
grief, the excellent sage Vyasa, the ocean of mercy, arrived 
there. 

11. The Pandavas honoured and bowed to him with 
respect after offering him a seat. In their misery they joined 
their palms in reverence and spoke. 

The Pandavas said :— 

12. O holy lord, O excellent sage, we are burning in 
grief but on seeing you we derive consolation and pleasure. 

13. O lord, O brahmin sage, please stay here for 
sometime and dispel our grief. By your very sight our 
miseries are dispelled. 

NandUvara said :— 

14. Thus requested, the excellent sage stayed there for 
their happiness, dispelling their grief by narrating various 
legends. 

15. O good sage, in the course of conversation pursued 
w'ith Vyasa, Yudhisthira bowed to him humbly and spoke. 

Tudhiftkira said :— 

16. O excellent sage, listen. I seek for the alleviation 
of our grief. O intelligent one, 1 am putting this humble * 
question. O lord, you shall kindly explain. 

17. Has anyone formerly suffered this sort of grief ? 
Verily we alone have had it. None else. 

Vj>dsa said :— 

18. Formerly, Nala,®* the king of Ni?adha, the noble 
soul, had experienced a misery more than yours. 

19. A great calamity and distress befell king Hari^^can- 
dra.*3 It cannot be adequately described. It makes others 
too distressed. 

()2. Nala, king of Nifadba, lost his kingdom in gambling to his 
rival Pufkara and then wandered into the forest with his wife and 
suffered great privations. See Mbh. Vanaparva. 

03. Harilcandra, son of Trisahku and ki^ of the solar race, had 
to suffer at the hands of the relentless sage VisvUmitra to whom he gave 
away his kingdom, son, wife, life and everything as the sacrificial gift. 



1236 


20. O Panglavas, even Rama** had to suffer that misery 
on hearing which men and women would be greatly affected. 

21. Hence it is very difficult to explain thfs misery. 
The body is a heap of miseries. Considering this, you shall 
eschew all miseries. 

22. By this misery alone is the body held and per¬ 
vaded. There is no doubt in this. At the outset, the very 
birth in the mother’s womb is a cause of misery. 

23. Even in infancy and childhood there is great 
misery in child’s sports. In youth man experiences misery 
even while enjoying pleasures. 

24. When days come and go, when burdens of tasks 
are born in plenty, the life nears its end everyday. But man 
does not realize it. 

25. In the end there is death. There is greater misery 
thereafter. There are different sorts of hellish trouble. All these 
are experienced by ignorant men. 

26. Hence this world is untrue. You shall follow truth 
always. Man shall do such things as will statisfy 6iva. 

Nandiivara said :— 

27. Thus the brothers spent their time by various 
talks, discussions and schemes of all sorts. 

28'30. Arjuna went over impassable mountains for 
the practice of his steady rites. He met a Yaksa on the way 
and through him he slew many robbers.®* He was delighted in 
his mind and reached the excellent mountain. Near Gahga 
he saw a beautiful spot with A^oka groves. It was excellent 
like the heaven. He halted there, took his bath and bowed 
to his venerable preceptor. 

31. He assumed dress and features according to his 
instructions. He curbed his sense organs and the mind and 
stood steady. 

94. RSma, son of Daiaratha, had to roam into the lorest for 
fourteen years owing to the jealousy of Kaikcyi who urged her husband 
Dasaratha to install her son Bharata and to send Rama into exile. 

95. In the Vedas Dasyus are represented as the aboriginal tribes¬ 
men who contended with the immigrant Aryans and were overpowered by 
the latter. In the Pur&nas the term Dasyu means a barbarian, a robber 
or an outcaste. 



^atarudrasathhitd 


1237 


32. He made a clay idol of Siva even and beautiful. 
In front of it he stood in meditation on the excellent heap 
of splendour. 

33. He took baths thrice a day. He performed various 
sorts of worship. He performed the Upasti form of worship 
of Siva again and again. 

34-35. Indra’s spies saw the splendour-column coming 
out of his head. They were frightened by it. They thought 
within themselves—“When did he come in ? Indra must be 
informed.” Saying so they went to Indra. 

Indra's spies said :— 

36. O lord of gods, we do not know who it is. Some 
one is performing a penance in the forest, a god, a sage, the 
sun or the fire. 

37. We are scorched by his splendour and have come 
near you. We have told you the details. Please do what is 
proper. 

MandUvara said :— 

38. Thus informed by the spies, Indra, the enemy of 
mountains, understood whatever his son Arjuna desired to 
do. He dismissed them and decided to go there to test 
him. 

39. O leading brahmin, Indra, the lord of !§aci, as¬ 
sumed the form of an elderly brahmin bachelor and went 
there to test him. 

40. On seeing him come, Arjuna worshipped him. 
After eulogising him he stood in front of him and said— 
“Whence do you come now ? Please tell me” 

41. The lord of gods thus requested by him spoke with 
a hint at testing his courage, out of love. 

The brahmin said: — 

42. O dear, why do you perform the penance in your 
prime of youth ? Is it for salvation or for victory ? In every 
respect this penance of yours is useless. 

PfandiSvara said :— 

43. Thus questioned by him he informed him of every¬ 
thing. On hearing that the brahmin spoke again. 



1238 





The brahmin said '.— 

44. This is not proper on your part to pursue this 
penance for achieving happiness or for salvation 8y means 
of Kfatraic rites, O excellent scion of the Kurus. 

45. Indra is the bestower of happiness and not of 
salvation. O excellent one, it behoves you therefore to 
perform a more excellent penance. 

46. On hearing his words Arjuna was angry. Slighting 
it but humbly, Arjuna of good rites replied. 

Arjuna said :— 

47. It is not for kingdom nor for salvation that 
this penance is resorted to. Why do you speak like this ? 
I am performing this penance on the advice of Vyasa. 

48. O bachelor, go hence. Do you wish to cause my 
downfall ? Of what use is this to you a bachelor ? 

NandUvara said: — 

49. On being addressed thus he was delighted. He 
revealed his wonderfully beautiful form with all parapher¬ 
nalia to him. 

50. On seeing the form of Indra, Arjuna was ashamed. 
Indra spoke to him again after consoling him. 

Indra said :— 

51. *‘0 dear, O Arjuna of great intellect, choose your 
boon, whatever you wish in your mind. There is nothing 
which cannot be given to you.’* 

52. On hearing the words of Indra, Arjuna replied 
“O father, bless me with victory. I am afflicted by enemies 
in every respect.” 

Indra said :— 

53. Your enemies, Duryodhana and others arc very 
powerful. Drona, Bhl^ma, Kar^a and others arc certainly 
invincible. 

54. A^vatthaman, son of Droria and a part of Rudra, 
is extremely invincible. But they can be withstood through 
me. Listen to what is wholesome to you. 

55. O hero, none is capable of performing this Japa. 



SatarudrasathhiUl 


1239 


Siva is the greatest of all. Hence perform the Japa of Siva 
now. 

56. Siva is the lord of worlds, the mobile and immobile 
beings. He is the lord of heaven. He can do everything. 
He is the bestower of worldly pleasures and salvation. 

57. I, Brahma and others, Vi^nu the bestower of boons 
and those who crave for victory are the devotees of Siva. 

58. Now onwards leave that mantra and worship Siva 
with devotion through the rules laid down for the worship 
of his clay phallic image and by contemplating on him. 

59. O Bharata, by your devotional feelings and modes 
of service, you worship Siva. Your achievement will be 
unshakable. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 

NandUvara said-. — 

60. After saying this he called out his spies and said— 
“All of you shall be cautious and attentive in protecting him 
always. ” 

61. Thus alerting his spies for the protection to be 
accorded to Arjuna, Indra spoke again to Arjuna with his 
.'eart full of fondness and afl'ection. 

Indra said -.— 

62. O Gentle one, O terrifier of enemies, you shall not 
commit blunders in the administration of your kingdom. 
This mantra will be conducive to your glory. 

63. Always courage shall be maintained by an aspirant. 
Siva the protector will give you riches and the fruits of your 
desire. This is undoubtedly true. 

Nandiivara said :— 

64. After giving the boon to Arjuna, the lord of gods 
remembered the lotus-like feet of Siva and went to his abode. 

65. The heroic Arjuna bowing to the lord of gods, 
performed the penance with controlled mind with Siva as 
his goal. 



CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 


[The demon MSka is killed in the context of 
the incarnation of Kirdta) 


Nandiivara said ’.— 

1. He performed the ablution duly, and the Nyasa 
(the mystic placing of fingers etc.) in accordance with the 
Gastric injunctions. He performed the meditation of Siva 
with great devotion in the manner explained by Vyasa. 

2. Like a great sage, he stood on the sole of a single 
foot. He fixed one of his eyes at the sun and stood repeating 
the mantra. 

3. Repeating the five-syllabled mantra of Siva the 
most excellent of all the mantras and mentally remembering 
Siva with pleasure he performed the penance. 

4. The splendour of the penance was such that the 
gods were surprised. They went to Siva again and told him 
sincerely. 

The gods said ’.— 

5. O lord of all, a penance is being performed by a 
man for your propiation. O lord, why don’t you grant him 
what he desires. 

^andiSvara said: — 

6. After saying this the gods eulogised him in different 
ways. Fixing their eyes to his feet they stood there in agony. 

7. On hearing their words the lord of benevolent 
mind, the delighted Siva laughingly spoke thus to the gods. 

Aw said: — 

8. O gods, you go to your abodcj. Undoubtedly I 
shall carry out your task in every respect. 

KandUvara said :— 

9. On hearing those words of Siva, they became as¬ 
sured. They therefore returned to their abodes. 



SatttntirasafhMUl 


1241 


10—13. In the meantime there came the demon Muka, 
instigated by the wicked Duryodhana, wielding MiyI against 
Arjuna. O great brahmin, he had assumed the form of a 
boar.** He came along the path where Arjuna was staying. He 
was digging up the peaks of mountains and trees in plenty. 
He was roaring and grunting in diverse ways and was rush¬ 
ing at a great speed. On seeing the demon Muka, Arjuna 
remembered the lotus-like feet of Siva and began to think. 

Arjuna said :— 

14. Who is this? Where does he come from? He seems 
to be very ruthless in actions. Certainly he is coming here 
to harm me. 

15. It occurs tome that he is my enemy, to be sure. 
Formerly many Daityas and Danavas had been killed by me. 

16. He may be one of those come here to wreak ven¬ 
geance. Or he may be some friend of Duryodhana acting 
for his welfare. 

17. Verily he is a benefactor on seeing whom the 
mind becomes pleased. If on seeing anyone the mind is 
agitated he is surely an enemy. 

18. The conduct declares the family, the body declares 
the diet, the mode of speech declares the amount of learning 
and the eye indicates the affection. 

19. The concealed mind is revealed by the general 
mien, the mode of walking, the activities, the speech, the 
features of the eyes and the face.®’ 

20. The eye is of four sorts—the resplendent, the im¬ 
passioned the squinted and the ruddy. The features are 
likewise different, O scholars. 

21. It is resplendent, when friends meet. It is im¬ 
passioned at the sight of the son. It is squinted in contact 
with the beloved and it is ruddy at the sight of the enemy. 

96. The battle between Arjuna and .^iva disguised as Kirata over the 
possession of an arrow that killed the t)oar, as described in Chs, 39, 40, 41 
here, forms the main theme of Bharavi’s Kiiatarjunlya. 

97. Cp. Pafleatantra I. 44. 

^ I 



1242 Sivapurib^ 

22. In regard to him my sense-organs are excited. He 
must be an enemy. Undoubtedly he shall be killed. 

23. I remember the words of my preceptor now—“O 
king, a person causing misery shall be killed by • you by 
all means. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 

2%. It is only for this purpose that I hold the weapons. 
There is no doubt in this.** After thinking thus he placed 
the arrow ready there and stood up. 

25-26. In the meantime, Siva, favourably disposed to 
his devotees, assumed the wonderful form of an efficient hunter 
and came there along with his Ganas in order to slay that 
Daitya, to protect Arjuna as well as to test his devotion. 

27. The hunter had tucked up his lion-cloth and 
folded up I§iva*s banner. His body was lined with the white 
ash. He held a bow and arrows. 

28. He carried the quiver suspended over his back. 
The Ganas too assumed the form of hunters. Siva too became 
the chief of Bhillas. 

29. The Commander-in-Ghief started various sounds. 
The grunting sound of the boar too spread over the quarters. 

30. Arjuna was excited by the sound that spread in 
the forest. Even the mountains were agitated by these 
sounds. 

31. “Oh, can this be Siva the benefactor? I have 
heard about this as mentioned by Krsna. 

32. Vy^a too has mentioned and the gods too. Siva 
is mentioned as the benefactor. Siva is the cause of happiness. 

33. He is called “the bestower of salvation*’ because 
he bestows salvation upon his devotees. Undoubtedly 
welfare befalls those who remember his names. 

34. Even in dreams, misery does not befall those who 
worship him with devotion. If it happens at all, it is due to 
their previous activities. 

35. That must happen whether big or small. The 
fault is particularly that of the action that has begun to 
fructify. 

36. Or ^iva may dispel the misery by his will, after 
one has experienced the fruits of one’s action big or small. 

37. He can convert poison into nectar and nectar 



Satamdrasmhhitd 


1243 


into poison. Whatever he wishes he certainly does. How 
can an efficient man be thwarted? 

38-40. Devotees of yore and future devotees must keep 
their mind steady after considering all those aspects^ whether 
one is in affluent circumstances or not, whether death is 
imminent or not or whether people praise or censure. Misery 
is quelled. 8iva is always the bestower of happiness through 
the merit and sin of individuals. Sometimes 8iva makes us 
miserable in order to test us. 

41. Since he is compassionate he is said to be the 
bestower of happiness ultimately. A gold piece can become 
pure only when it is put into the fire and purified. 

42. This has been heard by me from the Suge. Hence 
I shall attain blessed happiness through his worship alone.” 

43. While he was musing thus, the boar came within 
the range of his arrow-discharge. 

44-45. In order to protect Arjuna, Siva, favourably 
disposed towards his devotees, came there closely pursuing 
the boar. Between the two the animal rushed on and then 
halted. A wonderful horn was seen. 

46. Then both of them discharged the arrow. Siva’s 
arrow hit the tail, Arjuna’s arrow hit the snout. 

47-48. Siva’s arrow hit the tail and stopped at the 
snout. It struck the ground and entered it. Arjuna’s arrow 
pierced through the body. It came out of the tail and fell 
at its side. The boar who was a Daitya fell dead on the 
ground. 

49. The gods were much delighted. They showered 
flowers. Bowing down and eulogising they cried shouts of 
victory. 

50. On seeing the cruel form of the Daitya, Siva was 
glad and Arjuna was happy. 

51-52. With an excessively happy mind Arjuna said— 
‘‘O this is a huge Daitya. He had assumed this wonderful 
form and had come here to kill me. But I have been saved 
by Siva. Lord Siva has given me keen intelligence. There 
is no doubt in this.” 

53. After thinking thus Arjuna repeated Siva’s name. 
He bowed to Siva and eulogised him again and again. 



1244 SivapurSf^a 

CHAPTER FORTY 

{The Kxrata-Arjuna dialogue) 

NandUvara said :— 

1. O omni*'cient Sanatkumara, listen to the sport of 
the great soul Siva full of affection for the devotee and to the 
test of its stability. 

2. Siva immediately sent his attendant to fetch the 
arrow. The Arjuna too came there. 

3. The Gana and Arjuna reached the place simultane¬ 
ously for the arrow. Arjuna rebuked him and took up his 
arrow. 

4. The Ga^a said—excellent sage, why do you 
take this arrow ? The arrow is mine. Leave it off.” 

5. O excellent sage, thus addressed by the Gana of 
the Bhilla, Arjuna remembered Siva and spoke. 

Arjuna said :— 

6. O forest-roamer, what do you say without under¬ 
standing ? You are a fool. This arrow had been discharged 
by me just now. How can it be yours ? 

7. It is engraved with my name in many lines. The 
feathers are mine. How does it become yours ? You insist 
according to your wild nature. 

NandiSvara said :— 

8. On hearing his words, the leader of the Ganas 
laughed and spoke to Arjuna who was in the garb of a sage. 

9. O sage, listen. You arc a sage in disguise. You 
are not a true sage. You do not perform penance. People 
are being deceived by you. 

10. How can a saint utter a lie ? Do not take me to 
be single-handed. Know me to be the commander-in-chief. 

11. My master is sitting there with many hunters. 
In every respect, he is capable of destroying or blessing you. 

12. It is his arrow that has been taken by you now. 
This arrow will never remain with you. 

13-14. O sage, why do you wish to lose the fruit of 
your penance ? Truly have I heard that penance is marrfcd 



Satomdrasarhhiti 


1245 


and wasted by theft, pride afflicted by deceit and the breaking 
of promise. Hence O sage, whence will you derive the fruit 
of penance ? 

15. If you do not give up this arrow you will be an 
ungrateful fellow. It was certainly to save you that my 
master discharged this arrow. 

16. Your enemy has been killed by him and you have 
kept the arrow to yourself. Very ungrateful indeed arc you. 
You are making your own penance fruitless. 

17. You do not speak the truth. What you wish to 
gfain thereby ? If you have any need for the arrow, you 
may approach my master and request him. 

18. He can give you many similar arrows. My master 
is here. Why don’t you request him? 

19. Unmindful of his hc’p to you, you wish him 
harm. This does not behove you. Eschew this fickleness.' 

20. On hearing his words, Arjuna, son of Pftha, was 
angry. After remembering I^iva, he spoke these measured 
words. 

Arjuna said :— 

21. O hunter, listen. I shall explain. Your words 
are not true. O forest*wanderer, I know you. You are true 
to the caste in which you are born. 

22. I am a king. You are a thief. How can a war 
be pursued ? I must fight with people equal in strength 
to me, never with base people. 

23. Your master will be only like you. We are the 
benevolent donors and you the forest-dwellers, thieves. 

24. How can the king of foresters be requested by 
me now ? O forest-wanderer, why don’t you beg the arrow 
of me ? 

25. I shall readily give you the arrows. Certainly I 
have many. If a king docs not give what is taken, your 
objection may come up. 

26 Then O forester, how can I simply give away the 
arrow, if what I am desirous of doing is not being under¬ 
stood ? 

27-28. Why should there be a long talk ? Let your 
master come and fight with me. Defeating me in the battle, 



1246 


let him take the arrow and return to his abode. Why 
should there be any delay? 

No,ndiSvara said :— # 

29. On hearing these words of Arjuna who derived 
his strength from the mercy of lord Siva^ the forester 
spoke these words. 

The forester said :— 

30. You are ignorant. You are not a sage. Why do 
you invite death ? Give up the arrow and stay here 
happily or you will come ito grief. 

Nandiivara said :— 

31. Thus challenged by the forester who derived his 
strength from Siva and who was a Gana, Arjuna, son of 
Pandu remembered !§iva and said. 

Arjuna said '.— 

32. O forester, listen attentively to my words. If 
your master comes here I shall show my strength. 

33. It does not behove me to fight with you. I shall 
fight with your master. The fight between a lion and a 
jackal is very ridiculous. 

34. You have heard my words. You shall see my 
strength now. O Bhilla, return to your master. Do as vou 
pleas#*. 

NandUvara said :— 

35. O sage, thus addressed by Arjuna, the Bhilla 
returned to the place where the general Kirata, the incarnation 
of l§iva, stood. 

36. He mentioned Arjuna^s talk in detail to lord Siva, 
the great soul in the form of Bhilla. 

37. On hearing his words, lord Kirata was much 
delighted. It was Siva dressed as a Bhilla who had come 
there with his army. 

38. On seeing Kirata with his army, Arjuna, son of 
Pandu, look up his bow and arrows and faced him. 

39. Then Kirata sent the messenger again and 



^atarudrasafhhitd 1247 

through him delivered the message to Arjuna, the great 
soul. 

KirSta said :— 

40. O sage, sec this army coming. Give up the arrow 
and go away. Why do you seek death for a trifle. 

41. Your brothers are in distress. Your wife is grief- 
stricken. I think your kingdom will slip off your hands, 
I am sure. 

JiandiSvara said :— 

42. It was just to test the firmness of Arjuna that the 
great lord said this, the great lord Siva who had assumed 
that form to protect Arjuna by all means. 

43. What the lord said, the Gana of Siva mentioned 
that to Arjuna in detail after approaching him. 

44. On hearing that, Arjuna replied to the messenger 
“You shall tell your general that the reverse of what he 
says will happen to him. 

45. If I were to give up the arrow that belongs to 
me I shall be the cause of ignominy to my family. 

46. Well may my brothers be distressed. Let all my 
knowledge be fruitless. So, come on to fight with me. 

47. No lion is ever frightened of a jackal. A king is 
never afraid of a forester.” 

48. Thus replied by Arjuna the Bhilla returned to his 
master and conveyed all that Arjuna had said. 

49. Lord f>iva, a Kirata, heard the message and 
approached Arjuna along with his army. 



124Q 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

( The incarnation of lord Siva as Kirdta) 

NandiSvara said :— 

1. On seeing him comci Arjuna meditated on Siva 
and fought with him a terrible battle. 

2. He was severely afflicted by the Ganas with many 
sharp weapons. Thus tortured by them Arjuna remembered 
lord Siva. 

3. Arjuna split the arrows discharged by Kirata and 
his ganas. Then he thought upon Siva. 

4. When distressed by him, the Ganas fled to the 
quarters. Then Siva summoned the chief Ganas. But they 
did not respond to his call. 

5. Siva and Arjuna of great strength and exploit 
fought each other with various weapons of war. 

6. Taking pity on him Siva approached Arjuna, but 
Arjuna hit him heavily. 

7. Siva split the weapons of Arjuna as well as his 
armour. Aijuna stood in his bare body. 

8. Although afflicted by fear, Arjuna remembered 
Siva and fought a duel with the general spiritedly. 

9. The earth along with the oceans shook due to 
their fight. “What will happen now ?” Thinking thus, the 
gods were distressed. 

10. In the meantime, lord Siva stood in mid-air and 
fought. Arjuna too did likewise. 

11. Flying at each other, lord Siva and the earthly 
king Arjuna fought with each other. On seeing that wonder¬ 
ful battle the gods were surprised. 

12. Then Arjuna came to the ground, remembered 
the lo^us-like feet of Siva and caught hold of his feet deriving 
sufficient strength, thanks to his meditation on Siva. 

13. Catching hold of his feet, Arjuna whirled him. 
Lord Siva, favourably disposed towards his disciples, laughed 
indulging in divine sports. 

14. O sage, it was surely done by Siva himself who is 
subservient to his devotees. It could not be otherwise as 
this was just to grant him his devotion. 



SatarudrasathMtd 


1249 


15. Then Siva smiled and revealed his wonderful 
auspicious form as he is always well disposed to his devotees. 

16-17. On seeing that beautiful form, the form of the 
excellent supreme being as mentioned in the Vedas, Sastras 
and Puranas, the form which Vyasa had advised him to 
meditate upon, the form which bestows all Siddhis, the form 
of Siva, Arjuna was abashed and surprised much. 

18. “Ha, this is Siva, this is Siva who has been 
chosen by me as my lord, the lord of the three worlds him¬ 
self. O what a thing have I committed now ! 

19. Powerful indeed is the Maya of the lord. It deludes 
even the wielders of Maya. Why have I been deceived by the 
lord who concealed his own form.” 

20. After thinking thus within himself he joined his 
palms in reverence and bending his head he bowed to the 
lord with pleasure. Then he spoke in a delighted manner. 

Arjuna said :— 

21. O great god, O lord of gods, O Siva the merciful, 
O lord of all, my fault shall be forgiven by you. 

22. What you have done ? By concealing your own 
form you have deceived me now. Fie on me who fought with 
you, my master, O lord. 

NandiSvara said :— 

23. Thus Arjuna, son of Panqlu, repented. He fell at 
the feet of lord Siva. 

24. Cheering up in various ways the delighted lord 
Siva, favourably disposed to his devotees, replied to Arjuna. 

Siva said :— 

25. O Arjuna, do not worry yourself. You are a great 
devotee of mine. I have done this just to test you. Give 
up your sorrow. 

NandUvara said :— 

26. After saying this and lifting Arjuna with his own 
hands, the lord rid him of his bashfulness through his own 
lordly qualities. 

27. Delighting Arjuna, son of Pandu, honoured by 



1250 

heroes, Siva, favourably disposed towards his devotees, spoke 
to him with pleasure. 

Siva said :— 

28. O Arjuna, foremost among the sons of Pandu, 1 
am delighted. Choose your boon. By your hits and blows 
I have been worshipped by you. I consider it so. 

29. This has been done by my own will. I'he fault 
is not yours. There is nothing which cannot be given to 
you. Choose whatever you desire. 

30. In order to establish the rule of your fame among 
your enemies what you have done is auspicious. You shall 
not be struck with grief. Eschew all your feebleness. 

hfandiivara said :— 

31. Thus addressed by lord Siva, Arjuna stood care¬ 
fully and spoke to Siva with devotion. 

Arjuna said :— 

32. O good lord, O Sadasiva, is your desire, is your 
compassion to be described by me? You are the favourite 
of your devotees, you are Siva, the bestower of welfare. 

33. After saying this, the son of Pandu eulogised Siva 
the great lord, devotedly, in the manner approved of by 
the Vedas. 

34. “Obeisance to you the lord of gods. Obeisance 
to you the resident of Kailasa. O Sada^iva, obeisance to 
you. Obeisance to you, the five-faced®* one. 

35. Obeisance to Kapardin (one with matted hair), 
obeisance to you, the three-eyed. Obeisance to the delighted 
one, obeisance to the thousand-faced. 

36. O blue-necked one, obeisance to you. Obeisance 
to Sadyojata. O bull-bannered one, obeisance to you with 
Parvati as your left half. 

37. O ten-armed one, Obeisance to you the great soul. 
Obeisance to you holding the drum and the skull in your 
hands. Obeisance to you, the one wearing a garland of 
skulls. 

ijtl. On lilt* t'ivc-faccd loim ol 6iva sit 1 * 34 note. 



StttarudrasathhiUl 


1251 


38. Obeisance to you with the body refulgent like 
pure crystal and pure camphpr, obeisance to you with the 
Pinaka in your hand, obeisance to the bearer of the excellent 
Trident. 

39. Obeisance to the one with the tiger hide** as the 
upper cloth; obeisance to the wearer of elephant’s hide.'®* 
Obeisance to you with your body encircled by the serpents. 
Obeisance to you the supporter of Gahga. 

40. Obeisance to you of splendid, reddish feet, worthy 
to be served by Nandin and other Ganas. Obeisance to you, 
the chief of Ganas. 

41. Obeisance to one in the form of Gane^a, followed 
by Karttikeya. Obeisance to the bestower of devotion and 
salvation to the devotees. 

42. Obeisance to you devoid of attributes. Obeisance 
to you possessed of attributes. Obeisance to one with and 
without forms, having digits and devoid of digits. 

43. Obeisance to the one who blessed me in the form 

of K.irata. Obeisance to the one who is fond of fighting with 

heroes, obeisance to the one performing various sports. 

44. Whatever splendid form is seen, its splendour is 
yours. You are in the form of pure consciousness. You 
sport about in, the three worlds in different guises. 

45. There is no limit to your excellences as that of 

the dust particles, or stars in the sky or rain-drops. 

46. Even the Vedas cannot enumerate your good 

qualities. O lord, how can I, deficient in intellect, describe 

any ? 

47. Whatever be your nature, obeisance be to you. 
It behoves you to take pity. O lord, I am your slave. O 
lord l^iva, you are my master. 


on. Once 5 iva visited a forest in the guise of a mendicant and 
chan^?d the wives of the sages by his physical splendour ” 

resented his action, dug a pit and by mag»fal ore 

rush out of it. But Siva slew the tiger and took his skin which he 

as a garment. Dawson HM. P. 299 * •« (nr r'ava^ who 

loo The elephant skin belonged to the Asura Gaja (or Gaya) wo 

h.d inquJrf Ac god. «.d d«trjy«l, the .ag«. » “'d <o ha« 

.1^ Ih. A«r.. rip5«l op •"%>«> of «*>' •"'* “ 

cloak. See SP. Rudra. Yuddhakariija, Ch. 57. 



Sitk^urSf^ 


1252 

NandiSvara said :— 

48. On hearing his words, lord ^iva, who was highly 

delighted spoke to Arjuna delightedly. * 

Siva said :— 

49. Of what avail is a long talk ? Listen to my words. 
O son, choose your boon quickly. I shall give you every¬ 
thing. 

Nandiivara said :— 

50. Thus urged by him, Arjuna bowed to Sada^iva 
with palms joined in reverence and with head bending down. 
He s|>oke with words choked with devotion 

Arjuna said 

51. What shall I say ? You are the immanent Soul 
of all. Still let my detailed explanation be heard by you, 
O lord. 

52. Whatever danger I had from enemies has vanished 
at your sight. Please do that which may confer worldly 
Siddhis on me. 

KandiSvara said :— 

53. After saying this and bowing to Siva who is favour¬ 
ably disposed to his devotees, Arjuna stood by with shoulder 
drooping down and palms joined in reverence. 

54. Seeing Arjuna, son of Pandu, the foremost of 
his devotees, lord ^iva was extremely glad and satisfied. 

55. Lord Siva gave him Pasupata missile that could 
not be thwarted by anyone at any time and spoke thus. 

Siva said :— 

56. I have given you my own great missile. You will 
become invincible thereby. You will reap success over your 
enemies through this. 

57. I shall tell K]:sna also. He will help you. He 
is my own soul, my devotee and he carries out my task. 

58. O Bharata, due to my power, you will rule over 
your kingdom unhindered. You shall perform righteous 
deeds of various kinds always along with your brother. 



$etamirasa$hlnti 


1253 


NandUvara said ;— 

59. After saying this and placing his hand over his 
head, Siva vanished after being duly worshipped by Aijuna. 

60. The delighted Arjuna, after obtaining the excellent 
missile from the lord, returned to his hermitage remembering 
devotedly his chief preceptor and Siva, 

61. When he arrived, his brother felt fully revived as 
the body with vital airs. They felt happy at his sight. 
Draupadi of good rites was also delighted. 

62. The delighted Pan^avas were not satiated by hear.> 
ing the.details from Arjuna and knowing that Siva was 
satisfied, 

63. There was a shower of flowers and the sandal 
paste in the hermitage for honouring Arjuna the enemy of 
the boar and the Pandavas. 

64. By bowing to Siva joyously and realising that the 
time-limit had arrived, they knew that success was at hand. 

65. In the meantime, on hearing that Arjuna had 
returned, Kfsna came there to see him. He was very happy. 

66. Therefore I say that Siva is the dispeller of all 
miseries. He is always served by me. Let him be served by 
you. 

67. Thus the incarnation of Siva as Kirata has been 
explained to you. He who hears and narrates this obtains 
all desires. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

(The Twelve Jyotirlinga incarnations) 

NandiSvara said :— 

1. O sage, now listen to the twelve incarnations of the 
lord in the form of jyotirlifigas, the cause of diverse sports. 



1254 

2-4. The jyotirlingas'®* are—Somanatha in the Saurastra^®* 
territory; Mallikarjuna on the mountain Srilaila'®*; Mahakala 
in Ujjayinli®*; Amaresvara in Omkarai®® Mandhata; Itedara^®* 
on the Himalaya; Bhimasahkara in the city of Dakini;*®^ 
Vi^vesvara in the city of VaranasP®*; Tryambaka on the banks 
ofGautamP®®; Vaidyanatha in the cremation ground^®; Nageia 
in the forest ofDaruka^^i; Rame^vara in the Setubandha'*^ 
Ghusmesvara in the iSiva temple. 

5. O sage, the twelve incarnations of the supreme 
soul are wholly delightful to all men for seeing and touching. 

6. There, the first one, Somanatha, annihilated the 
distress of the moon. O sage, by wor<ihipping, it diSpels the 
ailments of consumption, leprosy etc. 

7. This incarnation of l§iva, Some^a, is stationed in the 
auspicious land of Saura^tra, in the form of a phallic image. 
It was worshipped by the moon formerly. 

8. Gandarakunda (the pond of the Moon) is there 
itself and it destroys all sins. By bathing there a man becomes 
intelligent and gets rid of his ailments. 



loi. On the basis of the serial order of the Jyotirlingas as outlined in 
the succeeding verses in this chapter and the verses 21-a;^ of the chapter 
first in the KRS, the order of the verses 2 and 3 of this chapier in the 
printed Skt. text has been reversed in the present English translation. 

102. Saurastra is the southern part of Kathiawai. 

10;. .Srisaila or Sripaivata is one of the sacred hills <>1 the south 
overhanging tiic Ki'^na river it contains the celt brated shiine oj Mallikur- 
juna, one of the ii> Jyotirlingas. 

104. The town, an ancient scat of leaming, is identical with I'jjajr in 

M.P. 

lo",. A sacred place of Saiva pilgrin’age in tha Nimar district 'n 
Madhya Pradesh. 

loti. It is a sacred Himalayan peak in Caihwal. 

107. A holy place of pilgiimage on the bank of the Bhima river, 
north-west of Poona. 

lol). A famous town in the east, it still retains its ancient name. 

loj. Gautami or Godavari is situated .about 20 miles fiom Nasik. 
It issues *roin Tryambaka. 

I If. Whether it is an ordinary cremation ground or a particular 
locality is not dear. 

III. Daruvana is pI.reed on the liimnlayas near Krdara in Garhwal 
on the OaAgS. 

It2. A very sacrctl place in the south, it still retains iii ancient 
name. 



Jatarudrasarhhita 


1255 


9. On seeing Somesvara, the great phallic image of 
5iva, people arc freed from sin. They attain worldly pleasures 
and salvation. 

10. O dear, the second incarnation of Siva Mallikarjuna, 
on the mountain, Srisaila, is the bestower of the desires of 
devotees. 

11. O sage, Siva went there from his mountain, with 
great pleasure in order to see his son Karttikeya. It is station¬ 
ed there in the form of the phallic image. 

12. It is the second Jyotirlihga. O sage, it, is very plca- 
.^ing. By seeing and worshipping it one derives salvation 
hereafter. There is no doubt in this. 

13. O dear, Siva incarnated himself as Mahakala in 
the city of Ujjayini for the protection of his devotees. 

14-15. The demon Dusana, a resident of Ratnamala,'^® 
was a defiler of Vedic rites, a hater of brahmins and des¬ 
troyer of everyone. When he reached Ujjayini, the lord was 
meditated upon by the sons of the Vedic brahmins. He redu¬ 
ced the demon to ashes by a mere Hurfikara. 

16. After killing him, on being requested by the gods; 
lord Mahakala stayed there in the form of a Jyotirlihga. He 
continues to protect his devotees. 

17. By seeing and strenuously worshipping the phallic 
image of Mahakala, the devotee attains his desires and the 
greatest goal. 

18. The fourth incarnation of Siva the supreme soul, 
the great lord in Omkara Mandhata is a bestower of the 
desires of his devotees. 

19. O sage, lord Siva manifested himself from his 
earthen phallic image devoutly installed by Brahma and he 
fulfilled the desires of the mountain. 

20. On being requested by the gods the lord in the 
form of his phallic image stayed there two-fold, bestowing 
worldly pleasures and salvation and being favourably disposed 
towards his devotees. 

21. The excellent phallic image abides in the syllable 
Omkara. O great sage, it also abides in the earthen phallic 
image in Oihkara Mandhat5. 


113. Not identified. 



1256 


22. O sage, O great sage, whatever is seen or wor¬ 
shipped it! the extremely divine phallic image described to 
you is the bestower of the desires of all devotees. • 

23. The fifth great incarnation of Siva is the Kedare^a. 
He is stationed in Kedara in the form of Jyotirlinga. 

24. It was at the request of the twofold incarnations 
of Vifnu, named Nara and Narayana that Siva stayed in 
Kedara on the mountain Himavat, O sage. 

25. Siva named Kedarelvara was worshipped every¬ 
day by them. He is the bestower of the desires of the 
devotees, by his sight and worship. 

26. Although he is the lord of all, he is the particular 
reigning deity of this territory. O dear that incarnation of 
Siva is the bestower of all desires. 

27. The sixth incarnation of Siva, the great lord 
named Bhimaiankara, performed great sports. He destroyed 
the demon Bhima. 

28. After killing this wonderfully lusty demon who 
caused misery to the devotees, the lord saved the devotee 
Sudak^ina who was the king of Kamarupa. 

29. Requested by him Siva himself in the name of 
Bhima^ankara stayed in Dakini in the form of Jyotirlinga. 

30. O sage, the seventh incarnation as Viivegvara at 
KaSi is in the form of the entire cosmic egg. It yields 
worldly pleasures and salvation. 

31. He is always worshipped by Visnu and all other 
gods as well as Kubera and Bhairava. 

32. He is stationed there in the form of Jyotirlinga. In 
his own city the lord is in the form of Siddha and he 
confers salvation. 

33. Those who repeat the names of KaSi and VMve^a 
and perform their Japa with devotion become unaffected by 
actions and reach the state of Kaivalya. 

34. The eighth incarnation Tryambaka of the moon- 
crested lord iSiva made its appearance on the banks of the 
river Gautam! on being requested by the sage Gautama. 

35. At the request of Gautama and with a desire to 
delight that sage, the lord stood there motionless in the 
form of Jyotirlinga, 



Satarudrasarhfiitd 


1257 


36. All desires fructify at the sight and touch of the 
great lord. Thereafter salvation too is attained. 

37. With the blessings of i§iva, and pleased with 
Gautama, the holy river Gahga, the beloved of Siva, stayed 
there in the name of Gautami. 

38. The ninth incarnation is glorified as Vaidyanatha. 
The lord indulging in many sports manifested himself for 
the sake of Ravana. 

39. Under the pretext of fetching him, lord Siva was 
installed in the cremation ground in the form of Jyotirliriga. 

40. The lord in the name of Vaidyanatha became 
famous in the three worlds. Seeing and worshipping him 
with devotion yields worldly pleasures and salvation. 

41. O sage, this benedictory passage referring to the 
greatness of Siva in the name of Vaidyanathesvara yields 
worldly pleasures and salvation to those who read and listen. 

42. The incarnation of Nagesvara is glorified as the 
tenth one. The lord manifested himself as the chastiser of 
the wickfd for his devotees. 

43. He killed the Rak^asa Daruka, a violator of 
virtue. He saved his devotee Supriya who was a merchant 
king. 

44. In order to help all the worlds, Siva, the great 
indulgent in sports, remained there assuming the form of 
Jyotirlinga, accompanied by Parvati. 

45. O sage, at the sight of Siva’s phallic image 
named Nagesvara and thanks to its worship, heaps of great 
sins perish immediately. 

46. O sage, the incarnation of Siva is the eleventh 
one. It was pleasing to Rama and it was installed by him. 

47. Duly propitiated by Rama, Siva who is favour¬ 
ably disposed towards his devotees manifested himself in the 
phallic image and granted the boon of victory to him. 

48. O sage, the lord, implored ardently by Rama 
and propitiated by Rama stayed at Setubandha in the form 
of Jyotirlinga. 

49. The grandeur of Rame'vara in the world was 
wonderful and incomparable, yielding worldly pleasures and 
salvation and bestowing the desires of the devotees ever. 



1258 SivafiurSna 

50. The man who performs the ablution of 

Rame^vara is really a living liberated soul. • 

51. After enjoying all worldly pleasures here, and then 
getting perfect knowledge, he shall obtain salvation here¬ 
after. 

52. The incarnation of biva as Ghu4mesvara is the 
twelfth wherein the lord indulged in different sports and 
conferred bliss on GhuSma. He is favourably disposed 
towards his devotees. 

53. O sage, the lord manifested himself in a lake near 
the Devasaila^^* in the southern quarter acting favourably 
to Ghu^ma. 

54. O sage, Siva who is favourably disposed towards 
his devotees entirely revived the son of Ghu^ma who was 
killed by Sudehya. He was so pleased with her devotion. 

55. At her request, Siva stayed in the lake in the form 
of Jyotirlihga Ghu^meSvara conferring desires to the devotees. 

56. The man who sees that phallic image and 
worships it with devotion enjoys happiness here and attains 
salvation hereafter. 

57. Thus I have explained to you the series of divine 
Jyotirlihgas twelve in number yielding both worldly pleasures 
and salvation. 

58. He who reads or listens to this narrative of 
Jyotirlihgas becomes freed of all sins and derives worldly 
pleasures and salvation. 

59. Thus I have described the compendium 
8atarudra by name which glorifies the hundred incarnations 
of Siva and yields the fruits of desires. 

60. He who reads this always or listens to it devotedly 
attains all desires and then becomes liberated, to be sure. 


114. According to thr present chapter V. it in situated on the 
Deva mountain in the south. For the identification of Devagiri see 
GEAMI P. 107 



KOTmUDR ASAMHITX' 

CHAPTER ONE 

{The greatness of Jyotirlihgas and their Upalihgas) 

1. Obeisance for ever to that brilliance, half of whose 
body has been beautified by the daughter of the mountain; 
who, rid of all aberrations, assumes the shape of the worlds 
by means of his own Maya ; whose sympathetic glance, 
they say, brings about the wealth and glory in the form 
of heaven and salvation and whom the Yogins see in their 
hearts as the one without a second and as th#* inner 
understanding and bliss. 

2. May that mass of splendour, whatever it be, be 
ausjMcioils, the splendour that has eyes gentle due to 
compassion ; which has lotus-like face smiling charmly ; 
which is brilliant with the digit of the moon ; which sub¬ 
dues the terrible three-fold distresses; whose body of 
excessive bliss, existence and knowledge sheds brightness ; and 
which is encircled by the arms of the daughter of the 
mountain, Parvatl. 

The sages said :— 

3. O Suta, the greatness of the incarnations of Siva 
inclusive of their narratives, has been well explained by 
you with a desire for the welfare of the world. 

4. O dear, may the excellent grandeur of Siva be 
narrated with pleasure in connection with his phallic forms. 
You arc blessed and the most excellent among the devotees 
of Siva. 

5. Listening from your lotus-like mouth, O holy lord, 
to the nectar-like glory of Siva, we are never satiated. Let 
the same sweet narrative be repeated. 

6-7. O disciple of Vyasa, with a desire for the welfare 
of the worlds,. please narrate in detail those divine phallic 
images of the great Ibrd whether they be on the earth in 



1260 ^ivapitrd^ 

the different holy centres or in other places glorified by 
men. 

SQta said :— 

8. O brahmins, O excellent sages, yqu have asked 
well. 1 shall explain them in brief with a desire for the 
welfare of the worlds and due to my affection for you. 

9. O sage, there is no limit to the number of phallic 
images. The entire earth, the entire universe is in the form 
of a phallus. 

10. The holy centres are equipped with phallic images. 
Everything is founded on these. There is no limit to their 
number. I shall mention a few of them. 

11. Whatever is seen, described or remembered is 
Siva’s form. Nothing other than that has real existence. 

12>13. Still I shall explain in the manner I have 
heard. Let it be heard with pleasure O excellent sages, 
whatever images are there on the earth in the Patala or in 
heaven, everywhere Siva is worshipped by the gods, Asuras 
and human beings. 

14. O excellent ones, the three worlds consisting of 
the gods, Asuras and human beings are pervaded by Siva 
in the form of phallic image for the welfare of the worlds. 

15. In order to bless the worlds, lord Siva assumes 
different phallic forms here in the holy centres as well as 
in other places. 

16. Siva incarnates in those places wherever he is 
devoutly remembered by the devotees. After carrying out 
their task he stations himself there. 

17. He has assigned his phallic form for the bene6t 
of the worlds. The devotee attains perfection by worshipping 
that form. 

18. O noble accctics, there is no limit to the number 
of his phallic images on the earth. Still I narrate the 
important ones. 

19. Even among the important ones, 1 shall enumerate 
the principal ones, on hearing which a man instantly gets 
rid of his sins. 

20. O excellent one, I shall mention the most 



KofinubrasathhiUl 1261 

important of the Jyotirlingas on hearing which a person 
becomes sinless. 

21-24. He who reads or recites the twelve names 
early in the morning is freed from all sins and attains the 
fruits of all Siddhis. The twelve Jyotirlihgas are—Somanitha 
in Saurastra, Mallikarjuna in Srilaila, MahSk^a in Ujjayini 
Parame^vara in Orhkira, Kedara on the Himavat, Bhima- 
Sankara in Dakini, Viive^a in Varanasi, Tryambaka on the 
bank of the Gautami, Vaidyanatha in the cremation ground, 
Nage^a in the Daruka forest, Ramela at Setubandha and 
Ghu^mesa at Sivalaya. 

25. O great sages, such excellent men will attain 
those desires for which they recite the names. 

26. Those who recite them without any desire but 
with purity of mind will never have rebirth involving 
residence in the mother’s womb. 

27. By worshipping these, people of all castes get 
their miseries destroyed in this world and become liberated 
hereafter, to be sure. 

28. The food offerings of these Jyotirlihgas shall be 
taken and others shall be fed with the same. Such acts 
reduce the sins to ashes instantaneously. 

29. O brahmins, the results of the worship of 
Jyotirlihgas cannot be described adequately by Brahmi and 
others. 

30. Even if one of them is worshipped continuously 
for six months, the misery of rebirth in the mother's womb 
will never recur. 

31. Even if a person of base birth happens to see 
Jyotirlihga, he will be born in a pure and good family. 

32. Being born in a good family he will become rich 
and master all the Vedas. Then by performing auspicious 
rites, he shall attain liberation without any obstacle. 

33. O great sages, whoever he may be, an outcaste, a 
slave or an eunuch, he will be born as a brahmin and 
become liberated. Hence one shall view the Jyotirlihga. 

34. O excellent sages, a few of the fruits of the 
Jyotirlihgas have been narrated by me. Let the Upalihgas 
(ancillary phallic forms) of these Jyotirlihgas be listened to. 



1262 


la 


35. The Upalihga of Somes vara is called Antakesa 
and it is installed at the confluence of the river ^ahl and 
the ocean.'** 

36. The Upalihga of Mallikarjuna is glorified as 
Rudreivara. It is pleasing and is stationed in Bhrgukak^."* 

37. The Upalihga of Mahakala is well known as Dug- 
dhe^a. It is famous in the region of Narmada and is remem¬ 
bered as destructive of all sins. 

38. The Upalihga of Omkara is famous as Kardame^a 
in the Bindu lake"’ and yields the fruits of all desires. 

39. The Upalihga of Kedarelvara is Bhute^a on the 
banks of the Yamuna. It is destructive of sins of the visit¬ 
ing devotees. 

40. The Upalihga of Bhimasahkara is Bhimesvara. It 
is famous in the Sahya mountain and it causes the increase 
of great strength. 

41. The Upalihga of NageSvara is BhuteSvara. Instal¬ 
led on the banks of Mallikasarasvati,"® it quells sins by the 
very sight. 

42. The Upalihga attached to Ramesvara is Gupte- 
svara. The Upalihga attached to Ghusme^a is VyaghreiSvara. 

43. O brahmins, thus I have mentioned the Upalihgas 
and the Jyotirlihgas. They dispel sins by their sight and 
yield the fruit of all desires. 

44. These are the most important ones. O excellent 
sages, let the other important ones also be heard. 

Ilf). It is the ronflurnce of the Mahi river that issues from the 
Sahyapada hill and the Western ocean identical with the Arabian sea. 

116. Bhrgukaksa is identical with Bharukaccha (Broach). It was 
the residence of the sage Bhrgu. 

117. Bindusaras is a Himalayan lake, the source of seven rivers 
srMt, f and grfel see sircar pp. 

58 - 59 * ' « 

ti8. Not identified. 



Kofirudrasarhhitd 


1263 


CHAPTER TWO 

(The greatness of Sioalingas) 


SUta said :— 

1. Kali on the banks of the Gahga is very famous 
as the bestower of liberation. It is full of phallic images. 
It is the abode of Siva. 

2. The important phallic image there, is Avimuktaka- 
Krttivaselvara is in the forms of an aged man and a boy. 

3. Tilabhan^elvara is in Dalalvamedha. Sahgamela 
is at the place where the Gahga meets the sea. 

4. What is called as Bhutelvara is the bestower of all 
to the devotees. What is famous as Narilvara stands near the 
Kauliki river.i^® 

5. Vatukelvara is on the bank of the Gan^aki river.'®® 
Purelvara stands on the bank of the Phalgu river'®' and is the 
bestower of happiness. 

6. Siddhanathelvara is the bestower of Siddhi at the 
very sight. What is famous as Durelvara is in the northern 
Patan. 

7. Srhgelvara as also Vaidyanatha are famous. What 
is famous as Japyelvara stands at the battle-ground of 
Dadhici. 

8-10. Gopelvara, Rahgelvara, Vamcivara, Nagela, 
Kamesa, Vimalelvara, Vyaselvara, Sukela, Bhandelvara, 
Huihkarela, Surocana-Bhutelvara and Sahgamela are the des¬ 
troyers of great sins. 

11. Kumarelvara is on the banks of the Taptaka'®® 
river, Siddhelvara and Senela are famous. 


119. It is the modern Kosi that issues from the Himalayas, flows 
through Nepal and Tirhut and joins the Ganges below Patna; dui 
originally the river passed through North Bengal and fell into the Brahma 
putra. See .Sircar, GAMl P. 42. 

120. Gan^aki (mod. Gan^aka) is the famous tributary of the 
\ Ganges and joins the river near Sonepur in' the Muzaffar District, Benar. 

Ibid pp. 39i 42- 

121. This sacred river flows through the Magadha country. 

122. Taptaka (Tapi or Tapatl) issues from the Vindhya mountain, 
flows through the Vindhya region and falls into the Arabian sea. 



1264 Siaapurina 

12. RameSvara, Kumbhe^a, Nandi^vara, Pufijefa and 
Putnaka in the city of Purna,i®* (are all great shrines). 

13. Brahme^vara was formerly installed at the holy 
centre of Da^a^vamedha at Prayaga by Brahma. It is the 
bestower of the fourfold aims of life. 

14. Some^vara wards off all adversities. Bharadvaje- 
^vara increases Brahmacarya. 

15. Sulatahke^vara is the bestower of desires. Madha- 
ve^a, there itself, protects devotees. 

16. O noble sages, what is called NageiSa is installed 
in the city of Saketa.^®^ The Shrine is particularly the 
bestower of happiness to those born of the solar race. 

17. BhuvaneiSa in the city of Purusottama'** is the bes¬ 
tower of good Siddhis. Loke^a and Mahalihga bestow all 
bliss. 

18. Kime^vara is also Siva’s phallic image. GaAge^a 
causes great purity. With a desire for the welfare of the 
people the shrines SakreSvara and Sukrasiddha exist. 

19. Vate^vara is famous as the bestower of the fruits 
of all desires. Kapale^a is on the shore of the ocean. Vak-* 
treia. is the destroyer of all sins. 

20. Dhautapape^vara himself is partially the supreme 
lord. Bhimelvara, Suryelvara are great shrines. 

21. Nande^vara is the bestower of knowledge and as 
such is worshipped by the world. Nake^vara is highly meri¬ 
torious. So also is Rameivara. 

22. Ka^takelvara is named Vimale4vara as well. So 
also is Dhartuke^a at the confluence of the Pur^a and the 
ocean. 

23. GaridreSvara should be known as the bestower of 
the lustre of the moon as fruit. Siddhelvara is the bestower 
of all desires. 

24. Bilve^vara is famous and so also is Andhake^a 
where the Daitya Andhaka was formerly killed by Siva. 

25. Siva assumed his form partially and became famous 

lafi. Puri^ft, a tributary of the Tapti river joins the latter in Eastern 
Khan^esa near Burhanpur. 

124. It is identical with Ayodhy 5 or a suburban town situated near it. 

125. Purufoitamapurl is identical with BhuvaneSvara (in Orissa) or 
with a town in that region. 



Ko^rudrasoihhiti 


1265 


as Sara^e^vara. He is the bestower of happiness to all the 
worlds always. 

26. Kardame^a is the greatest. Kotina is on the mount¬ 
ain Arbuda. AcaleSa is famous as the bestower of happiness 
to all the people always. 

27. NageiSvara is stationed on the banks of the 
Kauliki for ever. What is named Ananteivara is the 
receptacle of all welfare and auspiciousness. 

28. Yogesvara, Vaidyanathei^vara, KofiSvara and 
Sapte^vara are also famous. 

29. Bhadreivara is very famous. Bhadra is Siva himself. 
So also are Candi^vara and Sahgamesvara. 

30. Thus the phallic forms of Siva installed in the 
eastern quarter of ordinary and extraordinary efficacy have 
been narrated to you. 

31. O great sage, I shall now narrate to you the 
phallic images of Siva installed in the South. 


chapter three 

{Th$ penanci of AmsUyd and Atri) 


Ssta said ;— 

1. The Lihga Mattagajendraka in Brahmapuri^** at 
Gitrakuta had been installed formerly by Brahma. It 
bestows all desires lavishly. 

2. To the east of it is the phallic image KotHa 
bestowing all boons. It is installed to the west of God&vari 
and is famous as Pa^upati. 

3-4. The lord himself appeared in the southern quarter 
in the name of Atri4vara for helping the people and for the 
happiness of Anasdyl. He enlivened people at the time of 
draught. He is himself Siva partially. 

126. Brahmapurl on (he Citraku|a hill as mentiored here remains 
unidentified. 



SivapurS^it 


1266 

The sages said :— 

5. O Suta, O fortunate Suta, how was the excessively 
divine l^iva born as Atri4vara ? O one of excellent rites, 
please narrate it. 

SSta said :— 

6. O great sages, you have put the question well. I 
shall narrate the story on hearing which constantly one is 
relieved of sins. 

7-8. There is a great forest Kamada'*’ in the south near 
Gitrakuta. It is benehcient to the good in the performance 
of penance. There the son of Brahma, the sage Atri, 
performed a severe penance accompanied by Anasuya. 

9. O sage, formerly once, there was a great draught 
there, extending to a hundred years which put all living 
beings to distress. 

10. O great sages, the trees became dry then without 
sprouts or fruits. No water was seen anywhere even for 
daily routine work. 

11. There was no greenery anywhere. The winds 
blew dry and rough. There was a painful hue and cry all 
over the earth. 

12. On seeing the dissolution of all living beings, the 
chaste lady, the beloved wife of Atri said to her husband. 
‘‘I cannot bear this distress.** 

13. The sage then sat in the yogic pose, repeated the 
Pranayama three times and sank into the yogic trance. 

14. Atri, the great sage of perfect knowledge, meditated 
on Siva devoid of aberrations, the great splendour stationed 
in the soul, through his own soul. 

15. When the preceptor ank into meditation his 
disciples unable to get food deserted the sage, their 
preceptor, and went away. 

16. Anasuya the chaste lady then was left all alone. 

17-18. She joyously set'ved the sage constantly. Making 

a beautiful clay image through mantras in accordance with 
the rules, she worshipped Siva through mental modes of 

1U7. '1 hr funst Knmada in the south, near the CitrakQta hill, re¬ 
mains uniilrntiiird. 



KoiiruirasaihhitA 1267 

service. After serving Siva repeatedly she eulogised him with 
devotion. 

19-21. Anasuya the well behaved wife of the sage 
circumambulated her lord and Siva. After prostration she 
went round anticlockwise too. On seeing that beautiful 
lady the Daityas and Danavas were excessively agitated by 
her brilliance. They kept themselves away as people do 
from a blazing fire. 

22. O leading brahmins, Anasuya’s service to Siva 
performed sacredly through mind, speech and body surpassed 
even the penance of Atri. 

23. As long as the sage was engrossed in Pranayama, 
the gentle lady continued her service. 

24. O excellent sage, the couple thus engaged in their 
activities remained there, alone. 

25. Thus a long time elapsed. The excellent sage, 
sunk in great meditation did not wake up at all. 

26. Anasuya the chaste lady worshipped only her lord 
and Siva. That chaste lady did not care to know anything 
else. 

27-28. On account of his penance and her worship 
the gods and the sages, Gahga and the rivers came there in 
order to see them with pleasure. 

29-30. On seeing his penance and her service they were 
surprised. On seeing their wonderful activity they asked one 
another. “Which of the two—the penance or the service, is 
the greater?” They themselves replied—“Arti’s penance is 
good but Anasuya’s service is better”. 

31. On seeing their performance some said “Her ser¬ 
vice is better.” Others said “Difficult penances had been 
performed by sages of yore but nothing like Dadhici’s penance 
was ever performed by any”. 

32-33. The sage is blessed. Anasuya is blessed, since 
great penance is pursued by these with great pleasure. If 
there be a person performing such an auspicious, difficult and 
excellent penance anywhere in the three worlds, we do not 
know. 

34. After praising them thus, they went away but only 
Gahga and Siva were left. 



Swapmu9^ 


1266 

Gangd said :— 

35. **Delighted in worshipping us the chaste lady 
is too much engrossed in virtuous rites. I shall* help her 
and then go.” 

36. O great sages, $iva too, drawn by the meditation 
of Atri, stationed himself there in full digits. He did not go 
to Kailasa. 

37. O excellent sages, fifty-four years had elapsed. 
There was no rain at all. 

38-39. As long as the sage was in meditation and 
penance, Anasuya decided not to eat anything. Now listen to 
what happened when tho- sage was performing penance and 
Anasuya continued her service. 


CHAPTER FOUR 

{The greatness of AtriSvara) 


SUta iaid:-^ 

1. Once that great sage Atri, the foremost among the 
knowers of Brahman woke up and spoke to his wife “Give 
me water.” 

2-3. Of course the chaste lady took the water pot and 
went into the forest. (But she began to muse) “Whence can 
I fetch water? What ^all I do? Where shall I go? How 
can water be fetched?” Wondering thus she saw Ganga. 

4. By the time she went over to her, Ganga, the most 
excellent river, assumed a beautiful form and spoke to her. 
Gahgd said:—^ 

5. O gentle lady, I am delighted with you. Where 
are you going? Tell me now. O fortunate lady, you are 
blessed. I shall truly carry out your behest. 

SfUa said :— 

6. On hearing her words the saintly woman, the wile 
of the sage, was greatly surprised O brahmins. She replied 
with great pleasure. 



KofirudrasaMitd 


1269 


AnasSj^ said :— 

7. O beautiful lady with eyes like lotus-petals, whence 
have you come? Please tell me the truth. A chaste lady 
speaks good words. 

Suta sedd: — 

8. O great sages, when the wife of the sage spoke 
thus, the divine formed Gahga, the foremost of the rivers, said. 

Gangd said :— 

9. O chaste lady, on seeing the service rendered by 
you unto your lord and to iSiva the great soul and on taking 
view of your holy rites, I am staying near you. 

10. O lady of pure smiles, I am Gahga come here 
attracted by your worship. Choose whatever you wish. 

Suta said :— 

11'. On hearing what Gahga said, the chaste lady bowed 
to her and said—“If you are pleased madam, give me water 
now.” 

12. On hearing her words Gahga said—“Dig a pit.” 
She then made a pit in a trice, came and stood before her. 

13. Gahga entered the pit which became full of water 
In surprise, Anasuya took the water. 

14. Anasuya the wife of the sage spoke for the welfare 
of the people to Gahga, the excellent river of divine form. 

AnasGyd said :— 

15. If you are delighted, if you have sympathy for me 
you will please stay here till my husband comes. 

Suta said :— 

16. On hearing the words of Anasuya pleasing to the 
good, the delighted Gahga said—‘‘O sinless lady, you will 
give my water to Atri.” 

17. When Gahga said thus, Anasuya acted accordingly. 
She gave the divine water to her lord and stood before him. 

18. The sage performed the Acamana duly with great 
pleasure and drank the divine water. On drinking it he 
derived great happiness. 



19. “O this is not the water usually drunk by me.” 
After thinking thus he suddenly looked all round. 

20. On seeing the trees dry and witherecf and the 
quarters rough and arid, the excellent sage spoke to her 
“No rain has fallen?” 

21. On hearing what he said, the beloved lady replied 
in the negative. He then asked her whence she brought 
that water for him. 

22. When he said this, O great sages, Anasuya was 
much surprised. She then thought within herself. 

23. “If I tell him the truth it will be the exhibition of 
my greatness. If I do not tell him, it will be a violation of 
my rites. 

24. I shall tell him in a manner to avoid the contin¬ 
gencies. Even as she was musing thus, she was asked again 
and again. 

25. Then, thanks to the blessings of Siva, an intelligent 
idea struck her mind. 

“O lord, please hear me. I shall tell you what has 
happened.” 

Anasuya said :— 

26. “Thanks to the power of !§iva and you rmerits, Gahga 
has come here herself. This is her water, to be sure.” 

Ssta said :— 

27. On hearing this, the sage was surprised in his mind. 
Remembering Siva mentally he spoke to his beloved with 
great pleasure. 

Atri said :— 

28. O beloved, O beautiful lady, whether you speak 
truth or lie, I cannot believe it. This is something rare. 

29. O auspicious lady, how did that happen which is 
impossible even to the yogins and the gods. I am extremely 
surprised. 

30. If I see that myself I shall believe it, not otherwise. 
On hearing his words the beloved wife spoke to the hus¬ 
band :— 



KotirudraSarhhitd 


1271 


Anasuya said '.— 

31. O lord, O great sage, please come with me if you 

wish to see Gahga, the foremost among the rivers. ^ 

Suta said '.— 

32. After saying this and remembering Siva, the chaste 
lady took her husband to the place where Gahga, the fore¬ 
most among the rivers was present. 

33. There the chaste lady showed to he** husband 
Gahga of divine form stationed within the pit. 

34. Going there and seeing the beautiful pit full to the 
brim with water, the excellent sage said—“She is blessed.** 

35. “Is this the fruit of my own penance or of some¬ 
body else ?** After saying this the leading sage eulogised her 
with devotion. 

36. Then the sage took a clean bath in that excellent 
water. After performing the Acamana he eulogised her again 
and again. 

37. Anasuya too took her bath in that beautiful, clear 
water. The sage performed the routine rites. Anasuya too, 
of good rites, performed likewise. 

38. Then Gahga told her “I am returning to my 
place.*’ When this was said, the chaste lady spoke to the lead¬ 
ing river again. 

Anasuya said '.— 

39. O goddess if you are delighted, if you are kind to 
me, you will stay in this penance-grove for ever. 

40. This is the nature of the great that once they 
accept a request they will never forego it. After expressing 
her desire with joined palms, she eulogised her again and 
again. 

41. The sage said likewise—“O leading river, you 
shall stay. O goddess, be favourable to us and bless us with 
your support.** 

42. On hearing his pleasing words, the leading river 
Gaiig5 was delighted in her mind and spoke to Anasuya. 

GaAgS said '.— 

43. I shall stay back for helping the gods if you pass 



1272 


on to me a year’s merit accruing to you by worshipping 
lord l§iva. 

44. I am not so much satisfied with charitable gifts, 
or ceremonial ablutions in the holy centres or sacrifices or 
the practice of Yogic rites as I am satisfied with chastity. 

45. O chaste lady, this is the truth I speak that the 
mind is not so pleased by any other means as it is pleased 
at the sight of a chaste lady. 

46. On seeing a chaste lady, all my sins have perished. 
I have become purified and like Parvati have become chaste. 

47. If you seek for welfare, you give up that merit 
for the benefit of the world, then I shall become steady and 
stable here. 

Suta said '.— 

48. On hearing these words, the chaste Anasuya passed 
on a year’s merit to Ganga. 

« 49. It is the nature of the great that they do what is 

beneficial to others. The instance of gold-sandal and sugar¬ 
cane juice may be cited. 

50. On seeing this performance of Anasuya, a chaste 
woman, Lord Siva was delighted and appeared out of his 
earthern phallic'form. 

Siva said :— 

51. O chaste lady, on seeing this activity of yours I 
am delighted. Mention the boon you wish to choose, since 
I am very fond of you. 

52. Then the couple glanced at the wonderfully beauti¬ 
ful form of Siva. On seeing five-faced Siva they were much 
surprised. 

53. Bowing to and eulogising Siva, the benefactor of 
the worlds, the couple endowed with great devotion spoke to 
him after worshipping him. 

Ths couple said :— 

54. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, if the mother 
of the universe is also delighted, please stay in this penance- 
grove and be the bestower of happiness to the worlds. 



KottrudrasafhkitS 1273 

55> Then the river Gahga was delighted. I^iva too was 
pleased. They stayed at the hermitage of the excellent sage. 

56. Lord Siva, the destroyer of miseries was known as 
Atrl^vara. Gahga too stayed in the pit by her magical 
power. 

57. Thence onwards there is a perennial supply of 
water in that pit deep only by a hand’s length. Gahga flows 
gently there. 

58. Divine sages came there with their womenfolk and 
the sages who had formerly gone out of the various holy 
centres returned. 

59. Barleys and food-grains were plenty. People in¬ 
terested in sacrifices performed these accompanied by the sages. 

60. O great sages, delighted with these rites, clouds 
showered in plenty. There was great bliss in the world. 

61. Thus the greatness of Atri^vara has been explained 
to you. It is pleasing and conducive to worldly pleasures and 
salvation. It yields all desires and enhances devotion. 


CHAPTER FIVE 

{The death of the Brahmin lady and 
the greatness of Nandikeivara) 

Suta said :— 

1. Nilakanfha, the great god, stands in the phallic 
form on the divine mountain, Kalafijara.^*® He is the bestower 
of bliss to the devotees always 

2. His greatness is divine as glorified in l§rutis and 
Smftis. The holy centre there is of that name. By taking 
ceremonial ablution there, sins are quelled. 

3. O great ones of good rites, there is no limit to the 
phallic forms of l§iva on the bank of Reva^^ that bestow all 
sorts of happiness. 

128. The Mbh. (III. 85. associates Kaiahiara with Citrakuta. 
According to this reference KSlahjara lies in the Madhya BhSrata formerly 
known as Bundel Khai^da. Oinningham (A. G. see map at the end) 
places it to the east of Mahoba, below Citraki'Ma. 

129. Re\i identical with the Narmt da river is‘urs firm the Rk?a 
mountain and is associated with $iva. It is known by various (•thci names. 



1274 Sitoapuribi^a 

4. The river itself is in the form of Rudra that quells 

sins by mere sight. Any stone or pebble within it is in the 
form of Siva. • 

5. O great sages, still I shall enumerate and explain 
the important phallic forms that yield worldly pleasures here 
and salvation hereafter. 

6. One with the good name of ArteSvara is the dis¬ 
peller of sins. What is famous as Paramesvara and what is 

remembered as SiihheSvara (are good shrines). 

7. Sarme^a, KumareSvara, Pundarike^vara and 

Mandapeivara are all well known. 

8. TiksneSa is there which quells sins at the very sight. 
What is called Dhundhuresvara is on the banks of the 
Narmada river. It quells sins. 

9. I§ule^vara, Kumbhe^vara, Kuberesvara and 

Some^vara are very famous. 

10. Maflgale^a is blue-necked and is a great bestower 
of auspiciousness. Lord Mahakapisvara, was installed by 
Hanumat. 

11. Lord Nandika prevents the sins of a crore of 
murders. He is glorified as the bestower of the fruits of 
desire and salvation too. 

12. If pne worships Nandike^a with great devotion 
one will certainly achieve all Siddhis. 

13. O excellent sages, he who takes bath in the 
Reva or on its banks, realises all desires and gets rid of sins. 

The sages said :— 

14. O highly intelligent one, how is the greatness of 
Nandikesa there. Let it be kindly mentioned by you now. 

Suta said :— 

15. O sages, ^aunaka and others, you have well put 
the question. I shall narrate in the manner I have heard. 
Listen respectfully. 

16. Formerly the excellent sage was asked by 
Yudhi^thira. Out of affection for you, I shall tell you as he 
had mentioned then. 

17. The city named Karniki'®® of great splendour shines 


130. Not identified. 



Kofiru^osarA/nUt 1275 

on the western bank of the Reva. People of four castes 
reside there in plenty. 

18. A certain noble brahmin there, born of the family 
of Utta, entrusted his wife to the care of his two sons and 
went to Ka^i. 

19. The brahmin died there itself. On getting the 
news the two sons performed the obsequies. 

20. The wife looked after the sons, seeking their 
welfare. After bringing up the sons she divided the assets. 

21-22. She reserved some amount for her funeral expenses. 
After sometime when she was'going to die, she made pious 
gifts of various sorts. O brahmins, providentially she did 
not die. 

23. When she did not die providentially, the son 
observing her ailments said. 

The sons said :— 

24. O mother, what is amiss that you suffer so much. 
Please tell us so that we shall carry it out with pleasure. 

Suta said: — 

25. On hearing these words she said—“There is much 
that is amiss. If you do the same I shall die happily.” 

26. The elder son replied—“Please do mention. I shall 
do the same.” She then replied. 

The brahmin lady said :— 

27. O son, hear with attention. I had a great desire 
to go to Kaii. That was not to be. Now I am dying here. 

28. Dear son, my bones shall be cast off into the 
waters of the Gahga assiduously. That pious act will bless 
you, to be sure. 

suta said :— 

29. When she of good rites and on the verge of 
death, said thus, the affectionate elder son replied to her. 

The son said :— 

30. “O mother, you shall die peacefully and with 
confidence. I shall carry out youi* task first and then attend 
to mine.” 



31. After saying this, he handed water to her and 
went to his house. Remembering Siva, she died in the 
meantime. 

32. After performing her obsequies and the monthly 
Sraddha he started on his journey. 

33. The elder son who was famous as Suvada took 
her bones and started on his pilgrimage. 

34-35. He engaged a servant to accompany him. He 
consoled his wife and sons. He performed Sraddha, Dana 
and other pious rites. He then set out from his houre after 
Mahgala Smarana accompanied by the servant. 

36. He walked about twelve kilometres that day and 
when the sun set, he halted at the house of a certain 
Brahmin in the auspicious village of ViihSatigrama.^^^ 

37. He performed Sandhya and other rites duly. He 
recited the hymns of prayer to Siva of wonderful activities. 

38-39. The brahmin stayed there accompanied by the 
servant. The night had passed by two muhurtas when 
something surprising happened. O sages, listen attentively. 

I shall tell you everything. 


CHAPTER SIX 

{The Brahmin lady attains heaven) 


SUta said :— 

1. There was a fine cow tied up in the courtyard. 
The brahmin of the house who had gone out returned after 
nightfall. 

2. O great sages, on seeing the cow, tethered in the 
courtyard, not yet milked, the distressed brahmin desirous 
of milking it told his wife. 

3. In order to milk the cow he called his wife quickly 
and said *‘0 beloved, the cow is not yet milked.” Thus 
urged she brought the calf. 


131. Not identified. 



KotifudrasaHthitil 


1277 


4. O sages, the owner of the house, the brahmin, 
desirous of milk tried to tie up the calf to the peg. 

5. Dragged by the leg the calf kicked. O great one 
of good rites, the brahmin was put to pain. 

6. Infuriated by the kick of the calf, he hit the calf 
severely with the pieces of firewood. 

7. Hit by him the calf became utterly exhausted. 
Due to anger neither the cow was milked nor the calf was 
untied by the brahmin. 

8. For the pleasure of getting milked, the cow mooed 
loudly. On hearing the mooing sound of the cow, the calf 
said. 

The calf said :— 

9. *‘0 mother, why do you cry ? What is the misery 
that has befallen you ? Please tell me lovingly.** On hear¬ 
ing this, the cow said. 

10. *‘0 son, listen to me. Although I am unable to 
express my grief adequately, you have been hit by the 
wicked man. Hence I am distressed.** 

SQta said :— 

11. On hearing his mother's words, the calf taking his 
stand by the principle of previous action replied enlightening 
his mother. 

12. “What should be done ? Where should we go? 
Since the results are bound by previous actions, we experience 
joy or sorrow accordingly. 

13. Activities are pursued with pleasure and fruits are 
derived sorrowfully. There is none who gives misery and 
none who gives happiness. 

14. This is a wrong notion that another man gives os 
sorrow or pleasure. This is also an illusory concept that it 
is I who do this or that. 

15. Misery or happiness results from our own actions. 
Hence action is prominent and everything is founded on 
action. 

16. You the mother, I the child and all the Hiring 
beings are bound by action. They are not to be bewailed 
by you. 



1278 


Sivapurd^ 


Suta said :— 

17. On hearing these words of her calf full of wisdom, 
the distressed cow sorrowing for her calf, said thus. 

The cow said :— 

18. ‘*0 dear son, I know fully well that all the people 
are subservient to their actions. Still, seized by Maya I feel 
much distressed. 

19. I have cried a lot but the sorrow has not sub¬ 
sided.** On hearing these words, the calf spoke to her again. 

The calf said :— 

20. If you know thus, can anything be gained by 
crying? Hence leave off your sorrow. 

S(Ua said :— 

21. On hearing the words of her son, the distressed 
cow heaved a deep sigh and spoke to the calf. 

The cow said :— 

22. My distress will disappear only when a similar 
misery befalls the brahmin. I am telling you the truth. 

23. Tomorrow morning I shall hit him by my horns. 
No doubt, when hit he will lose his life. 

The calf said :— 

24. The fruit of previous actions we experience now. 
What is the fruit you are goiug to reap as a result of this 
brahmin-slaughter ? 

25. When merits and demerits are on a par one takes 
birth in Bharata. O mother, when they are wiped off by 
enjoyment or suffering, liberation is achieved. 

26. Some time the action is destroyed, some time the 
action results. That is why you have begun to perform this 
misdeed. 

27. Whence am I your son ? Whence are you my 
mother? This fond consciousness of sonhood and mother¬ 
hood is futile. Ponder. 

28. Where is mother? Where is father? Where is 



KofirudrasaThhitd 


1279 


husband? Where is wife? Know that none belongs to any 
one here. All reap the fruits of their own actions. 

29. O mother, knowing thus you cast off your misery 
strenuously. If there is a desire for pleasure hereafter you shall 
do good deeds here. 

The Cow said :— 

30. O son, I know this but delusion does not forsake 
me. I am much distressed by your misery. I shall return 
tit for tat. 

31. I know the place that dispels the sin of brahmin- 
slaughter. Going there I can get rid of the sin of Brahmin- 
slaughter. 

Sdta said :— 

32. O excellent brahmins, on hearing these words of 
the mother cow, the calf observed silence. It did not say 
anything more. 

33. O great sages, on hearing this wonderful dialogue 
between the two, the pilgrim brahmin was surprised and he 
thought within himself. 

34. “I shall leave in the morning only after seeing the 
wonderful sequel. I shall go to that holy spot myself.” 

35. O brahmins, after thinking thus the pilgrim- 
brahmin, devoted to his mother, became surprised. He and 
his servant went to sleep. 

36. When the day dawned, the owner of the house got 
up. Awakening the traveller he spoke these words. 

The brahmin said :— 

37. “Why do you sleep? It is already day-break. Go 
on your journey to the place where you desire to go.” 

38. He replied—“Please listen, O brahmin, there is an 
acute pain in the stomach of my servant. We will stay a little 
longer and go thereafter.” 

SUta said :— 

39. Creating such a pretext the man continued to sleep, 
desiring to know the details of the wonderful incident that 
had surprised him much. 



1280 


\a 


40. At the time of milking, the brahmin who wanted 
to go somewhere on some business spoke to his son. 

The father said :— 

41. O son, I am going out on some business. Dear, 
you shall carefully milk our cow. 

S&ia said :— 

42. After saying this, the brahmin left the house. 
Thereafter the son got up and untied the calf. 

43-44. The cow approached him herself for being 
milked. The brahmin's son, eager for milk, took the dis¬ 
tressed calf hit by his father near the cow in order to tie it 
up. The infuriated cow hit him with her horn. 

45-46. The boy, hit in a vulnerable pointy fell uncon¬ 
scious. People gathered there, saying—>“0, the boy is struck 
by the cow. Fetch water? fetch water?” By the time they 
attempted to do something, the boy died. 

47. When the boy died, there was a great hue and 
cry. His mother was struck with grief. She cried again 
and again. 

48. *‘What shall I do ? Where shall I go ? Who can 
remove my grief ?** After lamenting thus she struck the cow 
and let it off. 

49. The cow which had been white in colour turned 
black immediately. People cried to one another **0 see 
O sec.” 

50. On seeing this surprising event the brahmin travel¬ 
ler set out and followed the cow as it ran away. 

51-52. Lifting up its tail, the cow ran off to the river 
Narmada. Coming near the Nandike^a shrine, it dipped 
itself into the waters of the Narmada thrice. It r^ained its 
white colour and went away the way it came. The brahmin 
was surprised. 

53. Ah, blessed indeed is this holy centre that removes 
the sin of Brahmin-slaughter. The brs^min and the servant 
took their baths there. 

54. After the holy dip they started on their journey 
praising the river. On the way they met a beautiful maiden 
fully bedecked in ornaments^ 



Ko^rudrasarkltttd, 1281 
She said '.— 

^55. “O brahmiii'traveller where do you go in such 
bewilderment ? Eschewing all deceit tell me the truth here. 

56. On hearing these words, the brahmin narrated 
everything truthfully. The brahmin was again addressed by 
the women, ‘‘Stay here’*. 

57. On hearing her words, the brahmin stopped and 
replied humbly—“Speak out what you desire to say. 

58. She said again “In the holy spot that you have just 
seen, cast oif the bones of your mother. Why shall you go 
elsewhere ? 

59. O excellent traveller, your mother will assume a 
divine form and will immediately attain the good goal of 
Siva. 

60. O excellent brahmin, in the month of Vai^akha 
on the auspicious seventh day in the bright half, Gahga 
comes here always. 

61. Today is that seventh day. The river is in the 
form of Ganga there.” Saying so the lady vanished. O 
excellent sages, she was Gahga herself. 

62. The brahmin returned. As soon as he cast off 
half the bones of his mother from his bundle into the holy 
river, a wanderful incident happened. 

63-64. He saw his mother endowed with a divine 
form. She said—“You are blessed. You have fulfilled your 
duty. The family has been sanctified by you. May your 
wealth, food-grains, longevity and line flourish.” Blessing 
her son frequently, she went to heaven. 

65. After enjoying excellent happiness there for a long 
time, she attained the excellent goal, thanks to the grace 
of iSiva. 

66. Her son, tne brahmin, cast off the remaining 
bones too. He was much delighted in his mind. With con¬ 
tented soul he returned to his abode. 



1282 




CHAPTER SEVEN 

greatness of Nandikeivara) 


The sages said :— 

1. O holy lord, Suta, narrate in detail how Gahga 
came to Narmada on the seventh day in Vai^akha. 

2. How did the lord come to be known by the name 
Nandike^a ? O intelligent one, narrate that too with pleasure. 

S&ta said :— 

3. O excellent sages, you have put a very good question 
concerning Nandike^a. 1 shall narrate it as it enhances 
merit. 

4. A brahmin lady Rsika, the daughter of a certain 
brahmin, was duly married to a certain brahmin youth. 

5. O leading brahmins, although she observed holy 
rites, the brahmin lady became a widow at an early age as 
a result of previous actions. 

6. Then the brahmin widow, observing the rite of 
celibacy performed a severe penance by worshipping Siva’s 
earthen phallic image. 

7. In the meantime, a wicked and very powerful Asura 
named Mu^ha came there. He, the wielder of great Maya, 
was struck by the arrows of the cupid. 

8. On seeing that charming beautiful lady performing 
penance, he offered her many temptations and requested 
for sexual pleasure with her. 

9. O great sages, the lady obeserving holy rites and 
engrossed in 8iva’s meditation did not cast a loving glance 
at him, 

10. She did not honour him. Engaged in penance she 
remained meditating upon Siva and strictly continued her 
penance. 

11. That leading Daitya, Mu^ha, when slighted by 
that lady, became angry and showed his hideous form. 

12. The wicked-minded demon spoke harsh words ter¬ 
rifying her. He threatened the brahmin lady in many ways. 

13. Then the frightened brahmin lady, lovingly resort¬ 
ing to l^iva, repeated the name 8iva many times. 



iCotirudrataihhitd 


1283 


14. The agitated lady repeated the names of 8iva, 
sought refuge in him for the protection of her sacred virtue. 

15. To protect one who sought refuge in him and to 
uphold good conduct, Siva manifested himself, as well as to 
delight her. 

16. Siva, favourably disposed towards his devotees, 
immediately reduced to ashes that lusty leading demon named 
Mu^ha. 

17. Looking at her with a compassionate look, lord 
Siva efficient in and mindful of protecting the devotees told 
her, “Mention the boon you wish to have**. 

18. On hearing the words of lord Siva that chaste 
lady the wife of the brahmin, saw the auspicious and delight¬ 
ful form of Siva. 

19. Then bowing to Siva the beautiful supreme lord, 
the chaste lady of pure mind eulogised him with palms joined 
together and shoulders drooping down. 

ftfika said :— 

20. O great God, lord of the gods, favourably disposed 
towards those who seek refuge, you are the kinsman of the 
distressed. You are lord Siva, protecting your devotees always. 

21. My virtue has been saved by you from the Asura 
Mudha. By killing that wicked person the whole universe 
has been saved by you. 

22. O lord, grant me the greatest devotion to your feet 
which will never decay. This alone is the boon I ask of you. 
Nothing more than this. 

23. O great lord, please listen to another request of 
mine. Please stay here permanently for the benefit of the 
|>eople. 

Seta said :— 

24. After eulogising lord Siva thus, ^flka of auspicious 
rites remained silent. Then the merciful lord Siva spoke. 

Lord JSioa said :— 

25. O ^fikk, you are well-behaved. You are a special 
devotee of mine. Whatever boons you have asked for have 
been granted to you. 



1284 


26. In the meantime, coming to know of the manifesta¬ 
tion of 8iva, Vi$9u, Brahma and other gods came there with 
great delight. 

27. O brahmins, bowing down with great pleasure to 
Siva they all worshipped him. Joining their palms and bend¬ 
ing down they eulogised him attentively. 

28. In the meantime, Gahga the celestial river, with 
delighted mind, praised her rites and spoke to that chaste 
lady l^^ka. 

Ga^gd said :— 

29. For my sake you should make a verbal promise 
You should stay with me for a day in the month of VaiiSakha. 

Suta said :— 

30. On hearing the words of Gahga, the chaste 
lady of good rices consented with pleasure for the benefit of 
the world. 

31. For her bliss, the delighted Siva, vanished into 
that earthen phallic image along with her. 

32. Praising Siva and the brahmin lady, the delighted 
Brahma, Vi^nu and other gods and the celestial river Gahga 
returned to their abodes. 

33. From that day onwards this became a holy and 
excellent centre. Siva became famous as Nandikeia, the 
destroyer of all sins. 

34. O brahmin, in order to wipe off her sins which 
she takes from others, Gahga comes here on that day every 
year out of her own good will. 

35. The man who takes bath there and worships 
NandikeiSa with devotion becomes freed from all sins such as 
the slaughter of a Brahmin etc. 



Kotirudrasarhhitd 


im 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

( The greatness of Mahdbala) 


SUta said :— 

1. O brahmins, listen with devotion to the phallic 
forms of 3iva that exist in the western quarter on this earth. 

2. In the city of Kapila^s* are the two divine phallic 
images of l^iva named Kala and Ramesvara. By their very 
sight they dispel sins. 

3. Mahasiddhelvara is on the shore of the western 
ocean and is famous as the bestower of virtue, wealth, love 
and salvation. 

4. Gokarna'*® the excellent shrine, situated on the 
shore of the western ocean, destroys the sin of brahmin’s 
slaughter and other sins and yields the fruits of ail desires. 

5. At Gokarna there are crores and crores of l§iva*s 
phallic images. At every step there are innumerable holy 
centres. 

6. Of what avail is much talk. Everything in Gokarna 
is iSiva’s visible phallic image. All the waters there are 
holy Tirthas. 

7. O dear, the greatness of l^iva’s holy images and the 
Tirthas at Gokarna is explained and described in the Puranas 
by great sages. 

8. In the Kyta Yuga it is white ; in the Treta it is 
deep-red ; in the Dvapara it is yellow and in the Kali age 
it is dark in colour. 

9. Mahabala, though it has pervaded the regions as 
far below as the seven nether worlds, will become soft when 
the terrible age of Kali arrives. 

10. Persons committing great sins have attained 
diva’s region after worshipping Mahabala, the phallic image 
of iSiva at Gokarna. 

132. The present text locates the town Kapilfi, famous for the shrines 
of KAleivara and R&meivara, in the west of Bharata. 

133. The Gokart^a K$etra referred to here is located in the Western 
Ghat. There is a town of this name in the Kanara District with a phallic 
image of lord Siva there. This Gokaroa should be not confused with the 
town of the name situated in Nepal on the BSgamatl river. 



1286 


11. O sages, those who worship the lord with devotion 

after going to Gokarna on a holy day with sacred constellation 
will undoubtedly become Rudras themselves. * 

12. A devotee worshipping Siva’s image at any time 
in Gokarna attains the region of Brahma. 

13. With a desire for the welfare of Brahma, Visnu 
and other gods, the lord is always present there in the name 
of Mahabala. 

14. That phallic image secured by the Rak^asa 
Ravana as a result of severe penance was installed by 
Gananayaka at Gokarna. 

15-16. The following deities resort to its eastern gate 
out of devotion for it—Visnu, Brahma, Mahendra, ViSve- 
devas, Marudganas, Adityas, Vasus, Dasras, the moon with 
the stars and the gods with their attendants. They go 
there in their aerial chariots. 

17. Yama, the god of death himself, Gitragupta, the 
firegod, the manes and the Rudras resort to the southern 
gate. 

18. Varuna, the lord of all rivers, along with the rivers 
Gahga etc. resort to the western gate and serve Mahabala. 

19. Similarly the wind god, Kubera, Bhadrakalika, 
the goddess of the gods and Candika and other Mothers 
resort to the northern gate. 

20-22. All the gods, the Gandharvas, the Pitys, Siddhas, 
Garanas, Vidyadharas, Kirhpurusas, Kinnaras, Guhyakas, 
Khagas, different types of Pisacas, Vetalas, the powerful 
Daiteyas, 8esa and other serpents, the Siddhas and the 
sages, eulogise and bow to lord Mahabala. They get their 
cherished desires and sport about happily. 

23. Good penance has been performed by many after 
worshipping the lord. Great achievements pleasing here and 
hereafter have been secured by them. 

24. O brahmins, the Mahabala image of Siva at 
Gokarna worshipped and eulogised is the doorway to 
salvation. 

25. The worship of Mahabala on the fourteenth day 
in the dark half of the month of Magha yields salvation 
particularly even to the sinners. 



Kotirudrasarhhitd 


1287 


26. On this festive day of Siva, people of all the four 
castes come here from all countries, desirous of witnessing 
the great festivals. 

27. Women, old men, children and people of the 
four stages of life come there, see the lord of gods and obtain 

contentment. 

28. It is by the power of Mahabala that a Gancj^ali 
attained Sivaloka after worshipping that image of Siva. 


CHAPTER NINE 

(The attainment of good goal by the outcaste woman ) 

The sages said : 

1. O Siita, O fortunate Suta, you are blessed, you are 
the most excellent among the devotees of Siva. O holy lord, 
please narrate the story of the outcaste woman you just 
referred to. 

Suta said :— 

2. O brahmins, listen with great devotion to that 
wonderful story illustrative of Siva’s power. It enhances the 
devotional feelings of the listeners. 

3. The outcaste woman was a brahmin girl in her 
previous birth. She was named Sauminl. She was endowed 
with all characteristic signs. Her fape was bright like the 
moon. 

4. O brahmins, that youthful maiden Sauminl was 
married to a certain brahmin boy duly by her father. 

5. After getting a husband, O great brahmins, she in 
her fresh blooming youth indulged in sexual dalliance with 
him and maintained her auspicious rites. 

6. O brahmins, then her youthful husband, the brah¬ 
min boy became distressed with a great ailment. Due to 
the misfortune of Saumini he died. 

7. When the husband passed away, the woman was 
much distressed, dejected and despondent. For some time 



she maintained her pure conduct. She remained in the house, 
a well-behaved lady. 

8. Thereafter, though a widow, her heart il>ecame 
defiled by lustful feelings because she was still in her prime 
of youth. She then transgressed the limits of decency. 

9. Coming to know of her misdeeds defiling the 
family her kinsmen gathered together, caught hold of her 
hair, took her far off and abandoned her. 

10. A leading Sudra saw her roaming about in the 

forest, took her to his house and made her his wife. 

# 

11. She then became very fond of sexual intercourse, 
began to take in meat and indulged in drinking wine. She 
bore that Sudra a daughter too. 

12. Once while the husband had gone somewhere, 
Saumini the erring woman drank wine and badly wanted 
meat. 

13. In her cattleshed outside, goats and sheep had been 
tethered along with cows. It was dusk when nothing could be 
visible due to darkness. She then took a sword and went 
out. 

14. Inebriated that she was, the foul woman fond of 
flesh diet killed a calf taking it to be a goat without much 
consideration. 

15. After taking it within she realised that it was a 
calf. The terrified woman blurted out “Siva, Siva”, thanks 
to some previous merit. 

16. She meditated on Siva for a short while. But the 
desire for meat overwhelmed her. She minced the meat of 
the calf and ate it up with great relish. 

17. O brahmins, when a long time elapsed thus, 
Saumini died and went to Yama*s abode. 

18. Yama went through her antecedents and taking 
into consideration her merits and demerits he sent her back 
from hell to be born in an outcaste family. 

19. Fallen from Yama’s city she was born as a con¬ 
genitally blind girl out of the womb of a Gantjala woman. 
Her complexion was as dark as the dying embers. 

20. She was born blind. Even during her infancy her 
father and mother died. She was not married to anyone. 



Kofintdrasartihitd 


1289 


She became infected with leprosy and was utterly defiled. 

21. Emaciated and distressed with hunger, blind and 
moving about with a staff in her hand, she somehow subdued 
her gastric fire by the leavings of food of the Caridalas 
nearby. 

22. With great difficulty and sufferings she passed a 
major portion of her life. When old age affected her limbs 
she was subjected to unending grief and distress. 

23. Once she came to know of travellers going to 
visit Mahabala and Gokarna on the Siva festival day. 

24. Then prompted by a desire for clothes and meals 
she walked slowly to beg of the general public. 

25. She moved about here and there begging of the 
people imploring them with piteous words and outstretched 
hands after arriving at that place. 

26. In the outstretched hands of the suppliant 
woman, a meritorious traveller hurled a bunch of Bilva 
leaves. 

27. When that bunch fell into her hands she felt it 
again and again and realising that it was not edible she 
cast it off dejectedly. 

28. That bunch of Bilva leaves cast off from her 
hands during the night, fortunately fell on the top of a 
Siva’s phallic image. 

29. Thus on the Siva Gaturda^i night though she 
begged of the travellers again and again she did not get any* 
thing through the intercession of fate. 

30. Thus, unwittingly she observed the rites of 
Sivacaturda^i and kept awake during the night and obtained 
great bliss. 

31. Then in the next morning, overcome with great 
grief the dejected woman returned to her native place alone 
slowly. 

32. Exhausted by long starvation^ and faltering and 
staggering at every step she somehow covered the long dis¬ 
tance but fell down unconscious. 

33. Seated in an aerial chariot brought immediately by 
Siva’s GaQas, thanks to Siva’s mercy, she went to Siva’s 
region. 



1290 JSivapurS^a 

34. O brahmins, since at the outset the unchaste woman 
had cried out Siva’s name unwittingly, she acquired a great 
merit whereby she reached the divine abode of Mahabala. 

35. At Gokarna on Siva’s Tithi during the night she 
had keept awake and observed fast. She had performed the 
worship of Siva’s image with Bilva bunch. 

36. That was the fruit of a meritorious action per¬ 
formed unconsciously. She was liberated thanks to the grace 
of Mahabala. 

37. Thus is the great image of Mahabala, destructive 
of sins and the bestower of the highest bliss instantaneously. 

38. O brahmins thus the greatness of the excellent 
Siva image Mahabala has been mentioned to you by me. 

39. I shall now mention another wonderful glory of 
the same. By merely listening to it, the devotion for Siva 
is generated. 


CHAPTER TEN 

( The greatness and glory of Mahabala) 


SUta said :— 

1. There was a highly virtuous king Mitrasaha in the 
glorious family of Ikfvaku. He was the greatest of skilled 
archers. 

2. The virtuous and auspicious-natured lady Madayanti 
was his beloved wife, like DamayantI of Nala. She was 
known as a chaste lady. 

3. Fond of hunting, once that king Mitrasaha went 
to a thick forest accompanied by a huge army. 

4. Sporting about there, the king killed a wicked 
demon Kamatha who used to harass good men. 

5. The demon’s younger brother, a deceitful sinner 
thought “I shall conquer him by deceitful means” and with 
this evil intention approached the king. 

6- On seeing him humble in behaviour in seeking 



Kotirudaroscafthiti ^ 291 

service under him, the king made him the chief cook with¬ 
out knowing his real nature. 

7. After indulging in hunting sports for sometime in 
the forest, the king abandoned the game and joyously 
returned to his capital. 

8. On the Sraddha day of his father the king 
invited his preceptor Vasistha to his palace and fed him 
devoutly. 

9. On seeing the vegetarian and non-vegetarian dish 
in which the demon in the guise of a cook had mixed 
human flesh, the preceptor said. 

The preceptor said :— 

10. O wicked king, fie upon you. Human flesh has been 
deceitfully offered to me by you. Hence you will become a 
demon. 

11. On realising that it had been perpetrated by the 
demon, the preceptor pondered over and prescribed a time¬ 
limit of twelve years for the curse. 

12. Thinking that the curse was unjustified, the 
infuriated king was about to return the curse with a hand¬ 
ful of water. 

13. Then the chaste and virtuous queen Madayanti 
fell at his feet and entreated him to spare the curse. 

14. Out of deference for her entreaties the king 
desisted from cursing, but dropped the handful of water on 
his own feet which became deformed. 

15. O great sages, from that day onwards the king 
became famous in the world as Kalma^ahghri by the virtue 
of that water. 

16. By the curse of his preceptor the leading sage, 
the king Mitrasaha became a terrible violent Raksasa, 
roaming in the forest. 

17. Transformed as Rak§asa and resembling Yama, the 
destroyer of the world, he roamed about in the forest 
devouring various living beings, men and others. 

18. Once, somewhere in the forest, the king who 
was as hideous as the god of death saw a newly married 
couple—a young sage and his young wife indulging in sexual 
dalliance. 



19. The demon habituated to eat human flesh in his 
distressed state due to the curse caught hold of the young 
sage in order to eat him like a tiger seizing a fawnt 

20. The young woman, on seeing her husband 
seized by the demon, was much frightened and implored 
him with piteous cries. 

21. In spite of repeated importunities the man-eating 
ruthless wicked demon cut off the head of the brahmin sage 
and devoured it. 

22. The distressed, grief-stricken chaste lady lamented 
much. She gathered the bones of her husband and lighted 
a funeral pyre. 

23. The brahmin lady desirous of entering the pyre 
in order to follow her husband cursed the Rak^asa king. 

24. The chaste lady entered fire after proclaiming 
**From now onwards if you become united with any 
woman in sexual embrace you will die.” 

25. After undergoing the results of his preceptor’s 
curse to which there was a time-limit, the king regained his 
original form and joyously returned to his palace. 

26. MadayantI who knew of the curse of the chaste 
brahmin lady prevented her husband who evinced a desire 
for sexual embrace. She was much frightened of widow¬ 
hood. 

27. The issueless king became disgusted with kingly 
pleasures. Eschewing all riches he went to the forest. 

28. He saw the hideous form of Brahmahatya closely 
following him, threatening him again and again and 
tormenting him. 

29. Dejected in mind the king wanted to get rid of 
Brahmahatya. He tried japas, holy rites, sacrifices and 
various other means. 

30. O brahmins, when BrahmahatyH did not leave 
him inspite of the means like the ceremonial ablution in 
holy centres, the king went to Mithila. 

31. Distressed and worried by anxiety the king 
reached a park at the outskirts of the city. There he saw 
the sage Gautama approaching him. 

32. The king advanced towards that sage of pure 



Ko tirudra$arhhitA 


1293 


mind. He felt satiated on seeing him. He bowed to him 
again and again. 

33. When the sage enquired of his welfare, the king 
heaved a sigh of grief and distress. Viewed mercifully by 
him the king felt pleased and contented. He said thus. 

The king said :— 

34. O sage, this endless Brahmahatya harasses me. 
O dear, it is imperceptible to others but it threatens me at 
every step. 

35. A brahmin boy had been devoured by me in the 
clutches of a curse. That sin cannot be suppressed even by 
thousands of expiatory rites. 

36. O sage, I roamed here and there and tried 
various means to quell it. But it did not leave me off. 
Is it not due to my being a sinning soul ? 

37. Now it seems to me that I have attained the 
fruits of my birth because merely by your sight my heart 
is filled with bliss. 

38. O fortunate one, I, the sinner, seek refuge in your 
lotus-like feet. Grant me peace, whereby I can be happy. 

SUta said : — 

39. Implored thus by the king, the kind-hearted 
Gautama instructed him in the expiatory means for terrible 
sins. 

Gautama said :— 

40. O excellent king, well done You are blessed. 
Eschew all fear from sins. As long as Siva is the ruler, 
there can be no terror to devotees who seek refuge in 
him. 

41. O fortunate king, listen. There is another shrine 
well consecrated. There is a Siva’s temple named Gokarna. 
It destroys all great sins. 

42. Sins greater than the greatest cannot stay there. 
Siva himself is present there in the name of Mahabala. 

43. Mahabala is the emperor of all phallic images. 

It assumes four different colours in the four Yugas. It 
dispels all sins. 



1294 SioapurSna 

44. The excellent holy centre of Gokarna is on the 

shore of western ocean. There is a phallic image of l^iva, 
destructive of great sins. * 

45. Great sinners go there, take their ceremonial 

ablutions many times in the sacred waters and worship 

Mahabala. They have all attained Siva’s region. 

46. O king, you also go to Gokarna, the temple of 

Siva. After going there and worshipping Siva attain 

contentment. 

47. Take your holy dip in the sacred waters there. 

Worship Mahabala. Thus you will be rid of sins and 

attain Sivaloka. 

SUta said :— 

48. Advised thus by the noble-souled Gautama, the 
king highly delighted in the mind reached Gokarna. 

49. He took his dip in the holy ponds and wor¬ 
shipped Mahabala. His sins were wiped off without the least 
vestige. He attained the great region of Siva. 

50. He who listens to this pleasing narrative of 

Mahabala goes to Siyaloka along with the members of his 
family upto twentyone generations. 

51. Thus the extremely wonderful glory of Mahabala, 
the phallic image of Siva, has been narrated to you. It 
dispels all sins. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

(The greatness of the moon-crested Paiupatindtha) 

The sages said :— 

1. O Suta, O fortunate Suta, you are blessed with 
your mind attached to Siva. This wonderful story of 
Mahabala has been narrated to you. 

2. Please narrate the sacred glory of the sin-destroying 
phallic images that arc in the northern quarter. 



K 0 timdrasarhhi tS 


1295 


SUta said :— 

3. O brahmins, listen with respect. I shall succinctly ex¬ 
plain the particular glory of the northern phallic images of Siva. 

4. There is another shrine Gokarna destructive of 
great sins. There is an extensive holy forest there. 

5. The moon-crested Siva’s phallic image, excellent 
of all, is situated there. It was installed by Ravana with 
great devotion and it confers all accomplishments. 

6. O great sages, its situation there, is for the beneht 
of the people as that of Vaidy-»natha, the ocean of mercy. 

7. Taking the ceremonial ablution in Gokarna and 
worshipping the moon-crested Siva, the devotee attains 
Sivaloka. True. It is true undoubtedly. 

8. It is impossible to describe in detail the excessively 
wonderful glory of the moon-crested lord Siva who has a 
great affection for his devotees. 

9. Somehow the extreme grandeur of the phallic Siva 
has been explained to you. Now listen to that of the 
other phallic image. 

10. In the excellent holy centre^of the sage Mi^ra, 
the phallic image of Siva had been installed by the great sage 
Dadhici. 

11. After going there and tajking the due ceremonial 
ablution in the sacred pond, the devotee shall worship this 
image reverentially. 

12. The idol of Dadhica should be duly worshipped for 
the propitiation of Siva by those who seek the fruit of the 
pilgrimage. 

13. O excellent sages, if this is duly performed, the 
devotee will feel contented. After enjoying all pleasure here 
he will attain the supreme goal hereafter. 

14. The phallic image of Siva known as Rsisvara in¬ 
stalled by the sages in the holy centre of Naimisa'®® forest, 
yields happiness. 

15. O great sages, enjoyment of worldly pleasures and 
salvation he 'c and hereafter will fall to the lot of even sinful 
persons who visit and worship it, 

i‘^4. Noi identified. 

135. See P. 432 note. 



1296 


16. The phallic image destructive of sins, in the holy 

centre of Hatyaharana^^* should be particularly worshipped. It 
destroys even the sins of several slaughters, • 

17. Lalitesvara, the phallic image of :§iva in the holy 
centre Devaprayaga should be worshipped by men. It is 
destructive of all sins. 

18. The phallic image Pasupatisa in the Nayapala'®’ 
town famous on the earth is the bestower of the fruits of all 
desires. 

19. That phallic image is in the form of the crest. I 
shall narrate the story in the description of Kedare^vara. 

20. Close to it lies the wonderful phallic image Mukti- 
natha. Its very sight and worship bestows worldly enjoyment 
here and liberation hereafter. 

21. O great sages, the excellent phallic images in the 
four quarters have been thus described to you all. What else 
do you wish to hear. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

( The reason for Sioa^s assuming the phallic form) 

The sages said :— 

1. O Suta, you know every thing by the grace of 
Vyasa. There is nothing not known to you. Hence we ap¬ 
proach you with a query. 

2. The phallic form of Siva is worshipped throughout 
the world. You have said so. Is there any special reason for 
the same ? 

3. Parvatl, the beloved of Siva, is heard in the world 
in the form of an arrow. O Suta, what is the reason for 
this ? Please satisfy our curiosity in this respect by giving 
the account you have heard. 


I jG. Not idrntifird 

r{7 Nayapala (mod- Nepal), a buffer State between India and 
China is situated on the Himalayas. It was here that lord Siva preached the 
Pasupata-ynga'. The reirion is saered to Siva and is called Siadhilcjetra or 
Sivapifha. 



Kofirudrasat/ihiid 1297 

Suta said :— 

4. O brahmins, the story of a different Kalpa was 
heard from Vyasa by me. O excellent sages, I shall narrate 
the same. Please listen. 

5. What happened formerly among the brahmins in the 
Daruvana^®® forest may kindly be heard. I shall narrate the 
same in the manner I have heard. 

6. There is an excellent forest Daruvana. There were 
many excellent sages there, great devotees of l^iva who were 
always engrossed in meditation on Siva. 

7. O great sages, they performed the worship of Siva 
incessantly thrice a day. They eulogised Siva with different 
devotional hymns. 

8. Once the leading brahmin devotees of Siva engrossed 
in the meditation of Siva went into the forest for bringing 
sacrificial twigs. 

9. In the mezintime Siva himself assuming a very 
hideous form came there in order to test their devotion. 

10. He was very brilliant but stark naked. He had 
smeared ashes all over his body as the sole ornament. Stand¬ 
ing there and holding his penis he began to show all sorts 
of vicious tricks. 

11. It was with a mind to do something pleasing to 
the forest-dwellers that Siva, favourite of the devotees, came 
to the forest at his will. 

12. The wives of the sages were extremely frightened 
at this sight. The other women excited and surprised approa¬ 
ched the lord. 

13. Some embraced him. Others held his hands. The 
women were engrossed in struggling with one another. 

14. Meanwhile the great sages came there. On seeing 
him engaged in perverse activities they were pained and 
infuriated. 

15. The sages, deluded by Siva’s Maya and plunged 
in grief, began to say—“Who is this ? Who is this ?” 

16. When the naked sage did not reply, the great 
sages told that terrible Purusa. 


133. Sec P. io 8 j note. 



1298 SivapurS^ 

17. “You are acting pervertedly. This violates the 
Vcdic path. Hence let your penis fall on the ground.” 

Suta said :— 

18. When they said thus, the penis of that Avadhuta, 
who was Siva of wonderful form, fell down instantly, 

19. That penis burnt everything in front; wherever it 
went it began to burn everything there. 

20. It went to Patala; it went to heaven; it went all 
over the earth; it never remained steady anywhere. 

21. All the worlds and the people were distressed. 
The sages became grief-stricken. Whether gods or sages no 
one had any peace or joy. 

22. All the gods and sages who did not recognize Siva 
became sad. They assembled together and hastened to Brahma 
and sought refuge in him. 

23. O brahmins, after going there, they bowed to and 
eulogised Brahma. They narrated what had happened to 
Brahma the Creator. 

2f. Brahma heard them. He realised that they had 
been deluded by Siva’s Maya, After bowing to Siva, he 
told the excellent sages. 

Brahma said :— 

25. O brahmins, you though wise do such despicable 
things. Then why complain against the ignorant who act 
likewise ? 

26-27. Who can wish for happiness after offending and 
antagonising Siva thus? If a person does not welcome and 
serve a guest at midday, his virtue is taken away by the 
guest who in return deposits his sin in him. What then of 
Siva himself as a guest ? 

28. As long as the penis does not become stationary 
there cannot be anything good in the three worlds. I am 
telling you the truth. 

29. O sages, you must do such things as will make the 
penis of 8iva steady. Please ponder over this in your 
minds. 



Kofirudrasarhkitd 


1299 


Suta said: — 

30. Thus urged, the sages bowed to Brahma and 
said—*‘0 Brahma, what shall be done by us ? Please guide 
us in that task.” 

31. When the great sages asked him thus, Brahma, the 
grandfather of the worlds, spoke to them. 

Brahma said :— 

32. Let the gods propitiate goddess Parvati and 
pray. If she can assume the form of the vaginal passage that 
penis will become steady- 

33. O excellent sages, listen. I shall tell you the mode 
of procedure. Act accordingly with love and devotion. She 
will be thus pleased. 

34. Make an eight-petalled mystic diagram of lotus 
and place a pot over it. Water from holy centres shall 
be poured into the pot along with the sprouts of Durva and 
barley. 

35. The pot shall be invoked with Vedic mantras. 
It shall be worshipped according to the Vedic rituals after 
remembering Siva. 

36. The penis shall be drenched with that water, O 
great s^ges. When the sprinkling is made with Satarudriya 
mantras it will become stable. 

37. Parvati in the form of the Vaginal passage and an 
auspicious arrow shall form as the pedestal wherein the 
phallus shall be installed in accompaniment of the Vedic 
mantras.'*® 

38. Lord Siva shall be propitiated with the offerings 
of sweet scents, sandal paste, fragrant flowers, incense and 
other things as well as by food offerings and other forms of 
worship. 

39. With prostrations, holy hymns, musical instruments 
and songs he shall be propitiated further. Svastyayana 
mantras shall be repeated and the devotees shall proclaim 
the victory of the lord. 

40. The following prayer shall be recited—“O lord of 

139. The pedestal shaped as the vagina and the phallus fixed therein 
are symbolical of the eternal creative forces personified as SivS and 
iSiva. 



1300 Sivapuri^ 

the gods, be pleased, O delighter of the universe. You arc 
the creator, protector and the annihilator. You arc im¬ 
perishable. • 

41. You are the beginning of the universe, the origin 

of the universe within the universe. “O lord Siva, be quiet. 
Protect all the worlds.” 

42. If this is performed there will be stability, to be 
sure. There will not be any aberration in the three worlds. 
There will be happiness always. 

Srda said '.— 

43. O brahmins, thus advised, the gods bow“d to 
Brahma and then sought refuge in iSiva with a desire for the 
happiness of the worlds. 

44. When worshipped with great devotion and im¬ 

plored, lord Siva became delighted and spoke to them. 

Lord Siva said :— 

45. O gods, O sages, you listen to my words with 
reverence. If my penis is supported in a vaginal passage 
there will be happiness. 

46. Except Parvati, no other woman can hold my 
penis. Held by her my penis will immediately become quiet. 

Suta said :— 

47. O great sages, on hearing those words the delighted 
sages and the gods took Brahma with them and prayed to 
Parvatl. 

48. After propitiating Parvati and the bull-bannered 
lord and performing the rites mentioned before, the excellent 
penis became static. 

49. The gods and the sages propitiated Parvati and 
Siva by the mode of procedure laid down in the Vedas for 
the sake of virtue. 

50. Brahma, Visnu and oiher gods, sages and the 
three worlds including the mobile and immobile beings 
worshipped l§iva particularly. 

51. Siva became delighted and so also Parvati, the 
mother of the universe. That phallus was held by her in 
that form then. 

52. When the phallus was stabilised, there was wel- 



KotifudrMsarhhiid 1301 

fare throughout the worlds. O brahmins, that phallus became 
famous in the three worlds. 

53. The phallus is known as “Hate^a” as well as “SivS- 
Siva.” By worshipping it, all the people become happy in 
every respect. 

54. Here everything will flourish in plenty conferring 
supreme happiness and bliss. Hereafter it will bestow final 
liberatiovi. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

{The origin of Vafuka) 


Suta said :— 

1. O brahmins, it has been narrated to you how Siva 
came to be worshipped in the three worlds in the form 
of a phallic image. What else do you wish to hear ? 

The sages said :— 

2. O holy lord, please narrate the glory of the phallic 
image known as AndhakeSvara. Similarly it behoves you to 
mention the glory of other phallic images willingly. 

Suta said :— 

3. Formerly the Asura Andhaka resorted to the deep 
ditch of the ocean and kept the three worlds under his con¬ 
trol. He harrassed the gods. 

4. He used to come out of the ditch and harrass the 
people. Then he of great exploit re-entered the ditch. 

5. O great sages, the gods were grief-stricken. Implor¬ 
ing Siva again and again, they mentioned their miseries 
to him. 

Ssta said :— 

6. On hearing the words of the gods, the delighted 
lord Siva, the slayer of the wicked and the goal of the 
good replied. 



1302 iioapura^ 

Sim said :— 

7. I shall slay that Asura Andhaka, the murderer of 
the gods. O gods, proceed with the army. I too sh&Il come 
along with the Ga^as. 

8. When that terrible antagonist of the gods and the 
sages came out of the ditch, the gods went and occupied it. 

9. The Asuras and the gods fought a terrible battle. 
By the blessings of Siva, the gods became very strong. 

10. Attacked and tormented by the gods, the Asura 
returned to the ditch when he was pierced through with the 
trident by Siva, the supreme soul. 

11. Remaining there he meditated on Siva and prayed 
—*‘On seeing you at the hour of death, one becomes identi> 
cal with you instantaneously.*’ 

12. Thus eulogised, the delighted Siva spoke to him— 
“Mention the boon you wish to have. I shall grant it 
to you.” 

13. On hearing these words, the Asura said again after 
bowing to and eulogising Siva with pious feelings. 

Andhaka said :— 

14. O lord of gods, if you are delighted grant me the 
auspicious devotion to you. Taking unusual compassion on 
me, be stationed here. 

Silta said :— 

15. Requested thus, Siva hurled that Asura into that 
ditch. He himself stood there in the form of a phallic image 
with a desire to help the world. 

16. If a man worships AndhakeSa every day, his desires 
are fulfilled within six months. 

17-19. The brahmin who worships the beneficent phal¬ 
lic image for his livelihood for six months becomes a Devalaka, 
the worshipper of idol for subsistence. He is not authorised 
in ordinary rites of brahmins. 

The sages said :— 

Who is a Devalaka ? What is his function ? O intelligent 
one, mention that for the guidance of the people. 



Ko tirudrasartihitd 


1303 


Suta said :— 

20. There was a brahmin Dadhici who was well-versed 
in the Vedas and highly virtuous. He was engrossed in his 
devotion to Siva and was interested in Siva’s lore. 

21. His son was known as SudarSana whose wife was 
Dukula. She was born of a defiled family. 

22. The husband was always under her control. He 
had four sons. Of course he used to worship Siva every day. 

23. Then it happened that Dadhici had to go and 
live in another village along with his kinsmen. The kinsmen 
did not let him go back. 

24. While leaving home, Dadhici, the excellent devotee, 
had already instructed his son, “Be devoted to Siva.” 

25. Sudarsana’s son also worshipped Siva. O great 
sages, thus a long time elapsed. 

26-28. So, once it happened that on a Sivaratri occa¬ 
sion when all observed fast, Sudar^ana had his sexual inter¬ 
course with his wife and then performed the worship. But 
before he performed the worship he abstained from taking 
bath. For this misdeed Siva was infuriated and said. 

Lord Siva said :— 

29. O knave, you had sexual intercourse with your 
wife on the occasion of Sivaratri. Without taking bath you 
performed the worship. You are an indiscreet fellow. 

30. Because you have done this consciously, be sluggish 
and insensible. You are an untouchable person for me. Avoid 
touching me. 

Suta said :— 

31. Cursed thus by lord Siva, Sudariana, the son of 
Dadhici, attained insensibility immediately, deluded by Siva’s. 
Maya. 

32. O brahmins, meanwhile Dadhici, the excellent 
devotee of Siva, returned from the other village and heard 
the details. 

33. He too was rebuked by Siva. Hence he felt much 
distressed. He err id—“Oh I am doomed by this foul deed 
of my son.” 

34. Dadhici, honoured amongst the good, grumbled 



1304 ^ivafmrd^ 

again and again—“My excellent family is damned by the 
misbehaviour of my vicious son. 

35. That son too is doomed. He has taken af vicious 
slut to his wife.” Thus the son was rebuked by his father 
who repented, 

36. The father then worshipped Parvati with excellent 
rites, sincere devotion and perseverance for the happiness 
of his son. 

37. Sudar^ana himself performed the worship of Parvati 
with great devotion adopting the path of Gao(jll worship and 
with auspicious hymns. 

38. Thus by various means and with sincere devotion 
the father and the son propitiated the goddess Parvati who 
is favourably disposed towards her devotees. 

39. O sage, by the devotion of their service Gan^ika 
was delighted. She adopted Sudarsana as her son. 

40. For the sake of her adopted son she herself 
implored ^iva. ^iva who was angry had become quite calm. 
The son also was delighted. 

41. Then realising that lord l3iva the bull-bannered 
deity was delighted, she bowed to him herself and placed 
the son on his lap. 

42-43. Making the ablution of the son with ghee, 
Parvati handed over to her son Sudar^ana the three-stringed 
sacred thiead with a single knot and imparted instruction 
in SivagayatrP^ consisting of sixteen syllables. 

44. Then the brahmin boy performed the Sarhkal- 
papuja (worship by mental conception) sixteen times with 
the five-syllabled mantra with the word Sri prefixed to 
!^iva. 

45-46. Beginning with ceremonial ablution and ending 
with the concluding obeisance he worshipped the bull-ban¬ 
nered deity by means of devotional mantras, musical 
instruments and adorations in the presence of the sages. He 
recited various names of Siva. Then the delighted Siva and 


1^0. Accordir.g to one school of 3 iva-cult, the sixtccn-syllablrd 
formula known as Sivagiyatrl is the following : Pwt 



KotirudraseahhiUl 


1303 


Gandika said. 

47. “Wealth, foodgrain etc. whatever is offered to 
me shall be taken by you. There is no sin in this action. 

48. In the rites concerning me you will officiate as 
the chief, especially so in the rites concerning the goddess. 
Ghee, oil etc., everything offered to me shall be taken by you. 

49. When the Prajapatya rite is performed only one 
of you shall be there. Then alone is the worship complete. 
Or everything becomes fruitless. 

50. The Tilaka must be made round. Then you shall 
take bath. Sandhya prayers to l^iva shall be offered and his 
Gayatri repeated. 

51. After rendering service to me at the outset, the 
other rites shall be performed according to the family tradition. 
When everything is thus performed there shall be welfare. 
Your blemishes have been excused by me. 

Suta said :— 

52. After saying this, the supreme soul 2§iva consecrated 
his four sons as Vatukas in the four quarters. 

53. After keeping Sudarsana as her son with herself 
she granted boons to his sons and blessed them in several 
ways. 

Th» Goddess said :— 

54. Between you two whoever becomes my Vafuka 
shall be victorious. No doubt need be entertained in this 
respect. 

55. He who worships you has worshipped me too. You 
shall perform your duties always, O son. 

Suta said :— 

56. Thus boons were granted to the noble Sudarsana 
and his sons by Siva and Siva out of pity for the welfare of 
the worlds. 

57. Because they had been established by Siva and 
Siva they are known as Vatukas. Those who neglect penance 
are known s Tapodhamas. 

58. Thanks to the mercy of Siva and Siva they 



1306 


SioapurS^a 

expanded in various ways. Their worship at the outset is the 
great worship of Siva, the supreme soul. 

59. No worship shall be performed by any person as 
long as he has not performed Siva’s worship. If it is performed 
it does not turn out to be auspicious. 

60. Whether auspicious or inauspicious, the Vatuka 
is not to be eschewed. In the Prajapatya rite and at the 
feast a single Vatu is considered excellent. 

61. In the rites of Siva and Siva this difference is 
marked. O intelligent one, hear the same. O faultless one, I 
shall explain it now. 

62-63. I shall explain in the manner I have heard, the 
event that happened in the city of king Bhadra near the shrine 
of AndhakeSa during the daily rite of feasting in the 
Prajapatya rite. 

64. A certain banner was given to that king by Siva 
who was satisfied with his devotion. The king was addressed 
too by the lord mercifully. 

65-66. The banner will be raised and bound in the 
morning. It will fall down in the night. This will happen 
when the Prajapatya rite is full and complete. Otherwise this 
banner will remain steady even during the night. After saying 
this to the king, the delighted Siva, the storehouse of mercy, 
vanished. 

67. O great sage, the king adopted the procedure 
accordingly. The Prajapatya rite was performed every day in 
accordance with the rules of Siva-worship. 

68. If the rites became full and complete, the banner 
rose up itself in the morning and fell down during the 
night. 

69. On one occasion the function of the Vatu took 
place in the beginning. The banner then fell even before 
the feast. 

70. On seeing it there, the learned men were asked 
by the king. The brahmins are at their feast. Why is the 
banner not flying ? 

71. How did it fall down ? O brahmins, tell me the 
truth. Thus asked the brahmins, the excellent scholars, 
said. 

72. “O great king, while feasting the brahmins 



Kofirudrasatt^itd 


1307 


Vatuka the son of Gan(}! was fed at the outset. Siva was 
satisfied. Hence the banner fell down.” 

73. On hearing it, the king and the people were 
surprised. They praised them. 

74. Thus the greatness of the Vatukas was enhanced 
by Siva. The Va^ukas are glorified as excellent ritualists by 
those who know things of yore. 

75. At first Siva’s worship shall be performed by the 
Bafukas alone. Not otherwise. None else is entitled to the 
worship as Siva has said. 

76. .They shall conclude the worship with the remarks, 
“Let the worship be complete.” This alone is their work. 
Nothing else. 

77. O great sages, thus whatever was asked has been 
narrated to you, on hearing which a man obtains the fruit of 
Siva’s worship. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

(The origin of the Jyotirlinga Somandtha) 

The sages said :— 

1. Please narrate the greatness of the Jyotirlingas. 
Please mention their origin and everything else in the 
manner you have heard. 

SSta said :— 

2. O brahmins, please listen, I shall narrate its great¬ 
ness and origin succinctly in the manner I have heard from my 
good preceptor, to the extent of my intellect. 

3. llie first among them is glorified as Somanatha. 
O sage, at the outset, listen to its greatness with attention. 

4. O great sages, the greatness of Jyotirlingas cannot 
be adequately described even in hundreds of years. Still I 
shall tell you. 

5. O great sages, his daughters, twenty-seven in 
number, A^vini and others, were given in marriage to the 
moon by Dak^a, the great soul. 



6. On securing the moon as their lord, those daughters 
shone extraordinarily. The moon too, on securing them 
shone incessantly. 

7. The jewel shines with gold and the gold shines 
with the jewel. Now listen to what happened in due course. 

8. Out of his twenty-seven wives he did not love any 
one so much at anytime as he loved Rohinl. 

9. The others became distressed and sought refuge in 
their father. After going to him they mentioned their misery 
to him. 

10. On hearing it, Daksa too was struck with grief. 
O brahmins, approaching the moon he calmly spoke to him 
thus. 

Dak$a said :— 

11. O storehouse of digits, you are born of a noble 
family. How can you cherish oddity in your affection 
towards your dependents ? 

12. If you have done so, stop with it. This is enough. 
You shall not repeat it. Oddity in behaviour is said to be 
conducive to hell. 

S&ta said :— 

13. After requesting the moon, his son-in-law, thus, 
Daksa returned to his abode fully assured. 

14. The moon did not act according to his advice 
being deluded by Siva’s Maya which deludes the universe. 

15. Welfare befalls him who is destined to have it. 
How can one destined to court woe have a weal ? 

16. Being subjected to the force of destiny the moon 
did not accept his advice. Infatuated of Rohini he neglected 
others. 

17. On hearing it the skilful Dak^a returned to the 
moon excessively distressed. He politely asked the moon to 
mend his ways. 

Dak fa said :— 

18. O moon, listen. Although requested repeatedly 
you did not pay heed to my rntreatics. Hence, fall a prey 
to the wasting disease. 



Koiirudrasarhhitd 


1309 


SUta said :— 

19. Just as he cursed him, the moon contracted 
consumption within a trice. When he was wasted away 
there was a great hue and cry. 

20. O sage, the gods and the sages became extremely 
agitated and felt miserable—“What shall be done ? What 
will happen now ?*’ 

21. Informed and implored by the moon, Indra and 
other gods, Vasistha and other sages sought refuge in 
Brahma. 

22. O sage, after approaching him in their great 
agitation they bowed to and eulogised Brahma and mentioned 
everything to him. 

23. On hearing their words Brahma was much 
surprised. Praising the Maya of Siva within their hearing 
he said. 

Brahma said :— 

24. O what a pity ? This is distressing to the entire 
world. The moon is always wicked and defiled. Now Dak$a 
has cursed him. 

25. Many unholy deeds have been committed by the 
wicked moon. O sages, O gods, may the early misdeeds of 
the moon be heard. 

26. The wicked fellow went to Brhaspati’s house and 
abducted his w'ife Tara. He then allied himself with the 
Daityas. 

27. Having sought refuge in the Daityas he fought 
against the god though forbidden by me and Atri. Then 
the moon restored Tara to Brhaspati. 

28. Seeing her pregnant, Brhaspati refused to take 
her back. Induced by us he accepted her unwillingly. 

29-30. But he said, “If she casts off the foetus I shall 
accept her.” When they asked her whose child she bore in 
the womb, she replied that the foetus grew out of the seed 
of the moon. O excellent sages, I then removed the foetus 
and urged by me, she was accepted by him. 

31. What avails the narration of his previous count¬ 
less vicious deeds? He still continues to do similar things. 



1310 


SivapwS^ 


32. What has happened cannot be reversed. I shall 
tell you the means to be adopted now. Listen attentively. 

33. Let the moon go to the auspicious serine at 
Prabhasa along with the gods. Let him propitiate Siva 
there according to Nlftyufijaya rites. 

34. Let him perform the penance incessantly sitting 
before the lord. The delighted Siva will cure him from 
consumption afterwards. 

Suta said :— 

35. On hearing the words of Brahma, the gods and 
sages returned to the place where Daksa and the moon were 
present. 

36-37. The gods and the sages consoled Daksa and 
took the moon to Prabhasa.They invoked the sacred waters 
of Saiasvati and other rivers and performed the worship of 
the earthen phallic image in accordance with the Mrtyufljaya 
rites. 

38. The gods and the sages of pious mind left the 
moon at Prabhasa and joyously returned to their abodes. 

39. The moon performed the penance incessantly for 
six months. He worshipped the bull-bannered deity with 
the Mrtyufijaya mantra. 

40. The moon repeated the Mytyufljaya^** mantra a 
hundred million times. He meditated on the lord Mj-tyufljaya 
with his mind unruffled. 

41. Lord Siva, who is favourably disposed towards his 
devotees, was pleased by his devotion and manifesting himself 
there spoke to him thus. 

Siva said :— 

42. O moon, may there be welfare to you. Choose 
your boon, whatever you desire in your mind. I am pleased 
with you. I shall grant you an excellent boon. 

The moon said :— 

43. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, what is not 


i|i. This region sacred fo J^iv.T is placed in Kathiawar Sec P. 10R4 

note. 

142. Cp. VS. 3. 60. 



KofirudrasoThhitS 


1311 


attainable to me? Still, O lord, let not my body decay by 
consumption. 

44. Pardon my faults. Remain benevolent to me 
always. When he had said thus Siva spbke lo him again. 

^iva said: — 

45. O moon, let your digit decline day by day in 
one fortnight and increase steadily in another. 

Suta said: — 

46. O brahmins, when this happened the delighted 
gods and the sages came there quickly. 

47. After coming there they offered benedictory bless¬ 
ings to the moon. They joined their palms in reverence 
and bowed to Siva. They prayed to him devotionally. 

The gods said :— 

48. O great god, O lord of gods, obeisance be to you. 
O Siva, O lord, be stable here along with Uma. 

Siita said :— 

49. Then the moon eulogised the lord with good devo¬ 
tion first in the Nirguna and then in the Saguna form. 

50-51. Siva was delighted with the gods. For increas¬ 
ing the glory and greatness of the region and the moon, 
Siva stayed there in the name, of Somesvara. He became 
famous in the three worlds. O brahmins, by worship Siva 
becomes the destroyer of ailments such as consumption, 
leprosy etc. 

52. Blessed indeed and contented is he in whose name 
Siva the lord of the worlds, himself stayed there sanctifying 
the entire world. 

53. A pond was established there itself by all the gods. 
That was shared by Siva and Brahma together. 

54. It is famous as the moon’s pond on the earth. 
It is destructive of sins. The man who takes bath there gets 
rid of sins here. 

55. Incurable diseases like consumption arc entirely 
eradicated if a person takes ablutions there for six months. 

56. A pious man attains the fruit of circumambulating 



1312 SioafnirSna 

the CtirtJi, if lie circuniambiilalcs Prabhiisa. After death he 
is honoured in heaven by the gods. 

.')7. On seeing this Somalihga a person is reljeved of 
all sins. .After enjoying the fruits as desired, he attains 
heaven after death. 

38. He who makes pilgrimage to this place attains the 
fruits of whatever he miglil have had in view. There is no 
doubt about this. 

59-60. Thus seeing the fruit of that high order, the 
sages and the gods joyously bowed to J^iva and took the moon 
now freed from wastage. Circumambulating and praising 
that holy centre they returned to their abodes. The moon 
resumed his former activity. 

61. O great sages, thus the details of the origin of 
Soinesa have been narrated to you. Somesvara has originated 
thus. 

62. He w'ho listens to this origin or narrates it to others 
attains all desires and becomes rid of all sins. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

(The origin of the Second Mallikdrjuna Jyotirlihga) 

Suta said: — 

1. Hereafter 1 shall explain the origin of Mallikarjuna 
on hearing which the devotee becomes intelligent and rid of 
all sins. 

2. The story of Kumara has already been mentioned 
by me. I .shall e.xplain it again. It is divine and destructive 
of all sins. 

3-4, When Kumara, son of Siva and the powerful 
enemy of Taraka retunicd to Kailasa, the celestial sage 
Narada came there and lold him all the news such as the 
marri.agc of Ganesvara and corrtipiefl his mind. 



Kofi rudrasaifthitS 


1:^1 ri 


5. On hearing it, Kumfira bowed to his parents and 
went to the mountain KrauHca*'*’ though forbidden by his 
parents. 

6. Due to separation from her son, Parvati was dis¬ 
tressed. Then Siva enlightened her. 

7. O beloved, why are you distressed O Parvati, do 
not be grieved. O beautiful lady, our son will certainly 
return. Let not your excessive grief overpower you. 

8. When the distressed Parvati did not pay heed to 
his advic:e, the celestial sages were sent to Karttika by ^iva. 

9. The gods and the sages, accompanied by their at¬ 
tendants went there joyously to bring back Kumara. 

10. They went there and bowed to Kuinara, implored 
him in many ways and requested him humbly and respect¬ 
fully. 

11. Agitated by great pride Kumara did not care for 
the importunities of the gods and sages, intermingled with 
Siva’s behest. 

12. Then they returned again to J^iva. After bowing 
to him and taking leave of him they returned to their abodes. 

13. When he did not return, goddess Parvati felt 
severely the pangs of separation from her son. Siva too was 
extremely miserable. 

14. Grief-stricken and distressed following the conven¬ 
tions of the world, out of affection they went to the place 
where their son was. 

15. Coming to know of the arrival of his parents, 
from the top of the mountain Kumara went thirtysix kilo¬ 
metres further out of disregard for their love. 

16. When he went further on the Krauiica hill, ^iva 
and Parvati stayed behind assuming the fiery form. 

17. Out of filial affection they used to visit Kumara 
on the concluding day of every fortnight. 

18. Siva goes there on Amavasya day and Parvati on 
the Full Moon day. 

19. From that day onwards: that phallic image of Siva 
born of Mallikarjima became famous in the three worlds. 

141. It is a pan of Kailasn atx vUiidi tie- Manasarovara is 
situated. 



1314 $ivapwib(fa 

20. He who sees that phallic image becomes rid of all 
sins and attains all desires. There is no doubt about it. 

21. His misery disappears. He obtains supreme hap¬ 
piness. He never suffers from the distress of rebirth in the 
mother’s womb. 

22. There is no doubt that he obtains flourishing 
wealth, foodgrains, fame, health and the fruits of cherished 
desires. 

23. Thus the second Jyotirlihga Mallika has been 
narrated. It is the bestower of happiness and the welfare to 
the world. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

( The greatness of the Jyotirlihga Mahakdla) 

The sages said '.— 

1. O Suta, you know everything by Vyasa’s favour. 
We are never satiated by hearing about the Jyotirlihgas. 

2. Hence O holy lord, be kind to us and narrate the 
third Jyotirlihga to us now. 

Sdta said '.— 

3. O brahmins, if 1 remain in the company of you 
all, the glorious ones, I am blessed and contented. Blessed 
indeed is the association of saintly men. 

4. Hence, considering it my good fortune, I shall nar¬ 
rate the sanctifying sin-destroying divine story. Please listen 
to this story respectfully. 

5. There is a beautiful city Avanti^** yielding liberation 
to all souls. It is a favourite of l3iva, highly meritorious 
and sanctifying. 

6. An excellent brahmin engrossed in the performance 
of auspicious rites lived there. He studied the Vedas and 
performed the Vedic rites. 

144. The town Avanci is identical with UjjayinI, modem Ujjain. 



Ko firudrasarhkitd 


1315 


7. The brahmin maintained sacrificial fires. He was 
the devotee of Siva. Everyday he worshipped the idol of 
Siva. 

8. This brahmin Vedapriya was always interested in 
acquiring perfect knowledge. After securing the fruits of 
holy rites he attained the goal of the good. 

9. O excellent sages, he had four sons like him. They 
were not inferior to their parents and they were ever en¬ 
gaged in the worship of Siva, 

10. The eldest was Devapriya The next was Priya- 
medhas. The third was Sukrta and the fourth was Dharma- 
vahin of good rites. 

11. Thanks to the power of their merit, happiness in¬ 
creased on the earth even as the moon waxes incessantly in 
the bright half of the month. 

12. Their good qualities too flourished delighting and 
pleasing all. That city was enveloped in the brahminical 
splendour. 

13. O excellent brahmins, let the excellent event that 
happened in the meantime be heard. I shall narrate it in 
the manner I have heard. 

14. There was a great .\sura Dusana on the Ratna- 
mala’^® hill. He was very powerful. He was the king of the 
Daityas incessantly engaged in hating virtue and virtuous 
rites. 

15. Thanks to the grant of boons by Brahma he con¬ 
sidered the whole univcr.se insignificant. The gods were 
defeated by him and ousted from their places and positions. 

16. Vcdic rites and rites according to Sm^tis all over 
the earth were smothered by that wicked fellow like rabbits 
by a lion. 

17. Whatever Vcdic rites were there in the shrines 
and holy centres were stopped by him. Dharma was exiled 
to a distant place. 

18. “There is a beautiful city .Vvanti.” Thinking 
that what the Asura did, hear. 

19. Accompanied by a vast army, the great Asura 

14V Not iJoniifK'd. Il^ i(|rii(ifir;ilioii witli Uat'iaKiii in liu* south 
.Marf^lui region is doubtful. 



1316 SivapurS^a 

Dusana went there desiring to harm the brahmins staying in 
the city. 

20. After reaching the place, that great knave, that 
hater of brahmins called four hefty Daityas to him and said 
these words. 

The Daitya said: — 

21. Why don’t the wicked brahmins do as I say ? Ali 
these, engaged in Vedic rites and rituals are worthy of being 
punished by me. 

22. O excellent Daityas, the gods and the kings in the 
world have been defeated by me. Why should not the 
brahmins be kept in my control ? 

23. If they wish to live happily let them abandon the 
rites of Siva and the rituals of the Vedas. 

24. Otherwise it is doubtful that they will continue 
to live. I have said this truthfully. Hence, do that un¬ 
hesitatingly. 

Sula said '.— 

25. On hearing this and receiving the instruction the 
four Daityas besieged the four quarters of the city like the 
fires of dissolution. 

26. On coming to know of the intent of the Daityas, 
the brahmins were not at all distressed because they were 
engaged in meditating on Siva. 

27. Resorting to courage, the brahmins did not move 
even a line’s breadth from meditation. With l^iva to help 
who can remain in distress ? 

28. In the meantime, the whole of that auspicious 
city was overrun by them. The people were harassed and 
they rushed against the brahmins. 

The people said '.— 

29. O holy lords, what shall be done ? The wicked 
Asuras have come. People are tortured. They have come 
very near. 

S&ta said:~^ 

30. On hearing their words, the brahmins, the sons of 



Kofirudrasctfhhtti 


1317 


Vcdapriya, placing their faith in Siva for ever, spoke to 
them. 

The Brahmins said :— 

31. ; Listen, wc do not have an army to frighten the 
wicked Asuras. We do not have weapons to drive them 
back. 

32. The general dishonour and insult reflect.s on him 
who supports us. Moreover, what can happen to Siva who 
is omnipotent? 

33. Let lord Siva protect us from the terror of the 
Asuras. Except Siva, favourably disposed to his devotees 
there is no other refuge. 

Suta said: — 

34-35. Emboldened thus they performed the worship 
of Siva’s earthern idol. They sat firmly engaged in 
meditation. On seeing them thus the mighty Dusana shouted 
“Let them be killed. Let them be bound.” But the 
brahmins, the sons of Vedapriya engrossed in meditation on 
Siva did not hear the shouts. 

36. When the wicked Daitya desired to kill the 
brahmins, the spot near the Parthiva idol caved in with a 
loud report. , 

37. From the chasm thus created, Siva rose up 
assuming a hideous form. He became famous as Mahakala, 
the slayer of the wicked and the goal of the good. 

38. “I am Mahakala (the great god of death) risen 
up against the wicked like you. O sinful one, go away, 
leave the presence of these brahmins.” 

39. After saying this Siva reduced Dusana and his 
army, to ashes immediately with a mere sound of Hum. 

40. Dusana and a portion of his army too were killed 
by Siva the great soul. A part of the army fled. 

41. Just as darkless is dispelled on seeing the sun, so 
also that army was destroyed on seeing Siva. 

42. Divine drums were sounded. Shower of flowers 
fell. Vi^^u, Brahma and other gods came there. 

43. After bowing to the benefactor of the worlds, the 



brahmins joined their palms in reverence and eulogised him 
with different hymns 

44. After consoling the brahmins the delighted Siva 
asked the Brahmins to choose the boon they wished to have. 

45. On hearing it, the devout brahmins with palms 
joined in reverence and heads bent down bowed to Siva and 
said. 

The brahmins said '.— 

46. O lord, the chastiser of the wicked, O Siva, 
grant us liberation from the ocean of worldly existence. O 
Siva. 

47. O Siva, you shall stay here itself for the 
protection of the people. O lord Siva, save those who see 
you. 

Suta said '.— 

48. Requested thus, Siva remained in that auspicious 
chasm for the protection of his devotees after granting them 
the goal of the good. 

49. The brahmins attained salvation. The supporting 
base of Siva in the form of Lihga extended to 3 kilometres 
in each of the four directions. 

50. O brahmins, Siva became famous as Mahakales- 
vara. On seeing this image no one will have misery even 
in dreams. 

51. A man worshipping this image with a cherished 
desire in his mind will attain the same here and salvation 
hereafter. 

52. O great ones with good rites, the origin and the 
greatness of Afahakala has thus been narrated to you. What 
else do you wish to hear? 



KofirudrasarilhitS 


I3l9 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

( The greatness of Jyotirlihga Mahdkdla) 

The sages said:— 

1. O most intelligent one, please mention again the 
greatness of the Jyotirlihga Mahakala, the protector of 
his devotees. 

Suta said :— 

2. O brahmins, listen with interest to the devotion 
enhancing greatness of Mahakala, the protector of the 
devotees. 

3. In Ujjayini there was a king Candrasena, a 
devotee of ^iva, who had conquered his sense-organs and 
who knew the principles of all Sastras. 

4. O brahmins, the Gana Manibhadra, honoured by 
the people, the chief of the Ganas of Siva, was a friend of 
that king. 

5. Once the liberal-minded Gana-chief Manibhadra, 
gave him the great jewel Cintamani, out of pleasure. 

6. The jewel was as brilliant as the sun. It shone 
like Kaustubha. It blessed auspiciously when meditated 
upon, heard of or sighted. 

7. Any thing made of bell-metal, copper, tin or stone 
touched with its brilliant surface turned into gold. 

8. Wearing that gem round his neck the king 
Candrasena, dependent on Siva shone well like the sun in 
the midst of gods. 

9. On hearing that the excellent king Candrasena 
had the Cintamani round his neck, the kings on the earth 
were agitated in their hearts due to greed. 

10. The kings ignorantly trying to rival with him, 
begged of Candrasena, that jewel secured from the god. 
They used various means to get the jewel. 

11. O brahmins, the importunity of the kings was 
rendered futile by Cindrasena, a staunch devotee of Siva. 

12. Disappointed and offended thus by him the kings 
of all the lands became wrathful against him. 

13. Then the kings fully equipped with the four 



1320 SivapurStta 

types of armies^^® attempted to conquer Candrasena in the 
battle. 

14. They joined together, consulted and conspired 
with one another. With a vast army they laid siege to the 
four main gates of Ujjayinl. 

15. On seeing his city thus attacked by the kings, 
the king Candrasena sought refuge in Mahakalesvara. 

16. Without doubts and hesitations, without taking 
in any food that king of steady resolve worshipped Mahakala 
day and night without turning his mind to anything else. 

17. Then the lord Siva, delighted in his mind, 
concocted a means in order to save him. Listen to that with 
attention. 

18. O brahmins, at that very time a certain 
cowherdess roaming here and there in that excellent city 
accompanied by her child came near Mahakala. 

19. She had lost her husband. She carried her babe 
five years old. With great devotion she watched the 
Mahakala worship performed by the monarch. 

20. After witnessing the wonderful $iva-worship 
performed by him and bowing down she returned to her 
camp. 

21. The son of that cowherdess who had watched 
everything out of curiosity, thought of performing Siva’s 
worship similarly. 

22-23. He brought a fine pebble from somewhere and 
considered it his Sivalihga. He placed it in a vacant place 
not far from his camp. Various articles were conceived by 
him as sweet scents, ornaments, cloth, incense, lamp, rice 
grains and foodgrains in the course of his worship. 

24. Worshipping again and again with delightful 
leaves and flowers he danced in various ways and made 
obeisance again and again. 

25. As his mind was engrossed in the worship of Siva 
the cowherdess, his mother called him to take his meals. 

26. When the son engrossed in the worship did not 
like to take meals though called many times, the mother 
went there. 

I4r), A compl<‘te army consists of elephants, chariots, cavalry and 
infantry. 



KotirudrasartJutd 1321 

27. On seeing him seated in front of Siva with eyes 
closed she angrily caught hold of his hand, dragged him 
and beat him. 

28. When the son did not come away even after being 
dragged and struck she threw the image far off and spoiled 
his worship. 

29. Rebuking her son who was lamenting piteously 
the infuriated cowherdess entered her house again. 

30. On seeing his worship spoilt by his mother, 
the boy fell down and lamented, “O lord, O lord.” 

31. In his excessive grief he became unconscious 
su Idenly. Regaining consciousness after a while he opened 
his eyes. 

32. Immediately the camp became a beautiful temple 
of Mahakala. Thanks to the blessings of Siva, that child 
saw all these. 

33. The doorway was made of gold. There were 
excellent festoons at the doorstep. The temple had a shining 
dais set with costly and pure blue diamonds. 

31*. The temple was equipped with many golden pot- 
like domes, shining jewel-bedecked columns and the floor- 
paved with crystal bricks. 

35. In the midst, the cowherd’s son saw a jewel- ' 
bedecked linga of Siva, the storehouse of mercy, along 
with the articles he used for worshipping. 

36. On seeing these, the boy was much surprised in 
his mind. He got up immediately. It seemed as if he was 
immersed in the ocean of great bliss. 

37. He eulogised and bowed to §iva again and again. 
When the sun set the boy came out of the $iva temple. 

38. Then he saw his own camp as beautiful as the city 
of Indra. It had been suddenly transformed into one of gold, 
of variegated nature and shining much. 

39. He entered the house equipped with everything 
brilliant and glittering in the night. Jewels and gold pieces 
were scattered everywhere. He was joyous. 

40. There he saw his mother sleeping. She was like 
a celestial lady with all divine characteristics. Her limbs 

shone and glittered with ornamental jewelry. 

41. O brahmins, then that son, the special object of 



1322 SuM^urd^ 

Siva’s blessings, excited due to happiness awakened his 
mother immediately. 

42. Getting up and seeing everything unprecedentedly 
wonderful, she was as it were immersed in great bliss. She 
embraced her son. 

43. Hearing everything of the benign favour of the 
lord of ParvatT from her son she sent word of it to the 
monarch who was worshipping Siva constantly. 

44. The king who had concluded the observance of 
rites during the night came there immediately and saw the 
refulgence of the cowherd’s son in propitiating Siva. 

45. On seeing everything in the company of his 
ministers and chief priest the king was immersed in the 
ocean of great bliss and emboldened. 

46. Shedding tears of love and repeating the names 
of Siva with pleasure, the king Candrasena embraced the 
boy. 

47. O brahmins, there was a great and wonderful 
jubilation. Excited with happiness they sang the glorious 
songs of lord Siva. 

48. On account of this wonderful event, this mani¬ 
festation of the greatness of Siva and the flutter in the midst 
of the citizens, the night elapsed as though it was only a 
moment. 

49. The Jcings who had besieged the city for an 
attack heard of this event in the morning through their spies. 

50. Extremely surprised on hearing it the kings who 
had come there met together and consulted one another. 

The kings said :— 

51. This king Candrasena is a devotee of Siva and 
hence invincible. The king of Ujjayini, the city of 
Mahakala, is never distressed. 

52. The king Candrasena is a great devotee of Siva 
inasmuch as even children in his city observe Siva’s rites. 

53. Certainly Siva will be furious if we offend him. 
We will be doomed if Siva is furious. 

5i. Hence we shall make an alliance with him. In 
that case lord Siva will be compassionate to us. 



Kotirudrasa thhiUL 


1323 


Suia said: — 

55. Thus deciding, the kings abandoned their enmity. 
They regained purity of mind. They were pleased. They 
abandoned their weapons and missiles. 

56. Permitted and encouraged by Gandrasena they 
entered Ujjayini, the beautiful city of Mahakala and 
worshipped him. 

57. Then they went to the house of the cowherdess. 
They praised her good fortune with divine blessings. 

58. They were welcomed and honoured by Gandrasena 
there. Seated on a very worthy seat they congratulated him 
and were surprised. 

59. Seeing the shrine of Siva and the l§iva-Lihga that 
rose up, thanks to the power of the son of the cowherdess 
they fixed their mind in Siva. 

60. The delighted kings, sought the sympathy of Siva 
and presented several valuable things to the cowherd boy. 

61. The kings made him the chieftain of cowherds 
in all their different lands. 

62. In the meantime Hanumat, the brilliant lord of 
monkeys, worshipped by the gods manifested himself there. 

63. The kings were bewildered at his arrival. They 
rose up in reverence and made obeisance to him perfectly 
humble in their devotion. 

64. Worshipped by them and seated in their midst 
the lord of monkeys embraced the cowherd boy and glanced 
at the kings and said. 

Hanumat said :— 

65. Weal unto ye all, O kings and all the souls here, 
listen. Except iSiva there is no other goal to human beings. 

66. This cowherd boy fortunately saw the worship of 
Siva. Without the use of mantras he worshipped Siva and 
attained happiness. 

67. This boy, the most excellent devotee of Siva, the 
enhancer of the glory of cowherds, shall enjoy all pleasures 
here and attain salvation hereafter. 

68. In his race, in the eighth generation, there will be 
a famous cowherd Nanda. Vi§nu himself will be born as his 
son, Kf^na. 



1324 Sivajfurdna 

69. Henceforth this cowherd boy will attain glory all 
over the world in the name of iSrIkara. 

• 

Suta said :— 

70. After saying this, the son of Aujana^*’ the lord of 
monkeys in the form of Siva mercifully glanced at the kings 
and Candrasena. 

71. He then initiated the intelligent cowherd child 
Srikara with pleasure in the rites of Siva pleasing to the lord. 

72. O brahmins even as all of them were glancing at 
Candrasena and Srikara, the delighted Hanumat vanished 
there itself. 

73. The delighted kings who were duly honoured 
took leave of Candrasena and returned the way they had 
come. 

74. The brilliant Srikara, initiated by Hanumat, 
propitiated Siva along with brahmins well-versed in sacred 
rites. 

75. The king Candrasena and Srikara, the cowherd 
boy, worshipped Mahakala with great devotion and pleasure. 

76. In due course, Srikara and Candrasena propitiat¬ 
ing Mahakala attained the great region of lord Siva. 

77. Such is the phallic form of Siva Mahakala, the 
goal of the good, the slayer of the wicked in every respect 
who is favourably disposed towards his devotees. 

78. Thus the great secret, the sanctifying narrative 
that bestows all happiness, conducive to heaven and 
enhancing devotion to Siva has been narrated to you. 


147. Afijani, mother of HanQmat, was the daughter of Kuhjara and 
wife of Kesarin. Once she was seated on the summit of a mountain, her 
garment was slightly displaced and the god of wind being enamoured of 
her beauty assumed a visible form and asked her to yield to his desires. 
She requested him not to violate her chastity to which he consented. 
But since hr fixed his desire on her she conceived a son who was named 
HanOmat. 



Kofirudrasafhhitd 


1325 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

{The ereatness of the Jyotirlihga OrfikdreSvara) 

The sage said :— 

1. O Suta, O fortunate Suta, a wonderful story has 
been narrated of Mahakala, the phallic image of Siva that 
protects his devotees. 

2. O foremost of the wise, please describe the fourth 
Jyotirlinga of the great lord, the destroyer of all sins, in 
Omkara. 

Suta said :— 

3. O brahmins, O great sages, I shall describe to you 
with pleasure how the phallic image of lord Siva named 
Paramela manifested from Omkara. Let it be heard. 

4. Once, the holy sage Narada served with great devo¬ 
tion the phallic form of Siva named Gokarna after going 
there. 

5. From there the excellent sage came to Vindhya,^*® 
the lord of mountains. He was duly worshipped by the 
mountain with great honour. 

6. “Every thing is present in me. I am not deficient 
in anything.” It was with this obsession that he sat in 
front of Narada. 

7. On knowing his arrogance, Narada the dispeller of 
pride heaved a sigh and stayed there. On hearing that 
Vindhya spoke again. 

Vindhya said :— 

8. “What deficiency do you observe in me that you 
heave this deep breath ?” On hearing these words, the great 
sage Narada spoke again. 

Jfarada said: — 

9. Everything is present in you. But Meru is loftier. 
He is classified among gods. But you, never. 

14H. 'it is one of the seven kula-parvatas. It forms the dividing 
line'between the north and the south. It is the source of Narmadfi, 
Saras.i and other riNtr*!. Vatinis legends are associated with its name. 



1326 


Suta said :— 

10. After saying this Narada left the place and went 
in the manner he had come. Vindhya was distressed. “O 
fie upon my life”, he exclaimed. 

11. “I shall propitiate Siva, the lord of the universe 
and perform penance.” Deciding thus in his mind he sought 
refuge in Siva. 

12. With great pleasure he went to the place where 
Omkara himself was present. There he made an earthen 
idol of Siva. 

13. Continuously for six months he propitiated Siva. 
Engaged in meditation on Siva he never moved from the 
place of penance. 

14. On seeing the penance of Vindhya, Siva, the de¬ 
lighted consort of Parvati, revealed to him his real form 
inaccessible even to the Yogins. 

15. Delightedly he said—“Tell me what you wish in 
your mind. I am delighted with your penance. I fulfil the 
desires of my devotees.” 

Vindhya said :— 

16. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, give m< 
such intellect as I may achieve my object. O Siva, you an 
always favourably disposed towards your devotees. 

Suta said :— 

17. On hearing that, lord Siva thought within him¬ 
self—“This Vindhya of deluded intellect desires for a boon 
capable of harassing others. 

18. What shall I do ? I shall grant him that boor 
which being auspicious for him may not harass others ?” 

Suta said :— 

19. Still Siva granted him that excellent boon ‘‘O 
Vindhya, king of mountains, do as you please.” 

20. At this time the gods and the sages worshipped 
Siva and said—“You must stay here.” 

21. On hearing the words of the gods, the delighted 
lord Siva did so with pleasure for the happiness of the 
worlds. 



Kofirudrascufihitd 1327 

22. Tha phallus image of !§iva known as Oriikara is 
twofold. In the Pranava, Sada^iva came to be known as 
Oihkara. 

23. What is born of the earthen idol became Parame- 
iSvara. Both of them yield the desires of the devotees. O 
brahmins, they yield worldly pleasures and salvation. 

24. The gods and the sages performed his worship then. 
After propitiating the bull-bannered deity they attained 
many boons. 

25. O brahmins, the gods returned to their abodes. 
Vindhya was much delighted. He realised his object and 
eschewed his despair. 

26. He who worships Siva in this manner will not stay 
in the mother’s womb. He will obtain all the fruits desired. 
There is no doubt in this. 

27. Thus I have narrated to you the fruit of worship¬ 
ping Oihkara. Hereafter I shall mention the glory of Kedara, 
the excellent phallic form of Siva. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

{The greatness of the Jyotirlinga Kedareivara) 

Suta said '.— 

1. O brahmins, the incirnations of Vi?nu—Nara and 
Narayana performed their penance in the Bharata Khanda 
in the hermitage of Badarika^rama.'*® 

2. Requested by them for their worship, Siva, being 
subservient to the devotees comes every day to that earthen 
phallic image of Siva. 

3. A long time elapsed while these two incarnations 
of Vistiu, the spiritual sons of Siva, performed the worship 
of Siva. 

4. On one occasion the delighted Siva told them—**I 
am delighted. Choose your boon from me.” 

I4f). It is Ihf prak of the main Hinialata langc in CaihHal. It 
has the tfni|ilc of Nara-Narayang aufi is a sacnd place of pilgriiragr. For 
details see GEAMI. 



1328 Sivapuritfa 

5. When he said this, Nara and Narayana spoke these 
words keeping in mind the welfare of the world. 

Nara and Ndrdyana said :— 

6. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, if the boon 
is to be granted by you, O Siva, stay here in your own form 
and accept the devotion of your devotees. 

Suta said :— 

7. Thus requested, lord Siva himself stayed in Kcdara 
on the Himavat in the form of Jyotirlihga. 

8. He was worshipped by them for helping the worlds 
and for appearing in the presence of the devotees. He des¬ 
troys their miseries and terrors. 

9. Then Siva himself stayed there in the name of 
Kedaresvara. By his sight and worship he bestows the desires 
of the devotees. 

10. The gods and the sages of yore worship here. They 
get the fruit of their desire from the delighted lord Siva. 

11. Since the residents of Badarikasrama derive their 
desires every day by worshipping him, he is called the bes- 
tower of the desires of his devotees ever. 

12. From that day onwards, if anyone worships 
Kedaresvara with devotion he will not suffer distress even 
in dreams. 

13. It was he who on seeing Pan<;Javas assumed the 
form of a buffalo, having recourse to his magical skill and 
began to run away. ' 

14. When he was caught by the Pandavas he stood 
with his face bent down. They held his tail and implored 
him again and again. 

15. He remained in that form in the name of Bhakta- 
vatsala. His head portion went and remained fixed in the 
city of Nayapala.*®® The lord stood in that form there. 

16. He asked them to worship him in that trunkless 
form. Worshipped by them, Siva remained there and granted 
boons. 

17. The Pandavas went away with joy after worship- 


150. Sec P. 1296 note. 



Ko firudrasatfthitd 


1329 


ping him. After obtaining what they desired in their minds, 
they were rid of all their miseries. 

18. There in the shrine of Kedara, Siva is directly 
worshipped by the Indian people. 

19-20. lie who makes a gift of a ring or a bracelet after 
going there becomes a beloved of Siva. He comes very 
near the form of Siva. He is endowed with the form of 
Siva. On seeing that form of Siva, a person gets rid of 
sins. By going to Badari forest he becomes a living liberated 
soul. 

21. On seeing the forms of Nara, Narayana and Keda- 
resvara, undoubtedly he can achieve liberation. 

22. The devotees of Kedaresa who die on the way 
are released from rebirth. No doubt need be entertained 
in this respect. 

23. Going there, with pleasure, worshipping Kedaresa 
and drinking the water there a person is released from 
re-birth. 

24. O brahmins, in this Bharata country people should 
worship with devotion Nara-Niirayanesvara and Kedaresa. 

23. Although he is the lord of the universe still he is 
particularly the lord of Bharata. There is no doubt that 
Siva Kedcira is the bestower of all desires. 

26, O excellent sages, I have narrated to you what 
you have asked for. On hearing this narrative the sins dis¬ 
appear at once. No doubt need be entertained in this regard. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

( The greatness of the Jyotirlinga—Bhimeivara and the havoc 
perpetrated by Bhimasura) 

Sata said :— 

1. Hereafter I shall explain the greatness of Bhime 
^vara on hearing which alone a man obtains all desires. 



1330 

2. With a desire to bless the worlds Siva himself, the 
receptacle of welfare and happiness, took his incarnation in 
Kamarupa.^** 

3. O great sages, I shall tell you why Siva, the bene¬ 
factor of the people, took the incarnation. Please listen with 
respect. 

4. O brahmins, formerly there was a Rak^asa of great 
virility named Bhima who harassed all living beings and 
who spoiled virtuous rites always. 

5. This powerful demon was born of Karkatl from 
Kumbhakarna. He took up residence on the Sahya^^^ mountain 
along with his mother. 

6. When Kumbhakarna, the terror of the worlds, was 
killed by Rama, the ogress remained on the Sahya alone 
in the company of her son. 

7. O brahmins, once Bhima, the wicked tormentor 
of the worlds, of terrible exploits, while yet a boy asked his 
mother Karkati. 

Bhima said :— 

8. O mother, who is my father ? Where is he ? How 

is it that you are living alone ? 1 wish to know everything. 

Please tell me the truth. 

Suta said :— 

9. Asked thus by her son the defiled ogress spoke to 
her son. Listen, I shall tell you. 

Karkafi said :— 

10. Your father was Kumbhakarna the younger brother 
of Ravana. That powerful demon was killed by Rama along 
with his brother. 

11. Once that powerful demon Kumbhakarna had 
been here. He caught me forcefully and enjoyed me. 

12. That powerful demon left me here itself and rc- 

iji. It is identical vvith the Gauhati region of Assam. It is a sacred 
Mahftpi(ha a.ssociated with Sakti. 

152. It stands in the northern position of the Western Ghats exclud¬ 
ing the Travancore hills. It is the source of Kaveri, Krwia, Nirvindhya 
and other rivers. 



Ko^rudfasaihkiUL 1331 

turned to Lanka. That Lanka was not visited by me. 1 
have been staying here alone. 

13. My father was Karkafa and my mother Pufkasl. 
My husband Viradha was killed by Rama. 

14. When my husband was killed I stayed with my 
parents. My parents are dead now, reduced to ashes by a 
certain sage. 

15. When they had been there for food, the infuriated 
disciple of Agastya, the noble Sutiksnaof good penance re¬ 
duced them to ashes. 

16. That was why I happened to be alone on this 
mountain, miserable and helpless. 

17. It was during this period that Kumbhakarna the 
younger brother of Ravana came here and had his sexual 
intercourse with me. He left me alone and went away. 

18. You were born after that. You have great strength 
and exploit. Depending on you I spend my days here. 

Suta said '.— 

19. On hearing this, Bhima of terrible exploits was 
angry and thought “What am I to do against Vi§nu ? 

20. My father was killed by him and so my grand 
parents. Viradha too was killed by him. Many miseries 
have been inflicted on us. 

21. If I am the true son of my mother I shall 
surely harass Visnu. Thinking thus Bhima went to perform 
a great penance. 

22. With Brahma as the goal of his meditation he 
performed a great penance for a thousand years. 

23. He kept his arms lifted up; he stood on a single 
foot. He fixed his vision at the sun. Bhima the son of 

Kumbhakarna remained like this. 

24. A terrible fiery splendour arose from his head. 

Scorched by it the gods sought refuge in BrahmS. 

25. The gods including Indra bowed to Brahma with 
devotion and eulogised him with different hymns. They men¬ 
tioned their miserable plight to him. 

The gods said:— ^ , i. 

26. O Brahma, the fiery splendour of the demon has 



1332 SivapurS^ 

risen to harass the worlds. O Brahma, grant the boon to this 
wicked Rak$asa. 

27. If not, we shall be scorched by his terrible fiery 
splendour and court ruin. Hence grant him his prayer. 

Suta said:- 

28. On hearing their words, Brahma the grandfather 
of the universe went there to grant him the boon and spoke 
thus. 

Brahma said :— 

29. “I am delighted with you. Mention the boon 
you de.sire in your mind.” On hearing the words of Brahma 
the Raksasa said. 

Brahma said :— 

30. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, if a boon is 
to be granted by you, O Lotus-seated one, grant me un¬ 
equalled strength. 

Suta said: — 

31. After saying this, the Raksasa made obeisance to 
Brahma. After granting him the boon, Brahma returned to 
his abode. 

32. The Raksasa Bhima who acquired great strength 
from Brahma returned to his house puffed up with pride. 
After bowing to his mother he said. 

Brahma said :— 

33. O mother, observe my strength. I shall work up 
a havoc among the gods including their chief Indra and also 
Visnu who goes to help them. 

34. After saying this, Bhima of terrible exploit con¬ 
quered the gods including Indra at the outset and ousted 
them from their respective positions. 

35. Then in a battle he conquered Vi§ 9 u respected 
even by the gods. Then joyou.sly the Raksasa began to con¬ 
quer the earth. 

36. At first he went to conquer Sudaksina, the king of 
Kamarupa. Then he fought a terrible battle with him. 

37. Thanks to the powers of Brahma and that of the 



Kofirudrasarhhitd 


1333 


boon, the Asura Bhima conquered that great king though he 
was a great hero and had the support of l§iva. 

38. After conquering the lord of Kamarupa, Bhima of 
terrible exploit bound him and struck him. 

39. O brahmins, all that belonged to that king who 
was a servant of Siva, including his kingdom and its adjuncts 
was seized by that wicked Bhima. 

40. The virtuous king, fond of sacred rites, a favou¬ 
rite of Siva, was bound with fetters and imprisoned in an 
isolated cell. 

41. There the captive monarch made an excellent 
earthen idol of Siva and started its worship with a desire for 
pleasant results. 

42. He eulogised Gahga in various ways. He per¬ 
formed the rites of ablutions and the worship of Siva. 

43. Ho performed meditation duly in accordance with 
the rules prescribed for the worship of earthen idols. 

44. He joyously worshipped Siva after performing ob¬ 
eisances, prayers and the like with the mystic signs and poses. 

45. He repeated the japas of the five-syllabled mantra 
with the Pranava prefixed. He did not get any leisure to 
do any thing else. 

46. The king’s beloved wife, the chaste lady, famous as 
Daksina performed the worship of the earthen idol with 
pleasure. 

47. The couple, devoutly engaged in the propitiation 
of Siva worshipped the deity, the benefactor of the devotees 
with single-mindedness. 

48. But the Raksasa deluded by the arrogance due to 
the boon spoiled all sacrificial rites saying, “Let the offerings 
be made to me.” 

49. O excellent sages, with a huge army of wicked 
Raksasas he put the entire earth under his control. 

50. Defiling the Vedic rites and the sacred rituals of 
Sastras, Smrtis and Puriinas, the powerful demon enjoyed 
everything himself. 

51. The gods including Indra were harassed by him. 
The sages were subjected to misery, Brahmins were ousted 
from the world. 



t334 


StaaPurS^ 

52. Then the dejected gods and sages including 
Indra, with Brahma and Vi§nu at their head, sought refuge 
in iSiva. 

53. On the auspicious banks of the Mahakosi they 
delighted iSiva, the benefactor of the worlds after eulogising 
him with various prayers. 

54. They made the earthen idol and performed 
worship in accordance with the rules and eulogised him with 
different prayers and obeisances duly. 

55. Thus eulogised by means of prayers, by the gods, 
Siva was much delighted and spoke to the gods. 

^iva said :— 

56. O Visnu, O Brahma, O gods, O sages, I am 
delighted, mention the boon you wish to have. What shall 
I do for you ? 

Suta said :— 

57. O brahmins, when these words were mentioned by 
l§iva, the gods spoke to Siva after bowing to him with palms 
joined in reverence. 

The gods said :— 

58. O lord of gods, you know everything in the mind 
of others. You are the immanent soul. There is nothing 
unknown to you.' 

59. Still at your behest, O lord, we shall mention our 
grief. Be pleased to hear. O lord, look at us with your 
merciful eye. 

60. The Rak^asa, the powerful son of Karkatt, begot 
by Kumbhakarna, harasses the gods always, with his strength 
enhanced by the boon granted by Brahma. 

61. Please kill this Rak$asa who causes much misery. 
O great lord, be merciful. O lord, do not delay. 

Sata said :— 

62. Thus requested by the gods, Siva favourably dis¬ 
posed to his devotees said—*‘I shall slay him.** He then 
spoke to the gods. 



Ko firudrasathhitd 


1335 


^iva said :— 

63. The king of Kamarupa is my excellent devotee. 
O gods, tell him that his task will soon be accomplished 
by me. 

64. The great king Sudaksina, lord of Kamarupa, is a 
special devotee of mine. Let him continue my worship 
interestedly, 

65. . 1 shall kill Bhima who is wicked, whose power is 
enhanced by the boon granted by Brahma and who has 
insulted you. 

Suta said :— 

66. Then the gods went there. The delighted gods in¬ 
formed the great king what lord Siva had said. 

67. After informing him thus, the gods were highly 
delighted. The sages then returned to their respective abodes. 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 

{The origin of the Jyotirlinga Bhimeivara) 

Suta said :— 

1. With a desire to accord benefit to him Siva stayed 
with his devotee along with his Ganas. In order to protect 
him he remained concealed there. 

2. In the meantime a great meditation was started 
by the lord of Kamarupa in front of the earthen idol of 
Siva. 

3. Then somebody informed the Raksasa, “The king 
is performing a black magic against you.** 

SBta said :— 

4. On hearing it the Raki^asa was infuriated. With a 
desire to kill him he seized a sword and rushed at the 
king. 

5-6. On seeing the earthen idol of iSiva, the Raksasa 



1336 Swapwrd^ 

thought '‘Contemplating on this idol he is doing something. 

. Hence I shall kill him along with his adjuncts.” ^ Thinking 
thus the extremely infuriated Rak^asa spoke thus. 

Bhima said :— 

7. O wicked king, what are you doing here ? Tell 
me the truth. I shall not kill you then. Otherwise I will 
certainly kill you. 

Suta said :— 

8. On hearing his words, the lord of Kamarupa full 
of faith in Siva thought within his mind thus. 

9. What is destined to happen will happen. There is 
nothing to prevent it. Everything is determined by our own 

previous action and iSiva is the dispenser of the result. 

10. The merciful lord is certainly present in this 
earthen idol. He is carrying out my task. Who is this 
Rak^asa ? Whence has he come ? 

11. Lord 6iva is reputed in the Vedas as true to his 
promise. He carries out his promises in the interest of his 
devotees. 

12. The promise is “If and when any terrible person 
harasses my devotee I shall kill that wicked person in order 
to save him. There is no doubt in this.” 

13. Thus emboldened and meditating on lord 3iva the 
king reminded him of the promise, mentally and devotedly. 

14. “O lord, I am yours. Do as you wish. I will 
tell him the truth. Do what is beneficial to me,” 

15. Thus meditating in his mind, the king bound by 
the noose of truth spoke the truth slighting the Rak^asa. 

The king said :— 

16. I am worshipping lord Siva who protects his 
devotees, who is the lord of all beings—mobile or immobile 
and who is free from aberrations. 

Suta said :— 

17. On hearing these words of the king of Kamarupa, 
Bhima spoke thunderingly, his body shaking with rage. 



Ko^ruirasathhiU 


1337 


Bhima said :— 

18. Your Siva is known to me ? What harm can 

he do to me ? He was kept as a servant by my uncle. 

19. You wish to conquer me depending on his strength. 
Then you have conquered everything, indeed. No need for 
any hesitation. 

20. As long as Siva your protector is not seen by me 
you can serve him as your lord and not otherwise. 

21. If he is seen by me, O king, everything will be 
clear in every respect. Hence you remove all these idols of 
Siva. 

22. Otherwise great terror will befall you. There is 

no doubt about it. I am of terrible exploit -and I shall lay 

my hands heavily on your lord. 

Suta said :— 

23. On hearing his words, the king of Kamarupa who 
had steady faith in Siva immediately spoke to the Rak$asa. 

The king said :— 

24. I am a wicked ignorant brute in your eyes but 
I shall never forsake Siva. My lord who is the most excellent 
of all will never forsake me. 

Suta said :— 

25. On hearing the words of the king with his soul 
dedicated to Siva, the Raksasa laughed and spoke to the 
king immediately. 

Bhima said :— 

26-27. “He is intoxicated. He begs everyday. What 
does he know about his features ? What steadfastness can 
a Yogi have in affording protection to his devotees V* 
Think thus and keep aloof in every respect. Your lord and 
I shall proceed with our tight. 

Suta said :— 

28. Thus ridiculed, the excellent king, a devotee of 
Siva, steadfast in his rites, spoke fearlessly to Bhima who 
caused misery to the people. 



SioapmS^ 


1338 

The king said :— 

29. O wicked Raksasa, listen. I shall not comply with 
your threats. If you go astray wherefore arc you powerful ? 

The Siita said :— 

30. Thus addressed by the king, the demon rebuked 
him and hurled his terrible sword at the earthen idol. 

31. “See now itself your lord’s strength pleasing to 
the devotees.” Saying this, the powerful demon laughed in 
the company of the Raksasas. 

32. O brahmins, no sooner did the sword touch the 
earthen idol than 8iva manifested himself from the earthen 
idol. 

33. “Sec, I am Bhime^vara. I have revealed myself 
to protect my devotee. This is my old rite that the devotee 
should be protected by me always. 

34. From this alone see soon my strength that is 
pleasing to the devotees.” After saying this he split the 
sword into two with his Pinaka. 

35. His spear was then hurled by the Raksasa. That 
spear too of the wicked Raksasa was split into a hundred 
pieces by 8iva. 

36. O brahmins, then a lance was hurled at 8iva by 
him. It too was split into a hundred-thousand pieces with 
his arrows by Siva. 

37. Then a huge iron club was hurled at Siva by him. 
Within a trice, it too was reduced to small pieces like 
gingelly seeds by Siva with his trident. 

38. Then a terrible fight ensued between the 
attendants of Siva and the Raksasa. It frightened all the 
onlookers with distress. 

39. Within a trice, the entire earth became agitated. 
The oceans and the mountains became excited. 

40. The god and the sages were much distressed. They 
said to one another. “In vain did we beseech Siva.” 

41. Narada came there and requested Siva, the 
destroyer of miseries with palms joined in reverence and 
head bent down. 



KofirutfrasarfthitS 


1339 


Ndrada said '.— 

42. O lord, forgive, O cause of fierce agitation. Why 
shall a dagger be thrust to cut a blade of grass, Let the 
demon be killed soon. 

43. Thus requested, lord Siva reduced the Rak^asa to 
ashes with only a Huiii sound for his weapon. 

44. Even as all the gods were watching, O sage, the 
Raksasas were burnt down by Siva in a trice. 

45. Just as the conflagration consumes the forest so did 
the fury of Siva destroy the army of the Raksasas in a trice. 

46. None could see even the ashes of Bhima. He was 
burnt down along with his followers. There was no trace of 
him to be seen. 

47. The flame of the fury of Siva spread from forest 
to forest. The ashes of the Raksasas spread everywhere in the 
forest. 

48. The fiery flame of the anger of the great lord 
Siva came out and spread from forest to forest. The ashes 
of the Raksasas spread throughout the forest. 

49. From the ashes different herbs cropped up effec¬ 
tively in various ways. Men could assume different forms 
and features through the ashes. 

50. Evil spirits, ghosts are removed far by the ashes 
O brahmins, there is no task which cannot be carried out 
through it. 

51. Then Siva was implored by the gods and sages 
*‘0 lord, you should stay here itself for the happiness of the 
people. 

52. This despicable land causing distress to the 
people of Ayodhya will yield welfare to the people at your 
very sight. 

53. You will be known as Bhima^aiikara—a phallic 
image which shall be worshipped always. It will avert 
mishaps and be conducive to the attainment of all desires. 

Sula said '.— 

54. Thus requested. Siva the benefactor of the worlds, 
the lord favourably disposed towards his devotees remained 
there itself. 



1340 


SivapwH^ 


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 

{The greatness of Viiveivara, the arrival of Rudra at Kfiii) 

Suta said '.— 

1. O excellent sages, hereafter I shall narrate the 
greatness of Visvesvara, destructive of great sins. May it 
be heard. 

2-3. That which is seen as the substantive, as an entity 
in the form of knowledge and bliss, eternal and free from 
aberration, desired for a second. That second, of the tree 
of salvation, was possessed of attributes. It is named Siva. 

4. That split itself into two in the male and the 
female forms. The male is famous as Siva and the female 
is known as Sakti. 

5-6. O great sages, the unseen Cit and Ananda created 
Prakrii and Purusa. O brahmins, on seeing their parents, 
Prakrti and Purusa were plunged in doubt. 

7. Then a voice arose from the great attributeless 
Atman—“Penance shall be pursued by you for the generation 
of excellent creation.” 

Prakrti and Purusa said\- 

8. O lord Siva, there is no place for penance. Where 
shall we sit and perform this penance at your behest ? 

9-10. Then a beautiful city endowed with the requisite 
articles, the auspicious essence of brilliance extending to five 
Kronas was created and established by Siva devoid of 
attributes, in the firmament near the Purusa. 

11. Occupying it with a desire for creation and medi¬ 
tating, Visnu performed penance for a long time. 

12. Due to his exertion various currents of water 
began to flow. The void was pervaded by the water-currents. 
Nothing else was seen. 

13. On seeing it and thinking *‘What is this wonderful 
thing in sight”, Vi$nu shook his head. 

14. Then a jewel fell in front from the ear of the 
lord. It became the great holy centre named Manikar^ika. 

15. When the holy centre extending to five Kronas 



Kofirudrasarhhitd 1341 

began to float on the waters, it was supported on Trident 
by iSiva devoid of attributes. 

16. Visnu slept there itself along with his consort Pra- 
krti. At the behest of Siva, Brahma was born of his umbilical 
lotus. 

17. At the behest of Siva, he evolved a wonderful 
creation. The fourteen worlds were created in the Cosmic 

Egg- 

18. The extent of the Cosmic Egg is fifty crores of 
Yojanas as glorified by the sages. 

19. “How will the beings in the Cosmic Egg bound 
by action attain me otherwise ?”, the holy centre of Paflca- 
kroiSi was released by him after thinking like this. 

20. “This Ka^i is the bestower of auspiciousness in 
the world. It is destructive of action. It illuminates salvation. 
It is the bestower of knowledge. It is my great favourite. 

21. The phallic image Avimukta is installed by the 
great Siva himself. O you born of my parts, this holy centre 
should never be abandoned by you.** 

22. After saying this, l§iva himself brought Ka^ika from 
his Trident and released it in the mortal world. 

23. At the close of the day of Brahma (when all 
other objects perish) it certainly does not perish. Then, O 
sages, l3iva upholds it by means of his Trident. 

24. O brahmins, when the creation is resumed again 
by Brahma it is replaced. It is called KaSi because it pulls 
out or destroys our actions. 

25. The phallic image Avimuktesvara stays in K&^i 
always, yielding salvation to the people including even the 
great sinners. 

26. O great sages, the Sarupya*®* and other types of 

152. The PurS^as outline four states of beatitude viz, (i) residence 
in the same heaven with the deity (tffWlflT ), (ii) proximity with the deity 
(hi)assimilation to the deity , smd (iv)complcte abiorp- 

tion into the divine essence The last of these is the sute of 

final extinction wherein the individpal soul is ccmpletely merged in the 
universal soul. 



1342 

salvation arc attained elsewhere. The excellent type of salva* 
tion Sayujya is attained here alone. 

27. Of those who do not attain salvation*elsewhere, 
the city of Varanasi is the resort. The meritorious holy 
centre Paficakro^i is destructive of sins of crorcs of slaughter. 

28. The immortal gods too desire death here. What then 
of others ? Thus holy centre yields worldly pleasures and 
salvation always. It is a favourite resort of Siva. 

29. Brahma praises this city. So also do the Siddhas, 
Yogins, sages and other people in the three worlds and 
Vi^nu too. 

30. I cannot describe adequately and entirely the 
greatness of Ka^f even in hundreds of years. I shall explain 
to the extent I can. 

31. The lord' of Kailasa, who is Sattvaic within and 
Tamasaic without, who is famous in the name of Klligni 
and who is the supreme Being with and without attributes 
spoke after making many obeisances. 

Rudra said :— 

32. O lord of the universe, O great lord, I belong to 
you undoubtedly. O great god, be merciful to me, your 
son, O lord, accompanied by mother Parvatl. 

33. O lord of the universe, you shall stay here for the 
benefit of the worlds. I request you, O ruler of the universe 
to save the universe. 

Ssta said :— 

34. Avimukta, of suppressed and controlled soul, shed 
tears from his eyes and imploring him again and again spoke 
to l§iva. 

Avimukta said :— 

35. O g^eat lord, O lord of gods, O good panacea for 
all the evils of time, you are in truth the lord of the three 
worlds. You arc worthy of being served by Brahm&, Vipju 
and others. 

36. O lord, may you establirii your capital in the city 
of Ka£i. For the sake of inconceivable pleasure I shall stay 
in meditation. 



Kofirudrasarfihitd 


1343 


37. You alone are the bestower of liberation and world¬ 
ly desires. For rendering help to the people you stay here 
always along with Uma. 

38. O Sada^iva, save the living beings from the ocean 
of world!/ existence. O Siva, carry out the task of your 
devotees. I request you again and again. 

Suta said :— 

39. Thus requested by ViSvanatha, Siva the sovereign 
ruler of all, stayed there for rendering help to the people. 

40. KaSi became the most excellent centre for all since 
Siva came to Ka^i. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 

{The greatness of the Jyotirlinga KdH-ViiveSvara) 

The sages said :— 

1. O Suta, if the great city of Varanasi is so meritorious 
please narrate its greatness to us as well as that of lord 
Avimukta. 

Ssta said :— 

2. O great sages, I shall explain neatly and succinctly 
the splendid greatness of Varanasi and Vi5ve5vara. May it 
be listened to. 

3. Once goddess Parvati asked Siva with great joy 
about the greatness of the two Avimuktas—Kasi and VHve4- 
vara, out of desire for the welfare of the worlds. 

Parvati said :— 

4. It behoves you to explain the greatness of this 
shrine entirely | taking pity on me and desiring the benefit of 
the worlds. 



1344 


Sivapmii^ 


SlUa smd :— 

5. On hearing the words oi the goddess, the lord of 
the gods, the lord of the universe, replied to hei* for the 
pleasure of all living beings. 

Lord Siva said ’.— 

6. What, gentle lady, has been asked by you is 
splendid. It is auspicious and pleasing to the people. I shall 
explain as a matter of fact the greatness of the two 
Avimuktas. 

7. Varajpasi is my mysterious shrine. It is the cause of 
salvation for the people in every respect. 

8. In this holy centre, the Siddhas have always taken 
to my holy rites. They hold different phallic images. They 
yearn to attain my world. 

9. Those who have conquered themselves and controlled 
their sense>organs pursue the great Pa^upata Yoga which is 
explained in the Vedas, yielding worldly pleasures and 
salvation. 

10. O great goddess, the residence in Varanasi is 
always appealing to me. Forsaking everything listen to the 
cause of its greatness. 

11. The two deserve liberation—he who is my devotee 
and he who has perfect knowledge. Their is not the depend* 
ence on holy centres. They are equanimous in regard to 
what is prescribed and what is forbidden. 

12. They must be known as liberated souls, no matter 
where they die. They are sure to attain salvation. This 
decisive word has been uttered by me. 

13. Here in this excellent holy centre Avimukta, there 
is one special thing to be noted. O goddess, O great Sakti, 
I^ease listen attentively. 

14. People of all castes, of all stages of life, whether 
childi^n, youths or the aged, if they die in this city, are 
undoubtedly liberated. 

15-16. O bra hmin s, whether pure or impure, whether 
virgin or married, whether widow or barren, whether suffering 
from menstrual disorders or defects or whether recently 
delivered of a child, of whatever nature she may be, if she 



KofirudrasaMtd 


1345 


dies at this holy centre she attains salvation. There is no 
doubt in this. 

17. The sweat-born, (lice, bugs etc.) the egg-born 
(birds), the germinating ones (plants and trees) and the 
embryo-born (mammals) these living beings do not attain 
salvation elsewhere as they do at this place. 

18. O goddess, there is no dependence on perfect 
knowledge here, nor that on devotion, nor that on holy 
rites, nor that on charitable gifts. 

19. ^ There is no dependence on culture, nor that on 
meditation at anytime, nor that on repetition of names, nor 
that on adoration, nor that even on noble nativity. 

20. Whoever may be the man staying in my holy 
centre, whatever may be the manner of his death, if he 
dies here, he certainly attains salvation. 

21. O beloved, this divine city of mine is most 
mysterious one. O Parvatl, even Brahma and others do not 
know its greatness. 

22. Hence this holy centre is known as Avimukta. It 
is greater than Naimisa and all other holy centres in yield¬ 
ing salvation to the deceased. 

23. Truth is the esoteric doctrine of Dharmas. 
Equanimity is the esoteric doctrine of salvation. Learned men 
know Avimukta as the esoteric doctrine of all shrines and 
holy centres. 

24. Any being, enjoying pleasures at his will, sleeping, 
sporting or performing different activities, attains salvation 
if he casts off his life at Avimukta. 

25. It is far better for men to become ghost after 
committing thousands of sins and stay at Ka^i than to 
attain heaven after performing a thousand sacrifices but 
without going to the city of Ka^i. 

26. Hence the people resort to Ka^i with every 
strenuous effort. The sages meditate on Sadariva in the 
form of his phallic image. 

27. O beloved, I distribute the different fruits among 
different men who perform penance with those ends in 
view. 

28. No entanglement of actions binds those who 



1346 SwafmrS^a 

cast off their bodies here. Afterwards they realise complete 
idoitity with the godhead as their goal. . 

29. Brahma along with the gods and the sages, Vi$nu, 
the sun, and all other noble souls perform my worship. 

30. He who dies in this holy centre does not get 
rebirth even if he happens to be a person whose mind is 
drawn towards sensual pleasures or who has eschewed 
interest in virtue. 

31. What then, if they aie free from attachment, 
devoid of arrogance, possessd of Sattvaic nature, blessed 
ones devoted to me and not initiating evil activities. 

32. Among thousands of' rebirths, a Yogin is bom 
here. Then, dying here, he attains the highest salvation. 

33. O Parvati, there are many phallic forms installed 
by my devotees. They yield all desires and bestow salvation 
too. 

34. This- holy centre is glorified as extending to five 
Krolas in every one of the four directions all round. At the 
time of death it yields immortal beatitude. 

35. If a sinless man dies, he attains salvation 
immediately. If a sinner dies here he assumes multitudes 
of births. 

36-37. He attains salvation only after experiencing 
tortures. He who commits sins in the holy centre of 
Avimukta, experiences tortures at the hands of Bhairava 
for ten thousand years and then attains salvation, O beauti¬ 
ful lady. 

38. Thus the course of events in regard to one who 
commits sins has been narrated to you. A man should 
realise this and worship Avimukta properly. 

39. An action once performed is never wasted even 
in hundreds of crores of Kalpas. Good or bad, one must of 
necessity enjoy the fruit of one's action. 

40. Exclusively inauspicious action is contributory to 
hellish distress. Exclusively auspicious action is conducive 
to the attainment of heaven. A mixture of the two is said 
to be resulting in human birth. 

41. The birth will be good or evil in accordance widi 
the predominance or deficiency of the one or the other. 



JCefinidnsarhhitd 1347 

The annihilation of good and evil ia liberation. This is the 
truth, O Parvati. 

42. O great goddess, the action that causes bondage 
is said to be threefold as mentioned in the Karmak^d^^ 
section of the Vedas. It is (1) hoarded (Saficita) (2) the 
current (Kriyamana) and (3) that which has started yielding 
results (Prarabdha). 

43-44. The actions of the previous births are classified 
as hoarded. The action the fruit of which is being 
experienced in the present birth is Prarabdha. O goddess, 
whether good or bad the action performed in this birth is 
known as Kriyamana.*®* 

45. The annihilation of the Prarabdha Karman is 
only through enjoyment and not otherwise. The destruction 
of the other two types of action is possible through worship 
alone. 

46. Except in Kail in no other place can all the 
actions be wiped off. The other holy centres arc easily ac¬ 
cessible but the city of KaSi is difficult of access. 

47. If Ka^i had been visited with devotion in the pre¬ 
vious birth, the person in the present birth reaches Ka5i and 
dies there and not otherwise. 

48. If after reaching Ka§i a man takes his ceremonial 
bath in the Ganges, the two types of actions viz. the current 
and the hoarded are destroyed. 

49. It is certain that the Prarabdha is not destroyed 
except through enjoyment. When that is enjoyed it is also 
destroyed. 

50 If a man visits Ka^i first and commits sin after¬ 
wards, the seed of that action takes him again to Kali. 

51. Then his sins are reduced to ashes. Hence a man 
shall resort to K&li. That certainly debars Karmans to 
fructify. 

153. Man’s actions are classified into three categories, viz. (i) past 
actions still unfructified , (ii) past actions beginning to fructify 

(*nrw), (iii) present actions awaiting fructification in future. 

Acoordina to the present context, the action of the second category 
(Frirabdlu) is exliaustible by the consumption of its fruit. The re. 

maining two and can be checked from further growt. 

by performing the rites 8iva. 



1348 


^waptird$a 


52. O beloved, if even a single brahmin is afforded 
shelter and residence at Ka^i, the man who affords shelter 
and residence, gets the benefit of residence in Ka£i himself 
and thence he attains salvation. 

53. If a person dies in Ka^i, he is freed from rebirth. 
If a man dies at Prayaga, his desires for worldly enjoyment 
and salvation are fulfilled. 

54. If both the desire for worldly enjoyment and 
salvation are fulfilled at Prayaga, the fruit of salvation derived 
from residence in Kaii is likely to be in vain. If only the 
fruit of salvation is the goal, the fruits of Prayaga are likely 
to be in vain.*** 

55. Hence at my behest, Vi^nu creates something 
afresh and accords him the fruit as mentally conceived by 
him. 


SiUa said :— 

56. O excellent sages, such things constitute the great* 
ness of Ka^I and VisveSvara yielding worldly pleasures and 
salvation to the good. 

57. Hereafter I shall explain the greatness of Tryaih* 
baka on hearing which a man gets rid of his sins altogether. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 

(The greatness of Gautama in the context of the great- 
ness of TtymbakeSvara) 


Suta said :— 

O excellent sages, listen. 1 shall tell you the story 
ahat dispels sins in the manner I have heard it from Vyasa, 
ilhe good preceptor. 

154. The holy Prayiga yields worldly desiret as well as emanci* 
uation; the holy KSlI grants emancipation only. For him who desires 
Doth the worldly enjoyment and emancipation, Kfili is useless, for he 
can get these at PraySsa. For him wno desires emancipation alone 
prayiga is of no avail, for he can get the same at KS^I. 



Kdtirudrasarfthiii 


1349 


2. Formerly there was an excellent sage named 
Gautama. His wife Ahalya was extremely virtuous. 

3. A penance extending to ten thousand years was 
performed by him on the Brahmagiri'*® mountain in the 
southern quarter. 

4. O great ones of good rites, once a terrible drought 
lasting for a hundred years occurred there. All the people 
were put to great distress. 

5. Not a single juicy tender sprout was seen on the 
face of the earth. How could there be a water, the sus* 
tainer of living beings. 

6. Then the sages and other men, the beasts, birds 
and the deer of the forest went to the different quarters. 

7. On seeing the drought, the sages and the brahmins 
spent the horrible time in meditation and performing 
Pranayamas. 

8. Gautama himself performed an auspicions penance 
of Varuna for six months engrossed in Pranayama. 

9. Then Varuna came there to grant him the boon. 
He said —‘T am delighted. Mention the boon you wish to 
have. I shall grant it.’* 

10. O brahmins, then Gautama requested him for rain. 
Then Varuna replied to the sage. 

Vartma said :— 

11. How can I countermand the behest of the gods? 
Please ask for something else. You are a wise man. I shall 
grant it. 

Suta said :— 

12. On hearing these words of Varuna the great 
Atman, Gautama, eager to help others spoke thus. 

Gautama said ;— 

13. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, if a boon is 
to be granted to me, you shall grant it according to my 
desire. 


155. It is a mountain lying at a distance of twenty miles from 
Nasik district, near Tryambaka in which the Godivari has its source on 
which the sage Gautama had his hermitage. Padma P. VI. 17G. 58. 



1350 


14. Since you are the lord of waters, you shall give 

me water. O lord of gods, you shall give me divine, ever¬ 
lasting water yielding permanent results. * 

SBta said :— 

15. Requested thus by Gautama, Varuna said—“Please 
dig a ditch here”. 

16. When this was said, a ditch of a hand’s depth was 
dug by him. It was filled with divine water by Varuna. 

17. Then lord Varuna the king of waters spoke to 
Gautama, the excellent sage, eager to help others. 

Varu^ said :— 

18. O great sage, let there be a perennial supply of 
water in this ditch that has become sacred. This will be¬ 
come famous on the earth by your name. 

19. Charitable gifts made here, rites performed here, 
penance pursued here, the sacrifices done here for the gods 
and the ^raddha offered to the manes, everything will be 
imperishable. 

Suta said :— 

20. After saying this, the lord eulogised by that sage 
vanished. After rendering help to others, the sage Gautama 
too was happy. 

21. Seeking the support of great men is conducive to 
greatness. Only great men see its real nature, not others, the 
inauspicious ones. 

22. Man attains fruits in accordance with the nature 
of the man one serves. Loftiness is achieved by serving the 
great and meanness by serving the mean. 

23. Service in the abode of a lion is sure to yield 
pearls. Service in the hutment of a jackal is profitable only 
in yielding bones. 

24. This is the nature of the excellent people that they 
cannot bear others* misery. They consider others* misery 
their own and try to eradicate it. 

25. Trees, gold, sandal paste and the sugarcane exist 
for the enjoyment of the people. Men similarly competoit 
arc very rare in the world. 



Kopindrasarhhitil 1351 

26. A kind man, a man unpufied by arrogance a 
person habitually helping others and a person with peri*.;ct 
control over his sense-organs, these are the four holy pillars 
that support the earth. 

27. Having secured rare water thus, Ga utama per*, 
formed his routine and ceremonial rites duly. 

28. Thereafter he sowed different food-grains and bar¬ 
leys there itself for the performance of his sacrifice. 

29. Different kinds of food-grains, trees, flowers and 
fruits were produced in plenty there. 

30. On hearing of it, the sages came there in thousands. 
Many beasts, birds and other living beings flocked there. 

31. The forest became very beautiful, the most excellent 
on the surface of the world. In view of this imperishable 
contact the drought was not distressing. 

32. The sages in the forest were engaged in auspicious 
rites. They stayed there along with their disciples, children 
and womenfolk. 

33. They sowed food-grains for their livelihood. There 
was great joy and bliss in that forest, thanks to the power of 
Gautama. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 

( The planned arrangement of Gautama ) 

Suta said :— 

1. O brahmins, once Gautama sent his disdples there 
for water. Carrying out his orders they reached the spot 
with the water-pots in their hands. 

2. Many of the womenfolk who had assembled there 
for water saw the disciples of Gautama who had come for 
water. They prevented them from taking water. 

3. **We are the wives of the sages. We shall take 
water first. You stand far off. You can take water after¬ 
wards.’* Thus they rebuked them. 

4-5. The disciples returned and informed- the wife of 



the sage Gautama. The wife of the sage took them with 
her, pacified those women, herself took water and gave it to 
Gautama. The excellent sage performed the routine rites 
with that water. 

6. The other women, the wives of the sages, became 
infuriated and rebuked her. They returned to their huts 
with evil intentions lurking in their minds. 

7. The entire incident was distorted and intimated to 
their husbands by those evil-minded women. 

8. On hearing their words, the great sages became 
furious with Gautama as it was destined to be. 

9. The infuriated sages of crooked intellect worshipped 
Ganeiia with various articles of worship in order to put ob¬ 
stacle in the activity of Gautama. 

10. The delighted Gane^vara who is subservient to the 
devotees and who is the bestower of benefits appeared before 
them and said. 

GantSa said :— 

• 

11. *T am pleased with you. Mention the boon you 
wish to choose. What shall I do ?’* On hearing his words 
the sages said then. 

The sages said :— 

12. If the boon is to be given by you, let Gautama 
be turned out of his hermitage after being rebuked by the 
sages. Please do so. 

SQta said :— 

13. On being requested thus, the elephant-faced 
deity,'** the goal of the good, laughed and said gently 
enlightening them. 

GatiiSa said:— 

14. May this be heard, O sages. This is not proper. 
Those who become furious without any offence are sure to 
incur loss. 

15. According misery to the people who had rendered 
156. On the elephant'faced Gane 4 a, see 5 P. Rudra. Kuznfira. ch 17. 



Kofint^asarhkitd 


1353 


help before is not beneficial. If it is carried out, ruin will 
surely follow. 

16. Excellent results arc sought after performing 
. penance. No harm is sought after voluntarily eschewing 

auspicious results. 

Suta said :— 

17. Even after hearing these words, the excellent sages, 
still deluded in their intellect, spoke these words. 

The sages said :— 

18. ‘‘O lord, this must be done by you. Not other¬ 
wise.’* Gancia who was thus implored spoke. 

GaneSa said :— 

19. This has been decisively said by Brahma—“A 
wicked man never attains saintly nature nor does a saintly 
man assume perversion at any time.” 

20. Formerly when you were distressed by starvation, 
the sage Gautama afforded you happiness. 

21. Now you intend to inflict misery on him. This is 
not proper. Please think over this in all aspects. 

22. Deluded by your women-folk you never cared to 
act by my advice. There is no doubt that mv advice will 
be beneficial to him at the end. 

23. Certainly the excellent sage will render happiness 
unto you. Deception is not proper. Please choose anothei 
boon. 

suta said :— 

24. Although this advice was given by Ga^eia, the 
gpeat Atman, still the sage did not pay heed. 

25. Then Gane^a, who is subservient to his devotees, 
spoke indifferently to those sages of evil intent. 

Ganeia said :— 

26. I shall do what is being requested by you all. 
What is destined to happen will surely happen. After 
saying this he vanished. 

27. Gautaima did not know the evil intention of the 



1354 Swapwd^a 

sages. He went on performing his routine along with his 
wife with delighted mind. 

28. O great sages, hear what happened in the mean¬ 
time as a result of the influence of those wicked sages by 
the granting of the boon. 

29. There were food-grains and barleys in Gautama's 
held. Gane^a assumed the foim of a feeble cow and went 
there. 

30. O excellent sages, staggering and faltering, the 
cow, as a result of the boon began to eat the food-grains 
and barleys. 

31. In the meantime Gautama happened to come 
there casually. Compassionate by nature, he warded off the 
cow with a bunch of grass blades. 

32. No sooner was it touched by the blades of grass 
than the cow fell down dead even as the sage was watching it. 

33. The sages and their wicked wives who were hiding 
there began to shout, ‘*0 see, what is done by Gautama." 

34. O brahmins, the bewildered Gautama called Ahalya 
and spoke with a dejected, distressed mind. 

Gautama said :— 

35. O gentle lady, what has happened ? How did it 
happen ? Certainly lord Siva is angry. What should be 
dene ? Where shall we go ? The sin of slaughter has befallen 
me. 


Suta said :— 

36. In the meantime the brahmins reproached Gautama. 
The wives of the brahmins tormented Ahalya with threats. 

37. The evil-minded disciples and sons of the brah¬ 
mins reviled at Gautama repeating the words, “Fie on you." 

The sages said :— 

38. Your face is not fit to be seen. Go hence. If a 
person sees the face of a cow-killer, he shall take bath in full 
dress. 

39. As long as you stay in the midst of the hermitage, 
the sacrificial fires and the manes will not accept our gifts. 



KotitudrasathhiiS 


1355 


40. Hence, O sinner, O slayer of a cow, go somewhere 
else along with your followers. Do not delay. 

Suta said :— 

41. Saying this, they pelted him with stones. They 
inflicted pain on him and Ahalya with insulting words. 

42. Beaten and reproachad by the wicked persons 
Gautama spoke these words—sages, I am going away 
from here. I shall stay somewhere else. 

43. After saying this, Gautama went out of that place. 
Going a kroSa he made his hermitage there with their per¬ 
mission. 

44. As long as there is this curse, no rite shall be 
performed. You are not authorised in any of the rites of 
god, manes or the Vedic rituals.* 

45. The excellent sage Gautama excessively distressed 
by this regrettable incident spent half of month thus and then 
requested. 

Gautama said: — 

46. I am to be pitied by you. Please tell me how my 
sin can be wiped off. I shall do as you bid me. 

Suta said :— 

47. Thus requested the brahmins did not say anything. 
When they were implored humbly they met separately and 
remained aloof. 

48. Gautama stood far off. Bowing down to the 
sages he humbly asked them what he should do. 

49. When this was said by Gautama of noble soul, the 
sages spoke these words. 

The sages said : — 

50. “Without expiation purity cannot be attained. 
Hence, for the sake of purification you shall perform the rites 
of atonement. 

51. Go round the earth three times announcing your 
sin. After returning to this place perform the holy Vrata 
for a month. 

Thr verse is misplaced in the printed Skt. text. It shall follow v. 40 
above. 



1356 Stvapurib^ 

52. If you go round this mountain Brahmagiri^^^ hundred 
and one times you can attain purity. 

53. Or you fetch water from Ganga and perform the 
ceremonial ablution. Propitiate lord l§iva making a crore of 
his phallic images. 

54. At the outset, you circumambulate this mountain 
eleven times. Taking bath in Ganga you will become pure 
thereafter. 

55. Performing the ablution of the earthen phallic 
image of Siva with a hundred potful of water, the expiatory 
rite will be completed.” When he was thus urged by the sages 
he said in the affirmative. 

56. O excellent sages, at the behest of your honours 
I shall worship the earthen phallic image of Siva and also 
circumambulate the mountain. 

57. After saying this and circumambulating the 
mountain, the excellent sage made earthen phallic images of 
Siva and worshipped them. 

58. The chaste lady Ahalya too acted accordingly. Their 
disciples and the disciples of their disciples rendered service 
to them. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 

{The greatness of Tryambakeivara) 


SUta said :— 

1. O brahmins, when all this was performed thus by 
the sage along with his wife, the delighted Siva accompanied 
by his Ganas appeared before him. 

2. Then the gladdened Siva, the storehouse of mercy 
said—“O great sage, mention the boon you wish to choose. 
I am delighted with your devotion.” 


157. See P. 1349 note. 



Kofirudrasaihhita 1357 

3. On seeing.the beautiful form of Siva, the supreme 
soul, the sage bowed to Siva with devotion and eulogised him 
joyously. 

4. After eulogising and bowing to him many times, 
Gautama stood there with palms joined in reverence and 
said—**0 lord, make me sinless.” 

5. On hearing these words of the noble soul Gautama, 
Siva became much delighted and spoke. 

Siva said '.— 

6. O sage, you are blessed. You shall be contented. You 
are already sinless. You have been deceived by these wicked 
knaves. 

7. Indeed, on seeing you, people become sinless. How 
can you be a sinner ? You are always engaged in devotion 
to me. 

8. O sage, indeed, all the wicked persons, by whom 
you have been harassed, are sinners, evil-minded and murder- 
stained. 

9. Others too are likely to be sinners on seeing these. 
They have become already ungrateful. There is no way of 
atonement for them. 

S&ta said '.— 

10. After saying this, O brahmins, lord Siva, the bcs- 
tower of happiness to the good and chastiser of the wicked 
told him their evil actions in detail. 

11. On hearing the words of Siva, the sage was greatly 
surprised. After bowing to him with devotion, he spoke again 
to him with palms joined in reverence. 

Gautama said :— 

12. O lord Siva, a great help has been rendered by 
these sages. If they had not done like this, how could I have 
had your vision ? 

13. Blessed indeed are the sages who have pursued 
this auspicious activity towards me. It is by their so-called 
evil action that my great self-interest is made possible; 

SUfa said :— 

14. On hearing his words, lord Siva became all the 
more delighted. Looking at Gautama mercifully he replied, 



1358 Swapur^ 

Siva said :— 

15. O leading brahmin, you are a blessed sage. You 
are the most excellent among sages. Realising th3t I am 
highly delighted, you choose the excellent boon. 

Sata said :— 

16-17. Gautama thought—‘*It is thus that the scandal 
was spread in the world. Otherwise it would not have been 
so. Hence I must do what is proper**. After thinking like 
this, the excellent sage Gautama, devoted to l§iva, spoke to 
8iva with palms joined in reverence and head bent down. 

Gautama said :— 

18. O lord, what you say is true. Still what is done 
by the five leading persons^^^ cannot be otherwise. So, let 
what has happened happen. 

19. O lord of gods, if you are delighted, may Gafiga be 
given to me. Render help to the worlds. Obeisance be to 
you. 

Suta said :— 

20. After saying these words and grasping his lotus-like 
feet, Gautama made obeisance to the lord of gods with a 
desire for the welfare of the worlds. 

21-22. The essence of the earth and heaven had been 
extracted of yore, a part of this had been given to the sage 
by Brahma at his marriage. What had been held over, lord 
Siva favourably disposed towards his devotees, now gave 
to the sage. 

23. Then the waters of Ganga assumed the form of a 
lady and stood there. The excellent sage eulogised her and 
made obeisance. 

Gautama said :— 

24. O Ganga, ybu are blessed. You are contented. 
The whole world has been sanctified by you. Sanctify me 
too. I am likely to fall into hell. 


15®* Tlie context carries the existence of tjie modem PaflcSyata 
system to a hoary antiquity. 



Kofirudrasarhhitd 


1359 


SUta said: — 

25. Siva too then spoke—Gahga, listen. You are 
beneficial to all. At my behest> sanctify Gautama also/’ 

26. On hearing these words of Siva and Gautama, 
GaAga, the holy Sakti of Siva, spoke to Siva. 

Gangd said :— 

27. O lord, after sanctifying the sage along with his 
followers, I shall return to mv abode. I am telling you 
the truth. 

SUta said :— 

28. When this was mentioned by Ganga, lord Siva, 
favourably disposed towards his devotees, spoke again to 
Ganga keeping in mind the welfare of the worlds. 

Sioa said :— 

29. O goddess, till the advent of the Kali Yuga, when 
the son of Vivasvat shall be the twenty-eighth Manu, you 
shall stay here alone. 

Suta said :— 

30. On hearing these words of lord Siva, Ganga the 
sanctifying leading river replied. 

Gangs said :— 

31. O lord Siva, O slayer of the Tripuras, if my great¬ 
ness were to surpass that of all, I shall stay on the earth. 

32. O lord, please listen to something more. O lord, 
please abide with me with this beautiful body of yours along 
with your consort and the Ganas. 

Suta said :— 

33. On hearing her words, Siva favourably disposed 
towards his devotees, spoke again to Gahga for rendering 
help to the worlds. 

Siva said :— 

34. O Gaiiga you arc blessed. Listen. I am not dis¬ 
tinct from you. Still I stay here. You too must stay. 



1360 


Silta said :— 

35. On hearing these words of lord Siva, GangH was 
delighted in the mind and she accepted his advice. * 

36-37. In the meantime, the gods and ss^s, several 
holy centres and holy rivers came there. Proclaiming “Be 
victorious, be victorious*’, they respectfully worshipped Gau¬ 
tama, Ganga and Parvatl. 

38. Thereafter Vi^nu, Brahma and other gods eulogised 
them joyously joining their palms and drooping down their 
shoulders. 

39. Ganga and Parvati were delighted and they said 
**0 excellent gods, mention the boon you desire to choose. 
We shall grant the same with a desire to do what is pleas¬ 
ing to you.** 

Tfu gods said:— 

40. *‘0 lord of gods, O leading,river, if you are delight¬ 
ed, you shall stay here taking pity on us and for the benefit 
of men.** 

Ganga said :— 

41. Why don’t you stay here for the pleasure and 
welfare of all ? After washing off the sin of Gautama I shall 
go back the way I have come. 

42. O gods, how may my speciality be known apart 
from yours ? If you can prove the same, I shall undoubtedly 
stay here 

The gods said :— 

43. When Jupiter, the moat friendly to all, comes to 
the zodiac of Leo all of us will come. There is no doubt 
about it. 

44-45. O leading river, we will become unclean our¬ 
selves by cleaning off the sins of the people for eleven years. 
O beloved great goddess, we will come to you for washing 

that off in every respect. With respect we reveal this truth 
to you. 

46. To bless the worlds, to do what is pleasing to us 
Siva shall stay here and you too^ O leading river. 



KoftrudrasathMia 


1361 


47-48. Wc shall stay here as long as Jupiter is in 
Leo. We shall take our bath thrice a day and visit 8iva. 
Then we shall get rid of our sins and with your permission 
return to our native lands. 

Ssta said :— 

49. Thus requested by them as well as by the sage 
Gautama, Siva stayed there with pleasure. The excellent 
river Gahga too stayed. 

50. Gahga there became famous as Gautami. The 
phallic image became famous by the name Trymbaka. Both 
are destructive of great sins. 

51. From that time onwards whenever Jupiter enters 
Leo, the holy rivers, sacred centres and the gods come there. 

52. The holy lakes Pu^kara, and others, the sacred 
river Gahga and others, Vasudeva and other gods stay on the 
banks of the Gautami river. 

53. While they are here they lose sacredness in their 
original places. They will have it back when they return 
there. 

54. This is a Jyotirlihga famous as Tryambaka. It is 
stationed on the banks of the Gautami destructive of great 
sins. 

55. He who sees the Jyotirlihga Tryambaka with 
devotion and worships with obeissuice after eulogising it is 
freed from all sins. 

56. This very Jyotirlihga Tryambaka was worshipped 
by Gautama. Being worshipped it yields all desires here 
and bestows liberation hereafter. 

57. O great sages, thus what 1 have been asked has 
been narrated to you all. What else do you wish to hear ? 

1 shall explain it to you. No doubt need be entertained in 
this respect. 



1362 


SivapurlbfA 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 

{The greatness of the JyotirliAga TryambakeSvara) 

The sages said '.— 

1. O holy lord, whence did Gahga originate in the 
form of water ? How could it attain its greatness ? Please 
narrate. 

2. What happened to those wicked brahmins who 

tormented Gautama? O sage with Vyasa as your good 
preceptor, please narrate. 

SUta said :— 

3. O brahmins, Gahga who was thus requested by 
Gautama immediately descended from the mountain Brahma- 
giri. 

4. Its current flowed from the branches of an 

Udumbara tree. Gautama, the famous sage, took his bath 
joyously. 

5. Gautama’s disciples and other sages too came there 
and joyously took their bath. 

6. O excellent sages, the place became well known 
as Gahgadvara.^** It is beautiful and its sight dispels all sins. 

7. The sages who were malicious towards Gautama 
came there to take their bath; but on seeing them Gahga 
vanished immediately. 

8. Then Gautama hastened to that place and 

eulogised Gahga again and again with palms joined in 

reverence and head bent down. He then spoke. 

Gautama said :— 

9. Whether these are blind in their arrogance due 
to their affluence, whether they are good or bad, you shall 
grant them your vision by the virtue of this holy region. 

159. fTere Ga^S is said to have descended from Brahmagiri ( 3 P. 
KRS. 25. 3} which is situated in the south (Ibid 24- 3), in the proximity 
of Nasik near Tryambaku. The place of GaAgS’s descent is said to be 
GaAgSdvkra (Ibid. 27.6). As Brahmagiri the place of Gautama’s hermitage 
stan^ in the south, GaAgSdvftra cannot be identified with Haridvfira— 
the famous town of pilgrimage in Northern Ii\dia. 



KofifMdrasafhhitd 


1363 

Sata said :— 

10. O excellent sages, then a voice arose from the 

firmament. Please listen to the excellent words that GangS 
spoke. 

11. ‘‘These are the most ' wicked sages, most 
ungrateful and traitors to their lord. They are knaves and 
blasphemous heretics. They are unworthy of sight.*’ 

Gautama said :— 

12. “Mother please hear the words of the great 
lord which you shall make truthful. 

13. The lord has said, “I become sanctified by the 
person who in this world helps those who harm him.” 

Suta said :— 

14. On hearing the wm'ds of the sage Gautama the 
great Atman, the voice rose again from the firmament above 
Gafiga. 

15. “O sage Gautama, what is said by you is true. 
These are auspicious words. Still let them perform exfuatory 
rites in brief. 

16. At your behest and particularly under your 
guidance, they shall circumambulate this mountain. 

17. Then these wicked persons will be authorised in 
having a vision of mine. O sage, this truth I mention to 
you. 

18. On hearing these words, the sages did so duly after 
dejectedly requesting Gautama, “Our offence shall be 
excused.” 

19. When they did so, a ditch named Kusivarta just 
beneath Gang&dvira was made by Gautama with her 
permission. 

20. The sacred river flowed thence for the pleasure 
of the sage. Ku^fivarta became a famous and excellent 
place of pilgrimage. 

21. A man who takes bath there becomes worthy of 
attaining salvation after immediately eschewing the sins and 
securing perfect knowledge which is difficult of access. 

22. Gautama and the other sages mixed with one 



1364 SwapwSo^ 

another. Those who had been ungrateful before were 
ashamed of their wickedness. 

23. O Suta, this narrative has been heard by us in 
another manner.**® We shall mention it. According to that 
the infuriated Gautama cursed the brahmins. May this be 
known to you. 

SQta satd :— 

24. O brahmins, that is also true, for that happened 
in a different Kalpa. O great ones of good rites, I shall 
describe the particular points of that story also. 

25. On seeing the sages distressed by the famine, 
Gautama perfomed a great penance with god Varuna as the 
object of his worship. 

26. Through Vanina’s Maya he caused a perennial 
supply of water. Then he made them sow food-grains and 
barleys in plenty. 

27. Thus the excellent sage Gautama eager to help 
others afforded them sufficient food, thanks to the power of 
his penance. 

28. Once the wicked wives of those sages feeling In¬ 
sulted in an incident over taking water became furious and 
complained to their husbands slandering Gautama. 

29. With their minds thus prejudiced the evil-minded 
brahmins created an artificial cow grazing in his grain-field. 

30. On seeing a cow eating his food-grains, Gautama 
struck it mildly with a blade of grass trying to ward it off. 

31. The cow fell down immediately, being touched 
by the blade of grass. O brahmins, it died in an instant 
due to the forces of unaviodable destiny. 

32. Then the wicked sages held a gathering and said 
'*0 a cow has been killed by Gautama”. 

33. Then Gautama was frightened thinking that a 
cow had been killed. Along with his wife Ahalya, his 
disciples, the devotees of Siva, he began to wonder. 

i6o. According to the Puranic concept, the events of one Kalpa are 
repeated in another. But occasionally the events undergo modifications from 
Kalpa to Kalpa. Thus 3 P mentions two versions of the narrative ofGai^eia 
(Cp^. 3 P. RS- KumSra* Ch. 13. 5-6). The present ch. narrates two versions 
of Grautama’s narrative; the variation is occasioned by the diflTerence in 
Kalpa. 



Kofhu^asathhiUt 


1365 


34. Then the excellent sage Gautama realised the 
truth and was angry. He cursed the sages. 

Gautama said :— 

35. You are evil-minded desiring to put me in distress 
as I am a devotee of Siva. Hence you shall be averse to 
the Vedas always. 

36. ( Henceforth your faith in the rites of the Vedas, 
particularly with reference to the path of Siva yielding 
salvation shall cease to exist. 

37. Henceforth your attention, strayed from the path 
of salvation, will be diverted to evil paths extraneous to the 
tenets of the Vedas. 

38. From today let your foreheads be smeared with 
clay. Fall, ye all, deep down into the hell, O brahmins with 
foreheads smeared with clay. 

39. You will not have Siva as your sole deity. You 
will be considering the matchless Siva on a par with 
other gods. 

40. You will never have any interest in Siva’s worship 
and other rites, in devotees staunchly faithful to Siva and 
in the festivals of Siva. 

41. Let all these curses causing misery, descend on 
your progeny as well. 

42. All your descendants—sons, grandsons and others, 
O brahmins, shall be non-Saivites. You shall stay certainly 
in hell along with your sons. 

43. Afterwards you shall be born as Can^alas harassed 
by miseries and poverty. You shall be rogues, censuring 
others and marked with red-hot seals. 

Suta said :— 

44. After cursing the sages, Gautama returned to his 
hermitage. He performed the devotional rites of Siva and 
became very holy. 

45. Then the brahmins and sages distressed by the 
curses of Gautama put up their residence in Kaflci.^*^ They 
were excluded from the rites of Siva. 

i6i. KSfle! (mod. conjeeveram), one of the seven sacred cities of 
the Hindus is placed in the south of India on the Pal&r river. It is Kien- 



1366 


46. Their sons too remained excluded from the 
sacred rites of 6iva. In future, in the Kali age too, they 
will be born as rogues and illiterate ordinary people. 

47. O excellent sages, thus I have narrated their 
stories. O intelligent ones, their previous story too has been 
heard by all. 

48. Thus the origin of Gautami river has been 
narrated to you. So also its glory destructive of all sins. 

49. The glory of the Jyotirlihga Tryambaka is also 
narrated to you. On hearing this, one is released from all 
sins. There is no doubt about this. 

50. Hereafter I shall narrate the glory of the 
Jyotirlihga Vaidyanathesvara which dispels all sins. May it 
be heard. 


chapter twentyeight 

{^The glory of the Jyotirlihga Vaidyanatheivara) 


SSta said :— 

1. Ravana the arrogant and prestige-minded leader of 
Rak^asas propitiated Siva with devotion on the excellent 
mountain Kailasa. 

2. Though the worship continued for a long time, 
Siva was not delighted. Then Ravana performed another 
penance to delight Siva. 

3-4, The glorious Ravana, scion of the family of 
Pulastya dug a deep ditch among the groves of trees on the 
southern side of Himavat, the mountain that is usually the 
spot of Siddhi. O brahmins, he then kindled fire within it. 
Near it he installed the idol of Siva and performed a 
sacrifice. 

5. He performed three types of penance. During Ae 
summer he stationed himself in the midst of five fires, during 


chi pu-In (Kafleipura) of the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Thsang. The city 
was divided in two parts : VifOU Kaftci and Rudra KSficI. It is the former 
that is referred to here. 



KotifuirasmhIdUl 


1367 


rainy days he lay on the bare ground and in the winter he 
stood within water and performed his penance* 

6. Thus he performed penance a great deal. Even then 
Siva the supreme soul, difficult to be propitiated by the 
wicked was not delighted. 

7. Then the ambitious Ravana, lord of Daityas, began 
to worship Siva by cutting off his heads. 

8-9. In the due performance of the worship he cut oif 
his heads one by one. Thus when he had cut off his nine 
heads and one head remained, the delighted Siva favourably 
disposed towards his devotees, appeared in front of him. 

10. The lord reinstated the severed heads without 
causing pain and conferred on him his desire as well as un¬ 
equalled excellent strength. 

11. Securing his favour, the Raksasa Ravana replied 
to Siva, with palms joined in reverence and shoulders droop¬ 
ing down. 

Ravana said '.— 

12. O lord of gods, be pleased. I am taking your image 
to Lanka.*** Please make my desire fruitful. I seek refuge 
in you. 

Suta said :— 

13. Thus addressed by Ravana, Siva was in a dilemma 
and a bit disinclined. He replied. 

Siva said :— 

14. O excellent Raksasa, hear. My words are signi¬ 
ficant. Let my excellent phallic image be taken to your 
abode. 

15. Wherever this phallic image is placed on the 
ground it will become stationary. There is no doubt about it. 
Do as you please. 

suta said: — 

16. Thus warned by Siva, Ravana, the king of Rak^asas, 
took it saying **So be it” and went to his abode. 


itis. Sec P 1155 note. 



1368 Swttpufii^ 

17. Thanks to Siva’s Maya, he became desirous of 
passing urine while yet on his way. Lord Ravana of the 
family of Pulastya could not stop this urge. 

18. He saw a cowherd there and requested him to 
hold the image. About an hour elapsed, when Ravana did 
not return, the cowherd became nervous. 

19-21. He was distressed by its heavy weight. He 
placed it on the ground. The phallic image made of the 
essence of diamond remained fixed there. O sage, that 
phallic image is known as Vaidyanathelvara. It yields all 
desires and dispels sins at its very sight. It is famous in 
the three worlds. It grants worldly pleasures here and salva¬ 
tion hereafter. 

This Jyotirlinga is the most excellent of all. By its 
sight or worship it destroys sins. It is divine and conducive to 
salvation. 

22. It stood there for the benefit of the worlds. 
Ravana returned to his abode after securing the blissful 
boon. 

23. On hearing of it Indra and other gods and the 
pious sages with minds fixed in 8iva consulted one another. 

24. O sage, Vi?nu, Brahma and other gods arrived at 
the spot and devotedly performed the worship of Siva. 

25. The gods saw the deity personally and after con¬ 
secrating the image they called Vaidyanatha. They then 
bowed to the image and eulogised it. Then they returned to 
heaven. 

The sages said '.— 

26. O dear, when the image was installed and Ravana 
had returned to his abode, what happened? Please narrate 
it in detail. 

Suta said '.— 

27. After securing the great and excellent boon, the 
great Asura Ravana returned to his abode and mentioned 
everything to his beloved wife. He rejoiced much. 

28. O great sages, on hearing everything Indra and 
other gods and sages too became extremely dejected. They 
spoke to one another. 



Kofintdrasar/Ulitd 


1369 


gods and sages said :— 

29. “Ravana is a wicked knave. He is evil-minded and 
hater of the gods. After securing the boon from !§iva, he will 
make us more miserable. 

30. What shall we do? Where shall we go? What 
will happen now? What evil deeds this wicked fellow will 
not do after becoming more efficient ?** 

31. Thus distressed) Indra and other gods, and the 
sages too invited Narada and asked him dejectedly. 

The gods said :— 

32. O excellent sage, you can do everything. O cele¬ 
stial sage, find out some means to dispel the grief of the 
gods. 

33. What evil deeds the extremely wicked Ravana will 
not do ? Where shall we go, being harassed by the wicked 
fellow ? 

Jfdrada said :— 

34. O gods, give up your sorrow. I shall plan out 
and go. By the mercy of Siva, I shall carry out the task of 
the gods. 

Sata said: — 

35. Thus saying, the celestial sage went to Ravana*s 
abode. After receiving the formal welcome he spoke with 
great pleasure. 

Ndrada said: — 

36. excellent Rak^asa, you are a blessed sage, a 
great devotee of Siva. At your sight today my mind is 
much delighted. 

37. Please narrate the details how you propitiate Siva. 
Thus asked by him Ravana replied. 

RSvai^a said :— 

38. O great sage, after going to Kailasa for penance, I 
performed a severe penance for a long time. 

39. O sage, when Siva was not pleased, I returned 
from there to the grove and resumed penance. 



1370 SuK^yrd^ 

40. Standing in the midst of five fires during the 
summer, lying on the bare ground during rains and staying 
inside water during the winter I performed three-fold 
penance. 

41. O great sage> thus I performed a severe penance 
there. Still Siva was not even slightly pleased with me. 

42-43. I then became angry. I dug a ditch in the 
ground and kindled fire. I made earthen idols. By waving 
lights in the course of worship I worshipped Siva with scents, 
sandal paste, incense and food-offerings. 

44. Siva was propitiated by me by obeisances, eulogies, 
songs, dances, musical instruments and mystic gestures of 
faces and fingers. 

45. By such different modes and various other means 
lord Siva was worshipped by me according to the rules laid 
down in the Sastras. 

46. When lord Siva was not pleased and did not 
appear in my presence I was distressed as I couid not obtain 
the fruits of penance. 

47. “Fie upon my body. Fie upon my strength. Fie upon 
my penance’*. Saying this I performed several sacrifices in 
the fire that had been kept there. 

48-49. Then I thought—“I will cast off my body into 
the fire”. Thereafter I cut off my heads one by one, purified 
them and offered them to the fire. Thus nine heads were 
offered by me. 

50. O excellent sage, when I was about to cut off my 
tenth head, Siva appeared before me as a mass of splendour. 

51. The lord favourably disposed towards his devotees 
immediately spoke to me, “I am delighted. Mention the boon 
you wish to have. I shall grant you what you desire in your 
mind.*’ 

52. When lord Siva said this I eulog^ed and bowed 
to him with palms joined in great devotion. 

53. Then I requested the lord, “O lord of gods, if you 
arc pleased nothing will be inaccessible to me ? Please give 
me unequalled strength.” 

54. All that I had desired in my mind was granted 
by the merciful and satisfied Siva, saying the words “So 
be it.** 



Kot^fudrasmhhitd 


137 ! 


55. Reinstating my heads like a physician they were 
glanced at by Siva, the supreme soul with unfailing benign 
look. 

56. When this was done, my body regained its former 
state. Thanks to his grace, all benefits were derived by me. 

57. Then, requested by me, Siva stayed there per¬ 
manently in the name of VaidyanatheSvara. He has now 
become famous in the three worlds. 

58. Lord Siva in the form of Jyotirlinga confers world¬ 
ly pleasures and salvation by his sight and worship. He 
is the benefactor of all in the world. 

59. I particularly worshipped that Jyotirlinga and 
bowed to it. I have returned home and intend to conquer 
the three worlds. 

Suta said :— 

60. The celestial sage was excited on hearing his words. 
Laughing within himself, Narada spoke to Ravana. 

NSrada said :— 

61. May this be heard, O excellent Rak^asa, I shall 
tell you what is beneficial to you. You shall do as I say 
and not otherwise at any cost. 

62. What you said just now that everything was grant¬ 
ed by Siva should never be taken for granted. 

63. What will he not say in his state of mental aber¬ 
ration ? It will never come out to be true. How can it 
be proved ? You are my favourite. 

64. Hence you shall go again and do this for your 
own benefit. You shall endeavour to lift up Kailasa. 

65. Everything will come out to be fruitful only 
when Kailasa is lifted up. It is doubtlessly so. 

66. You replace it as before and return happily. Decide 
ultimately and do as you wish. 

SfUa said :— 

67. Ravai^a, deluded by fate, considered it beneficial 
when thus advised. Believing in the advice of the sage he 
went to Kailasa. 

68. Reaching there he lifted up the mountain. Every* 



1372 ^wapmiffa 

thing on the mountain became topsyturvy and mixed up 
with one another. 

69. On seeing it, Siva said “What has happened?'* 
Siva laughed and replied. 

Siv3 said :— 

70. You have got the return of favouring your disciple, 
indeed. Something good has happened through this disciple, 
now that an unequalled strength has been bestowed on a 
quiet soul who is a great hero. 

Suta said :— 

71. On hearing the words of Siva with a veiled hint, 
lord Siva considered Ravana ungrateful. He cursed him 
for being arrogant of his strength. 

Lord Siva said :— 

72. O Ravana, O base devotee, O wicked-minded, 
do not be arrogant. A destroyer of the arrogance of your 
mighty hands will come soon. 

SiUa said :— 

73. What thus happened there Narada too heard. 
Ravana delighted in his mind returned to his abode. 

74. Coming to a firm decision, the mighty Ravana, 
deluded of his own strength, destroyed the arrogance of his 
enemies and brought the whole universe under his control. 

75. Due to the divine weapons and great strength 
secured at the behest of Siva, there was none to counter¬ 
challenge Ravana in fight. 

76. By listening to this glory of lord Vaidyanatha 
the sinners get their sins reduced to ashes. 



KopirudrasafhhUS 


1373 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 

(The havoc of the Rdkfasas of DarukSvana) 

Suta said :— 

1. Hereafter I shall explain how the extremely cxccl- 
lent Jyotirlinga Nage^a of the supreme soul came into being. 

2. There was a certain ogress Dariika who became 
arrogant by the boon granted by Parvati. Her husband 
Daruka was also very powerful. 

3. Along with many Raksasas he tormented the good. 
He destroyed their sacrifices and spoiled their rites. 

4. His fertile and flourishing forest was on the shores 
of the Western ocean.*®’ It extended to sixteen Yojanas in 
every direction. 

5. Wherever Daruka went in that forest*®® for her sportiv*^ 
pleasure, the land in that spot acquired all requisites and 
became full of trees. 

6. The goddess had entrusted Daruka with the super¬ 
vision of that forest. She casually visited that forest along 
with her consort. 

7. Staying there, the Raksasa Daruka and his wife 
Daruka terrorised the people. 

8. The harassed people sought refuge in Aurva.*®® They 
paid homage to him with reverence and with their head 
bent down with pleasure they requested him thus. 

The people said :— 

9. O great sage, grant us shelter, if not, we will be 
killed by the wicked Daruka. You are competent to do every¬ 
thing. You are brilliant with your splendour. 

i6^. The Weitern ocean referred to in the Purinas is identical with 
the Arabian sea. 

164. Danik.wana which contains the temple of Nagesa, one of the 
twelve great Jyotirlihgas of MahSdeva is placed close to,the western 
ocean. The content ineiitlons the background for its nomenclature. Con¬ 
trary to this statement, the Arch. Sur. lists of Nizam’s territory (XXXI. 21. 
20) identify it with Auiidli in (he Nizam’s territory. Theic are two moie 
forests of this n uiie : one in the Himalav.ns, near Badrinalh, the other 
Vijayesvara in K&smir. Darukavana, with reference to the demoness 
Daruk.a, should not be confused with other DarukS forests. 

td'j. The sage Aurva was the son of IJrv.a and grandson of the 
famous sage Bhfgu. 



1374 


Sittapurd^a 


10. There is none in the world except you in whom 
we can seek refuge and slaying near whom we can be happy. 

11. On seeing you, the Raksasas run off. The splen¬ 
dour of Siva always shines in you like fire. 

Sula said: — 

12. Thus requested by the people the excellent sage 
Aurva, worthy of being resorted to, bewailed their lot and 
spoke these words for their protection. 

Aurva said :— 

13. If the Raksasas torture living beings on the cailh 
they will die themselves although they are very powerful. 

14. Whenever the people are killed, let the Raksasas 
too die. This is the truth I say, 

Sula said: — 

15. After promising to the subjects and consoling them, 
Aurva continued diflercnl types of penance, conferring hap¬ 
piness on the people. 

16. Realising (he cause for the curse, the gods made 
attempts to fight with the demons. 

17. With multifarious efforts and holding all types of 
weapons Indra and the other gods arrived there for the 
battle. 

18. On seeing them the Raksasas began to ponder. 
They consulted with one another. 

Raksasas said: — 

19. ‘'What shall be done ? Where shall we go ? A 
difficult situation has come up. We are fighting and dying. 
They arc fighting but they are not killed. 

20. If this situation continues what shall happen^*® to 
us ? A great misery has befallen us. Who can ward 
this ofl ?” 

Sula said :— 

21. Thinking thus and unable to find out a remedy 
Daruka and his companions felt miserable indeed. 

lOb. We have adopted the reading for ^^* 1 ^ I 



Ko tirudfasarfMtd 


1375 


22> On knowing that a great calamity had arrived, the 
the demoness Daruka spoke of the boon granted by Parvatl. 

Darukd said :— 

23. Propitiated by me formerly, the wife of Siva had 
granted me a boon. You can go to the forest along with your 
people if you desire to go. 

24. That boon has been secured by me. How is this 
misery to be borne ? Taking your people to the island you 
can stay with the Raksasas happily. 

S&ta said :— 

25. On hearing the words of the Raksasi, the Raksasas 
were delighted. Getting rid of their fear they spoke to one 
another. 

26. “She is blessed. She is fortunate. We have been 
saved by her.” After bowing to her they said respectfully. 

27. ‘‘If we can go let us go. Why ponder over it ? 
O gentle lady, we shall go and stay there permanently in 
in the waters.” 

28. In the meantime the people who had been tor¬ 
tured by the Raksasas formerly came there for fighting, 
accompanied by the gods. 

29-31. In their dilemma the Raksasas resorted to the 
boon granted by Parvati. They took their belongings to the 
city in the ocean. The demoness shouted cries of victory to 
the goddess and flew like the w’inged king of mountains.^*’ She 
then stayed fearlessly in the middle of the ocean. The 
follower of Siva accompanied by her attendants rejoiced much. 

32. Staying in the city inside the ocean, the sportive 
Raksasas became happy and fearless. 

33. For fear of the sage’s curse, Raksasas did not come 
on the earth. They moved about in the waters. 

34. They abducted travellers in the boats and impri¬ 
soned them in the city. They killed some of them. 

167. According to thf: Piiranir tradition mountains had wings, 
at will and destroyrd those towns and villages which refused gifts. 

Thus they proved refractory and troublesome to the people. Tnereupon 
Indra clipped off their wings and made them stationary. 



1376 SivapurS^ 

35. Staying there fearlessly, thanks to the boon granted 
by Parvati, the Raksasas worked havoc as before. 

36. O great sages, the people had the terror*in the 
waters now incessantly in the manner they had fear on 
land before. 

37. Sometimes the Rak?asl came out of the city in 
the water and blocked the path to the land in order to 
harass the people. 

38. In the meantime several beautiful boats arrived 
there all full of people. 

39. On seeing those boats the wicked Raksasas were 
delighted much. Rushing at the people on board they 
bound them forcefully. 

40. The naughty Raksasas came to the city taking 
those people with them. They fettered them and put them 
in prisons. 

41. The people thus bound in fetters and imprisoned 
became very unhappy. They were rebuked again and again. 

42. Their leader was a certain VaiSya named Supriya. 
His conduct was auspicious and pleasing to Siva. He was 
p. permanent devotee of Siva. 

43. He never remained without the worship of Siva. 
In every respect he followed the sacred rites of Siva. Bhasma 
and Rudraksa were his ornaments. 

44. If on any day he could not worship Siva he did 
not take his food. The Vai4ya performed the worship of 
Siva there in the prison also. 

45. O excellent sages, he taught the mantra of Siva 
and the mode of worshipping the earthen phallic image 
to several of his fellow-prisoners. 

46. They performed there the worship of Siva duly 
in the manner they saw and heard. It yielded them their 
desires. 

47. Some of them stayed in meditation taking up 
excellent postures. Some of them joyously performed the 
mental worship of Siva. 

48. O gre.at sages, the direct worship of Siva was perfor¬ 
med by the leader then in accordance with the rites of 
worshipping the earthen phallic image. 



Kotirudrasarhhitd 


1377 


49. Those who did not know the great rite remained 
meditating on ^iva with the hvQ-syllabled mantra ^‘Namah 
Sivaya. 

50. The leading Vaisya Supriya, a favourite of Siva, 
performed the worship of Siva by mental meditation 

51. Siva in the form mentioned before took up every¬ 
thing directly. The Vaisya was aware that his offerings 
were taken by Siva. 

52. O great sages, even as the Vaisya continued to 
perform the worship of Siva, six months passed by without 
hindrance. 

53. The event that happened thereafter, the story of 
the moon-crested lord, O great sages, please listen to with 
attention. 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

(The greatness of the Jyotirlihga Mdgeivara ) 

Suta said: 

1. Once an attendant of the wicked Raksasa saw the 
beautiful form of Siva in front of him. 

2. That wonderful incident was truthfully intimated 
to the king of Raksasas. 

3. The king of the Raksasas, Daruka, though very 
powerful was excited much. He hastened to the Vaisya 
and asked him. 

Suta said :— 

4. O Vaisya, what is it that you meditate upon ? 
Tell me the truth. Then you will not die. My words cannot 
be otherwise. 

Siva said :— 

5. He replied “I do not know.” On hearing it the 

i6 J}. The reading of the fourth pad i of this vci-ce is difrrlivc. W<* 
have adopted the reading ^ for f 5 T^ i I 



i378 Sivapurdifa 

Rfiksasa was angry. He incited tlie Raksasas—“O Raksasas, 
lef him be killed.” 

G. Urged by him, they seized various weapons and 
rushed at the leading Vaisya whose mind was .attaehed to 
J^iva, with desire to kill him. 

7. On seeing them come, the Vaisya remembered 
Siva with devotion and repealed his names though his eyes 
indicated that he was extremely frightened. 

The leading Vaiiya said :— 

8. O Siva, save me. O lord of gods, save me. O Siva, 
save me now froir. this wicked Raksasa. O lord of the 
three worlds, O slayer of the wicked, O one favourably 
disposed towards his devotees. 

9. O lord, you alone are my entire possession. I 
belong to you. I am subservient to you. O lord, my very 
life is always in you. 

Sfda said :— 

10. Thus implored, Siva appeared out of the crevice 
with an excellent temple with four doors. 

11. Seeing in its midst the wonderfully brilliant form 
f)f Siva along with his attendants he worshipped him. 

12-13. On being worshipped, Siva became delighted. 
He gave him the Pa<upata missile. He immediately slew all 
the Raksasas with all their attendants and adjuncts. He 
saved thus his devotee. Indeed 8iva is the slayer of the 
wicked. 

14. After killing all of them, Siva the creator of 
his Oracles and who assumes bodies in the course of sports 
granted a boon to the forest. 

15' May the rites and activities of the four castes, 
Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and ^udras flourish in this forest 
always. 

16. Let there never be people of the Tamasaic quali¬ 
ties. Let there be excellent sages, the propounders and the 
followers of the i^aiva cult. 

17. In the meantime the RaksasT Dfiruka dejected in 
her mind, eulogised Parvati. 



A o^irudrasaifthita 


1379 


18. ’I’hc goddess being pleased said “What shall 1 
do ?” She replied-“Let my race be protected by you”. 

19. “I shall protect your race. I say this truth to 
you.” Saying this the Goddess quairelied with Siva. 

20. On seeing the goddess furious, the lord, bound by 
the boon granted by him, replied with pleasure. “Do as 
you please”. 

21. On hearing the words of her husband Siva, the 
delighted Parvati laughed and spoke these words. 

Pdrvati said :— 

22. “Your words will be true at the end of this 
Yuga. Till then, I think, there can be the Tamasaic crea¬ 
tions as well. 

23. Otherwise the dissolution will lake place even 
now. O Siva, let the words uttered by me be proved 
true. O lord, I belong to you. I depend on you. 

24. This Riiksasi Daruka is my own Sakti. She is 
the most powerful among the Raksasis. Let her rule over 
the kingdom of the Raksasas, 

23. These wives of the Raksasas will give birth to 
sons. I have permitted all of them to live jointly in the 
forest. 

Suta said '.— 

26 On hearing these words of Parvati, lord Siva was 
delighted in his mind and spoke these words. 

Siva said'. — 

27. O beloved, if you say so, please listen to my 
words. I will stay in this forest with pleasure for protecting 
the devotees. 

28. He who maintains the discipline of rites and 
activities prescribed for different castes and has a sight of 
me with pleasure here will become an emperor. 

29-30. Or, at the end of the recurring cycle qf Kali 
or in the beginning of Kfta Age, the leading king equipped 
with a vast army, famous in the name of Virasena son of 
Mahasena, will have a sight of me. He will be a very 



1380 Sivafmriifa 

valorous devotee of mine. After viewing me he will become 
an emperor. 

Suta said :— 

31. Exchanging pleasantries thus, the couple, O brah¬ 
mins, indulging in great sports remained there. 

32. The Jyotirlihga form of Siva came to be known 
as Nagesvara. Goddess Siva became Nagesvarl. Both of them 
are favourites of the devotees. 

The sages said :— 

33. O intelligent one, how will VIrasena go to Daruka 
vana and worship Siva ? Please narrate it. 

Suta said :— 

34. Virasena, son of^ahasena, was a great favourite 
of Siva. He was born of.a Ksatriya family in the beautiful 
land of Nisadha.*®® 

35. Worshipping the earthen image of the lord, 
Virasena performed a severe penance, lasting for twelve 
years. 

36-39. Then Siva, the delighted lord of the gods, 
became visible to him and said :—Make a fish-like canoe 
of wood. Coat it with tin and other metals. O Virasena, 
I shall create Yogamaya and give it to you. Enter the 
canoe accompanied by Yogamaya and your men. 
Proceed to the island in the Western ocean.^’® Enter the 
crevice made by me. Perform the worship of Nage^vara. 
Thereafter secure the missile PaiSupata and slay the Raksasi 
and others. When I appear before you; you will not 
remain deficient in anything. 

40. Parvati’s strength will grow to be complete. The 
Mlecchas of the forest will become pious and auspicious. 

41. After saying this to Virasena and bestowing his 
mercy on everyone lord Siva, the destroyer of miseries, vanished 
there itself. 

42. Having received the boon form Siva the supreme 
soul, Virasena became competent to do everything, of course. 


.Sfi- P. Iiilg nolP. 
170. Sfc P. ij7;j note. 



Kb^vrudrasoahhita 


1381 


43. Thus is the manifestation of Nagewara, the lord in 
the form of a Jyotirlihga conferring the attainment of desires 
to the three worlds. 

44. He who listens to the origin of Nagcsa respect¬ 
fully attains all desires. He becomes intelligent. And his 
sins are destroyed. 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 

( The greatness of RdmeSvara ) 


SUta said :— 

1. Hereafter I shall explain how the phallic image 
Rame^vara originated formerly. O sages, listen to it respect¬ 
fully. 

2. Formerly, Visnu the favourite of the good, took his 
incarnation as Rama on the earth. 

3. O brahmins, Rama’s wife Sita, the daughter of 
Janaka, was kidnapped by Ravana the wielder of great Maya 
and taken to his abode in Lanka. 

4. Searching for her, Rama went to the city called 
Ki^kindha.^’^ Having alliance with Sugriva for his benefit 
he killed Bali. 

5. After staying there for sometime, he held consul¬ 
tations with Laksmana, Sugriva and others eager to find her 
out. 

6. The prince Rama sent the monkeys, the chief of 
whom was Hanumat, to various directions in order to find 
her out. 

7. On getting the crest-jewel of Sita and on knowing 
from the excellent monkey that she was in Lanka, Rama 
rejoiced much. 

8-9. O brahmins, accompanied by Hanuman the chief 
of monkeys, Laksmana, Sugriva and other monkey chiefs of 

171. Kiskindha was the capital of the Jannpada of the same name. 
It is identified with the Kaichur-ihdiary area of Mssoit and the adjoining 
regions tiAMl P rif)ie. It w.is placed on the 'I'ui^^abhadrS river. 



*^82 Sivapur^a 

great might and a vast army of monkeys eighteen thousand 
billions in number Rama reached the shores of the Southern 
salt ocean. • 

10. Reaching there, Rama the favourite of Siva 
stationed himself on the shore, being served by the monkeys 
and his brother Laksmana. 

11-13. “Alas where has Janaki gone ? When will she 
meet me. The ocean is very deep. The army of the monkeys 
is to be taken across. The Raksasa of great strength and 
valour, the uplifter of the mountain Kailasa has resorted to 
his stronghold Lanka. His son is Indrajit, the conqueror of 
Indra. Thus thought Rama in the company of Laksmana 
standing on the shore itself. He was appeased by Ahgada 
and other monkeys. 

14. Then Rama the excellent devotee of Siva, desirous 
of water, lovingly spoke to his brother Laksmana. 

Rama said :— 

15. O brother Laksmana, lord of heroes, I am thirsty. 
I desire water. You get some water quickly through some 
monkey. 

SUta said :— 

16. On hearing it the monkeys ran in all directions. 
They brought water, bowed to Rama and standing before 
him said. 

The monkeys said :— 

17. O lord, at your behest we have brought excellent 
water, sweet, cool and refreshing. Please take it. 

Suta said :— 

18. On hearing it Rama was much delighted. With a 
benign glance at them he accepted the water offered. 

19. When Rama, the devotee of Siva, took the water 
and was about to drink it, it occurred to him at the will of 
l§iva. 

20. “1 have not yet had the sight of Siva, the great 
lord, the bestower of all bliss. How can the water be taken 
in ?’* 



KofirttdrasarhhitS 


1383 


21. After saying this, he drank water and then 

performed the worship of Siva’s earthen image. 

22. He worshipped Siva performing all the sixteen 
ancillary services like invocation etc. with devotion according 
to the rules obtaining. 

23. After propitiating him with obeisances, divine 

eulogies etc. strenuously, Rama joyously prayed to Siva with 
great devotion. 

Rama said :— 

24. O lord Siva, O great lord, always favourably 

disposed towards your devotees, save me your devotee, 

dejected in the mind and seeking refuge in you. 

25. O Bhavatarana (one who takes devotees across 
the oc^an of worldly existence), this ocean is very deep. 
The Raksasa Ravana is heroic and mighty. 

26. The army of monkeys is a very fickle instrument 
of war. How can my task be achieved resulting in pleasing 
acquisition. 

27. In that, O lord of good rites, help must be 
rendered to me. O lord, without your help my purpose is 
difficult to be achieved. 

28. Ravana is your devotee. He is invincible in every 
respect to everyone. He is haughty due to the boons 
granted by you. He is a great hero who has conquered 
the three worlds. 

29. O Sadasiva, I too am your slave, in every 
respect subservient to you. Considering this, you shall be 
partial to me. 

Suta said :— 

30-31. After praying and bowing to the lord again 
and again, he repeated loudly, “O Siva, be victorious, be 
victorious” and eulogised Siva. Repealing the mantras and 
meditating, he performed the worship again and danced 
before the lord. 

32. With the heart drenched with devotional love he 
produced the throat-sound. Lord l§iva was much delighted. 

33. Assuming the pure form as mentioned and 



1384 


accompanied by all his attendants, lord Siva of brilliant 
form appeared before him immediately. 

34. Then, satisfied in his heart with Rama’s devotion 
lord Siva said—“O Rama, may there be welfare to you. 
Mention the boon you wish to have.” 

35. On seeing that form, they became sanctified. 
Rama himself, interested in Saiva cult, performed the worship. 

36. Eulogising in diverse ways and bowing to Siva 
joyously he requested for his victory in the imminent fight 
with Ravana. 

37. Delighted in his heart at Ram’s devotion, lord 
Siva said lovingly—“O great king, may you be victorious”. 

38. Securing the blessing of victory granted by Siva 
and receiving the permission of the lord he prayed again 
with palms joined in reverence and head bent down. 

Rama said :— 

39. O Siva, if you arc pleased, you shall stay here, 
O lord, to sanctify the worlds and to render help to the 
people. 

Suta said: — 

40. Thus implored Siva took up the phallic image named 
RameSvara. It is now famous on the surface of the world. 

41. It was by Siva’s favour that Rama crossed the 
ocean soon, killed Ravana and other Rak$asas and regained 
his beloved. 

.42. The gVeatness of Rame^vara became wonderful and 
unequalled in the world. It yields worldly pleasures and 
salvation and bestows all desires on the devotees always. 

43. He who performs the ablution of Siva with the 
waters of the divine Gahga and worships Ramcsvara with 
great devotion becomes a living liberated soul indeed. 

44 . After enjoying all pleasures here, rare even to the 
gods and deriving perfect knowledge in the end he will 
certainly attain salvation. 

45 . Thus has been narrated to you the story of Rame- 
/ivara, the Jyotirliiiga of Siva. It is divine. It destroys the 
sins of the devotees who listen to it. 



ICotirudrdsaihkiUI 


1385 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 

narrative of Sudehd and Sudharmd) 


S&ta said :— 

1. O excellent sages, the next Jyotirlinga to be 
mentioned is 6hu4mela. May its greatness be listened to. 

2. There is the excellent mountain in the Southern 
region named Deva.^’^ jt shines with great splendour and is 
very wonderful to view. 

3. A certain brahmin Sudharma who was the most ex¬ 
cellent among the knowers of Brahman and who was born 
of Bharadvaja family lived near it. 

4. His beloved wife Sudeha was interested in Saiva 
cult and sacred rites. She was skilful in all household 
activities and she devoutly served her husband. 

5. The excellent brahmin Sudharma worshipped gods 
and guests. He was devotedly attached to the Vedic path 
and scrupulously maintained the sacrificial fires. 

6. He had the brilliance of the Sun. He performed 
Sandhya prayers thrice a day. He taught disciples and was 
an expert in the Vedas and Sastras both. 

7. He was affluent and had also the qualities of 
gendemanliness. He was a liberal donor, a devotee of 8iva, 
a favourite of his followers and he engaged himself in the 
sacred rites of Siva-cult. 

8. A long period in his life thus passed when he 
continued his religious rites but no son was born to him. 
His wife’s menstrual periods were fruitless. She did not 
conceive. 

9. He did not grieve over this because he realised 
the*reality of different things. He knew that the soul is the 
uplifter of the soul and the soul is the sanctifier of the soul. 

10. Thinking thus he did not feel aggrieved even 
mentally. But Sudeha was distressed for not having a son. 

11. Everyday she implored her learned husband to 
strive for the acquisition of a son. 

I7J. Uf'vagiii ' mod. J)aiil.'Uai><icl i.s [ilaf'd in (Iw Auranga^ail District 
the /brmcr Hyderabad Stale CA.MI. P. 104- 



1386 


^ioapurd^ 


12-15. He used to reproach her saying, *‘0 gentle lady, 
there is no son, no mother, no father, no lo^r. Every 
one is selfishly inclined in the world, there is no doubt about 
this. Know this particularly with a keen intellect. Do not be 
aggrieved. O gentle lady, misery shall be eschewed by you, 
certainly. O one of auspicious rites, you shall not pester me 
like this everyday.” After enlightening her, he became 
intciested in the worship of the lord. He was perfectly 
contented. He did not feel the misery or joy of mutually 
contrary interests. 

16. Once Sudeha went to the neighbour’s house for a 
friendly chat but a quarrel arose there. 

17. She was reproached by the neighbour’s wife as 
natural to women. Sudeha was aggrieved with her harsh 
words. 

The neighbourly woman said: — 

18. O sonless woman, why are you arrogant ? I have 
i son who will inherit my wealth. But there is none to 
inherit your property. 

19. Undoubtedly the king will confiscate your estate. 
O barren woman, fie upon you, upon your wealth, upon 
your honour and prestige. 

Suta said ’.— 

20. Thus reproached by her she returned home 
depressed. She narrated to her husband all what her neigh¬ 
bour had said to her. 

21. The intelligent brahmin was not grieved by 
hearing it. He said “Let her say what she wishes, O beloved, 
what is destined to happen will happen.” 

22. Thus pacified and consoled again and again by 
her husband she did not stop worrying. She again pleaded. 

Sudeha said :— 

23. You are my husband. Somehow you shall beget 
a son. O excellent among men, otherwise I .shall cast off 
this body. 



Koiirudrasarhhitd 1387 

Suta said :— 

24. On hearing what she said, Sudharma the excellent 
brahmin, harassed by her importunities, mentally remembered 
Siva. 

25. The alert brahmin offered two flowers to the 
sacrificial lire. He thought in his mind that the right side 
flower would yield a son. 

26. Making this as a condition the brahmin told his 
wife. ‘-You shall lake one of these* two flowers to decide 
about the acquisition of a son” 

27-28. She thought “I will surely have a son. Let (he 
insignia flower come to me.” Then she bowed to Siva and the 
sacrificial fire.” After praying again she picked up one of the 
flowers. 

29. The insignia flower was missed by her due to 
delusion caused by Siva’s desire. 

30. On seeing it the husband sighed deeply. Remember¬ 
ing the lotus-like feet of Siva he spoke to his beloved. 

Sudharma said :— 

31. O beloved, how can what is ordained by the lord 
be otherwise. Cast off your vain hopes. Render service to 
the lord. 

32. After saying so and giving up hope himself, the 
brahmin became engaged in sacred rites and meditation on 
Siva. 

33. Yearning for a son Sudeha did not leave off her 
pleadings. With palms joined in reverence and bending her 
head she lovingly said to her husband. 

Sudeha said :— 

34. Let there be no son born of me. With my consent 
you shall take another wife. Undoubtedly she will bear you 
a son. 

SSta said :— 

35. Requested thus by his beloved wife, that brahmin 
the most excellent of the devotees of Siva and fond of 
sacred rites spoke to hcf. 



1388 


Sivapurdtfa 


Sudharmd said :— 

36. Our miseries have gone ofT, O beloved, do not 

put obstacles in our holy rites now. * 

Ssta said :— 

37. Although prevented thus, she brought her mother’s 
younger daughter to her house and said to her husband 
“Take her.” 

Sudharmd said :— 

38. Now you say that she must be my beloved wife. 
But should she give birth to a son you will begin to be 
jealous of her. 

Suta said :— 

39. O brahmins, when thus warned by her husband, 
Sudeha joined her palms in reverence and spoke to him. 

40. “O excellent brahmin, I will not be jealous of 
my own sister. Please marry her and beget a son. I urge 
upon you.” 

41. Thus implored by her, Sudharma married that 
lady Ghu^ma with due ceremonies. 

42. After marrying her he requested Sudeha, “O my 
pious beloved, this is your younger sister. You must bring 
her up.” 

43. After saying this, Sudharma, the most excellent 
devotee of Siva, pursued his sacred rites to the utmost with 
his mind leaning towards virtue. 

44. Sudeha served her sister like a hired wench 
eschewing all opposition and lovingly nurtured her. 

45. The junior wife with the consent of her sister, made 
hundred and one earthen idols every day. 

46. According to the sacred rules Ghusma rendered 
devotional services to these images and threw them in the 
neighbouring lake. 

47. Thus she performed the wish-yielding worship of 
Siva every day leaving them off and invoking them again 
in accordance with the rules of devotional service. 

48. Performing the worship of Siva thus regularly 



Kotirudrasarfihitd 


1389 


she completed a hundred-thousand imagoes and their worship 
which would yield the benefits of all desires. 

49. By the mercy of $iva a son was born to her. He 
was beautiful, fortunate and endowed with all auspicious 
qualities. 

50. On seeing him the brahmin was much delighted. 
Being the most excellent of all who knew virtue and engros¬ 
sed in the virtues of knowledge he enjoyed the pleasure with 
due detachment. 

51. Then Sudeha grew fiercely jealous of her. Her 
heart which was cool and quiet before began to blaze like 
fire now. 

52. O great sages, may the despicable event that 
followed, causing misery, be heard with attention. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

{Origin and glory of the Jyolirlinga Ghuimesvara) 

Suta said :— 

1. On seeing the son of the younger sister, the elder 
sister was much distressed. Unable to see her pleasure she 
became inimical. 

2. Her people celebrated the birth of a son continual¬ 
ly. But she could not bear the sight of the beautiful child. 

3. On seeing the son, a great favourite of the parents 
and endowed with all good qualities, her heart began to 
blaze like fire. 

4. In the meantime many brahmins came there offer¬ 
ing their daughters in marriage. Sudharma celebrated the 
marriage of his son*duly. 

5. Sudharmrx was extremely delighted in the company 
of Ghusma. All the relatives honoured GhuSma much. 

6. On seeing that, Sudeha blazed furiously in her mind- 
Extremely distressed she began to lament, “O I am doomed.” 

7. When the daughter-in-law came to the house and 



1390 


SivapurSffa 


the son was duly married, Sudharma evinced his enthusiasm 
to both the wives with an intention of delighting them 
equally. 

8. But Ghu^ma was delighted and Sudeha was dis* 
tressed. Unable to bear her happiness, she fell on the ground. 

GhuSma said :— 

9. “These are your own son and daughter-in-law 
not mine.** But the daughter-in-law considered Sudeha her 
mother-in-law and the son considered her his mother. 

10. The husband too loved the elder more than he 
loved the younger. Still the elder wife retained dirt in her 
mind. 

11. One day the senior wife Sudeha, extremely dis¬ 
tressed in her heart, thought how she could subdue her 
misery. 

Sudehd said :— 

12. Certainly the fire in my heart can be tranqullised 
only through the tears of Ghusma caused by her misery 
and not otherwise. 

13. So I shall kill her son today, the son that speaks 
pleasing words to her. What is destined to happen shall 
happen. This is my final decision. 

SUta said :— 

14. O brahmins, the inimical nature among co-wives 
is extremely ruthless and suicidal. The wicked and the 
mean do not ponder what shall be done or not done. 

15. One day during the night as the son was sleeping 
with his wife she took a big knife and cut off his limbs. 

16-17. The senior wife cut off the limbs of Ghusma’s 
son at night. Strong that she was shc^,took them to the 
lake where the earthen images of Siva were usually 
, hurled by Ghuiima. After casting off the limbs into the lake 
she returned and slept. 

18. In the morning Ghusma got up and performed 
her. daily household duties- Sudharma too performed his 
daily sacred rites. 



KottrudratathhUi 


1391 


19. In the meantime the senior wife too got up and 
performed her duties with great pleasure, now that the fire 
in her heart had been tranquillised. 

20. Getting up in the morning, the daughter-in-law saw 
to her horror the bed wet with blood and a few scattered 
pieces of the body, 

21. She told her mother-in-law, “where has your son 
gone ? The bed is wet with blood. Pieces of the body arc 
also seen.” 

22. The daughter-in-law fond of her husband began 
to lament—“O I am doomed. O my mother of holy rites, 
who has perpetrated this wicked deed ?” 

23. The senior wife, though delighted inwardly, 
showed great distress outwardly saying “O I am doomed !” 

24. Ghusma heard the pitiable lamentation of her 
daughter-in-law but did not leave off her sacred rite, the 
daily worship of Siva’s earthen image. 

25. Her mind did not exhibit any agitation. The 
husband too remained calm till the completion of the sacred 
rite. 

26. At noon when the worship was concluded she 
looked at the terrible bed. Still Ghusma did not show signs 
of grief. 

27-29. “He who has given this boy will protect him 
too. The annihilator of Kala, the goal of the good, is 
famous as a favourite of his devotee. Our protector, the 
sole lord, iSiva is like a gardener. He separates those whom 
he has united. What can I gain by worrying over it ?” 
Realising this truth, being emboldened in dedicating herself to 
Siva she did not grieve much. 

30. Taking the day’s earthly phallic images she 
went towards the bank of the lake repeating the names of 
Siva, maintaining the normalcy of her mind as afore. 

31. When she cast off the earthen phallic images and 
returned she saw her son standing on the bank of the lake. 

The son said :— 

32. I shall meet my mother. After dying I have been 



1392 >^wapurdna 

resuscitated, thanks to the power of her virtue and the 
mercy of Siva. 

Suta said :— 

33. O brahmins, on seeing her son restored to life 
the mother was not delighted as she was not distressed 
before. 

34. At that time, lord Siva, appeared before her 
immediately in the form of a mass of splendour. He said 
delightedly. 

^iva said :— 

35. O excellent-faced lady, I am delighted. Mention 
the boon you wish to have This boy had been killed by 
that wicked lady. I shall kill her with my trident. 

SSta said :— 

36. Bowing down to Siva she requested for the boon 
“O lord, Sudeha, my sister, must be protected by you.*’ 

^iva said :— 

37. Harm has been done by her. Why should you 
render help to her ? Sudeha the perpetrator of wicked 
deeds must be killed. 

GkuSma said :— 

38. No sin stays, the moment you aic seen. Now, on 
seeing you her sin will be reduced to ashes. 

39. ‘Sin is far removed at the mere sight of the person 
who renders help to those who harm him. 

40. These wonderful words of the lord have been 
heard by me O lord. Hence, O Sadasiva let it not be done 
otherwise. 

Sata said :— 

41. Thus requested by her, lord Siva the ocean of 
mercy, favourably disposed towards his devotees was 
delighted and spoke thus. 

^ioa said :— 

42. O Ghusma, request for another boon. I shall 
grant you what.is beneficial to you. I am delighted at your 
devotion and your nature of h*^ing free from aberrations. 



KofintdrasaMtS 


1393 


Suta said :— 

43. She said after hearing his words “If a boon is to 
be given by you, you shall stay here in my name for protect¬ 
ing the worlds.*' 

44. Then the delighted lord Siva said—“I shall stay 
here in your name. I shall be named GhuSmesa and 1 shall 
confer hafppiness. 

45. May my phallic image named GhusmeSa be 
auspicious and famous. Let this lake be the storehouse of 
phallic images always. 

46. Hence it will be famous in the three worlds in the 
name of “Sivalaya.'’^’-^ This lake shall always yield desires by 
its mere sight, 

47. O lady of good rites, upto a hundred and one 
generations in your family sons of great excellence like this 
will be born undoubtedly. 

48. They will have good wives, plenty of wealth, 
longevity and skill in everything. They will be learned and 
liberal. They will attain worldly pleasures and salvation. 

49. They will be hundred and one endowed with 
many qualities. Your family will expand like this splendidly. 

Siita said :— 

50. After saying this :§iva assumed the form of a 
phallic image named Ghu^mesa. He became famous. The lake 
was called l^ivalaya.^’® 

51. Sudharma, Ghusma and Sudeha came there and 
circumambulated Siva hundred and one times. 

52. After performing the worship of lord Siva, fondly 
meeting one another and eschewing the dirt of the mind 
they attained great happiness. 

53. On seeing the son regained to life, Sudeha was 
ashamed. O brahmins, she performed the expiatory rite for 
her sins and requested for forgiveness. 

274. Sivilaya lake, the abode of Ghuxine.wara phallic image is 
placed near Devagiri in the Aurangabad district of the erstwhile Hydera¬ 
bad State. 



1394 


SivapurS^ 


54. O great sages, the phallic image named Ghulme^a 

originated thus. Its very sight and worship renders happiness 
always. • 

55. Thus I have narrated to you the twelve Jyotir- 
lihgas which yield all desires, worldly pleasures and 
salvation. 

56. He who reads or listens to this narrative of 
Jyotirlihgas gets rid of sins and attains worldly pleasures and 
salvation. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

{Acquisition of SudarSana by Vifnu) 


Vydsa said :— 

1. O great sages, on hearing the words of Suta the 
sages praised him and spoke desiring the welfare of the 
worlds. 

The sages said :— 

2. O Suta, you know everything. Hence we ask you. 
O holy lord, please narrate the greatness of the phallic 
image Harisvara. 

3. O dear, this was heard by us formcHy that by 
propitiating Harilvara, Vi^^u acquired his discus SudarSana. 
Please narrate that story particularly. 

Suta said :— 

4. O great sages, may the auspicious story of Hari- 
£vara be heard, how SudarSana was acquired by Vi^^u 
formerly from Siva. 

5. On a certain occasion the Daityas became very 
powerful. They harassed the worlds and violated sacred rites. 

6. Tormented by the Daityas of great strength and 
exploit, the gods narrated their misery to Vi^^u, their saviour. 



Ko tirudrasarhhitd 


1395 


The gods said :— 

7. O lord, be merciful. We are very much afflicted 
by the Daityas. Where shall we go? What shall we do? 
We have resorted to you, for you are worthy of seeking 
refuge by us. 

S&ta said :— 

8. On hearing these words of the gods distressed in 
mind, Visnu remembered the lotus-like feet of Siva and said. 

FtVntt said :— 

9. O gods, I shall carry out your task after propitiating 
Siva. These powerful enemies shall be conquered with 
great effort. 

Suta said :— 

10. Thus consoled by lord Visnu, the gods thought 
that the Daityas would be surely killed. They then went 
to their respective abodes. 

11. For the victory of the gods, Visnu worshipped 
Siva, the lord of all the gods, the imperishable and the 
cosmic witness of all. 

12. He went to Kailasa and dug a pit there wherein 
he kindled fire and performed penance. 

13. He worshipped Siva joyously with various mantras 
and hymns prescribed for the worship of earthen image. 

14. O great sages, he worshipped with the lotus- 

flowers growing in the Manasa lake. He sat firmly in the 
Yogic posture and did not move at all. 

15. Thinking decisively—“By all means I shall stay 

here till the lord is pleased” Vis^u worshipped Siva. 

16. O brahmins, when Siva was not pleased with 

Visnu, the latter began to think anxiously. 

17. Afrer thinking thus he rendered him various 

services. Still, lord Siva, indulging in divine sports was 
not satisfied. 

18. Surprised much at this, Vis^u, endowed with 

great devotion, eulogised lord Siva by reciting his thousand 
names with pleasure. 



1396 


Sivapuf^a 


19. Re[>cating every name, he worshipped Siva, favour¬ 
ably disposed towards those who seek refuge in himt with a 
lotus flower. 

20. In order to test the piety of Visnu, one of the 
thousand lotus-flowcrs was taken away by Siva. 

21. That wonderful Maya of Si^a was not noticed by 
Vi?nu. But when he came to know of the shortage he 
started to search. 

22. In order to And it out he roamed over the world, 
steadily maintaining his sacred rite. But not finding the 
same, the pious Visnu offered one of his eyes (instead of 
the lotus). 

23. On seeing it Siva who destroys all miseries was 
delighted and appeared before him. He spoke these words 
to Visnu. 

Siva said :— 

24. O Visnu, I am delighted with you. Mention the 

boon you wish to have. I shall grant you what you desire. 

There is nothing which cannot be given to you. 

Suta said :— 

25. On hearing the words of Siva, Visnu was pleased 
in his mind. Extremely delighted he spoke to Siva with 
palms joined in reverence. 

Vifnu said :— 

26. What is there to be mentioned to you? You are 
the immanent soul. Still, O Lord, I mention the same with 
due deference to your behest. 

27. O Sadaiiva, the entire universe is afflicted by the 

Daityas. We have no pleasure at all. Our weapons are in¬ 

effectual in killing the Daityas. 

28- What shall I do ? Where shall I go ? I have no 
greater saviour than you. O lord, I seek refuge in you. 

Ssta said :— 

29. After saying this he stood in affliction and bowed 
to Siva, the supreme soul. 



Kofirudrasarhhitd 


1397 


30. On ]icaring these words of Visiiu, Siva, the lord 
of gods, gave him his discus Sudariana shining with the 
mass of splendour. 

31. On receiving it Visnu slew the powerful demons 
immediately with the discus without any strain. 

32. Tliereupon the universe derived normalcy, the gods 
became happy. After receiving the Sudarsana missile Visnu 
was greatly delighted. 

The sages said '.— 

33. What is that hymn of Siva that consists of his 
thousand names ? What is that hymn whereby Siva was so 
much delighted that he gave Visnu the d'seus. 

34. Please expound the glory of this hymn to us and 
narrate the dialogue between Siva and Visnu. The merciful 
nature of Siva towards Vi.snu may also be narrated to ns. 

Vydsa said :— 

35. On hearing the words of the pious sages, Suta 
spoke after remembering the lotus-likc feet of Siva. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 

{ Thousand Names of ^^iva) 

Suta said :— 

1. May this be heard, O great sages. I shall now re¬ 
count the hymn of thousand names^^^ of Siva, whereby Siva 
was satisfied. 

17-}. In fact lh<‘ text rcroicls morr than onr ihniisand n:ini«*<i. .Soinr 
air idcniiral in foiin 

OihrisaiT n‘pf(iiions in sri>s>‘ : ST:; f^^'TTST 'TJTrftT:; 

: ; ^?1 vy^:-55?!T?TttT- ;; 



1398 


Sivapurd^ 


Vifnu said :— 

2-131 Siva (pure), Hara (destroyer), mrda (gracious), 
Rudra”5 (terrible), Puskara( nourisher), Puspalocanafof flowery 
eyes), Arthigamya (accessible to the suppliants), Sadacara 
(of noble conduct), Sarva(all-in-all), (bcstower of welfare), 
Mahesvara (gre^t lord), Gandrapida (with moon for the 
diadem), Gandramauli (with moon for his crest-jewel), 
vi^va (universe), Visvambharesvara (lord of the earth), 
Vedantasarasandoha (the essence of Vedanta philosophy), 
Kapalin (with a skull in the hand), Nilalohita (blue- 
blooded), Dhyanadhara (object of meditation), Aparicchedya 
(inexplicable), Gauiibhartr (husband of Gauri), Gancsvara 
(Lord of Ganas), Astamurti*’® (Having eight cosmic bodies), 
Visvamurti (universe-bodied), Trivarga (beslower of virtue, 
wealth and love), Sargasadhana (achiever of creation, 
Jnanagamya (accessible by perfect knowledge), Drdhaprajfta 
(of steady intellect) Devadeva (lord of gods), Trilocana 
(threc-eyed), Vamadeva (lovely lord), Mahadeva (great god) 
Patu (efficient), Parivrdha (chief), Drdha (firm), Visvarupa, 

(multiformed), Virupaksa (odd-eyed), Vagisa (lord of 
speech), Surasattama (the most excellent god), Sarvapramana- 
samvadin (in whom all authorities and proofs agree), 
Vrsahka (bull-bannered), Vrsavahana (bull-vehicled), Isa 
(lord), Pinakin (holding bow), Khatvahgin (holding missile 
Khatvahga), Gitravesa (of variegated dress), Girantana 
(eternal being), Tamohara(remover of ignorance), Mahayogin 
^great Yogin), Goptr (protector), Blrahmandahrt (heart of 


°thfrs are the names of gods and sages : ^T?TT, 

(of Brahma) (of Visnu) 

(of Indra) ^ (of Datiaircya) ’pf'T?? 

(of the sages On the other hand, some of the well known, significant 
names such as are missing. 

175. As soon as he was born he wept, so he received this name 

176. The eight foiras of Siva, represented by earth, water, fire, 
wind, ether, sun, moon and mind are known lespcciively as Sarva, Bhava, 
Pa. 4 upati, I 4 ana, Btilma, Rudra, Mah&deva and Ugra. I'hese symbolise 
the five gross material elements, two opposite principles (»f heal and cold 
and the principle of mind which is the eighth. 



Kofirudrasariihitd 


1399 


cosmos), Jatin (having matted hair), Kalakala (slayer of 
Death), Kfttivasas'” (wearing hide), Subhaga (comely), 
Pranatatmaka (soul of the devotees), Unnadhra (uplifted), 
Puru^a (divine being), Jusya, (worthy to be served), 
Durvasas (sage Durvasas), Purasasana (chastiser of the 
Tripuras), Divyayudha (having divine weapons), Skanda- 
guru (preceptor of Skanda), Paramesthin (staying at the 
aqrne), Paratpara (greater than the greatest), anadima- 
dhyanidhana (with no beginning, middle or end), Giriia 
(Lord of mountains), Girijadhava (husband of Parvati) 
Kuberabandhu) kinsman of Kubera), Srikantha (of glorious 
neck), Lokavarnottama (excellent of all castes in the world), 
(soft), Samadhivedya (who can be realised through trance), 
Kodandin (holding bow), Nilakantha^’® (blue-necked), 
Parasvadhin (holding axe). 

Visalaksa (wide-eyed), Mrgavyadha (hunter of animal), 
Suresa (lord of gods), Suryatapana (scorcher of the sun), 
Dharmadhyaksa (presiding deity of virtue), Ksamaksetra 
(field of forgiveness), Bhagavat (lordly), Bhaganetrabhit 
(splitter of the eyes of Bhaga), Ugra (fierce), Pasupati 
(lord of beasts, the individual souls), Tarksya (Identical 
with Garuda), Priyabhakta (favourite of the devotee), 
Parantapa (scorcher of enemies), Datr (donor), Dayakara 
(compassionate), Daksa (skilful), Kapardin (having matted 
hair), Kamasasana (chastiser of cupid), Smasananilaya 
(residing in cremation ground), Suksma(subtle)Sma^anastha 
(staying in cremation ground), Mahesvara (great God), 
Lokakartf ^ (creator of the worlds), Mrgapati (lord of 
deer), Mahakartr (great maker), Mahau^adhi (great 
medicine), Somapa (imbiber of Soma juice), Amrtapa 
(drinker of nectar), Saumya (gentle), Mahatejas (of great 
splendour), Mahadyuti (of great brilliance), Tejomaya (full 
of lustre), Amrtamaya (full of Nectar), Annamaya (of the 
nature of food), Sudhapati (lord of nectar), Uttama (the 
most excellent), Gopati (lord of speech), Goptr (protector),- 

177. For the origin of this name sec SP. RS- Yuddha. ch. 57. 

178. According to a legend Siva swallowed poison churned out of 
the ocean and obtained thi« name. For the symbolical interpretation ol 
this name see MP. A Study pp 



1400 


Sivapurana 


Jfianagamya(attainable through perfect knowledge), Puratana 
(ancient being), Niti (justice), Sunltii (good ju^ice and 
policy), Suddhatman (pure soul), Soma (accompanied by 
Utna), Somatara (excelling the moon), Sukhin (happy 
being), Ajatasatru (whose enemy is not yet born), 

Alokasambhavya (whose existence is inferred as possible 
through the lustre), Havyavahana (carrier of sacrificial 
offerings i.e fire), Lokahkara (maker of the worlds) 
Vedakara (originator of the Vedas), Sutrakara (composer 
of Aphorisms), Sanatana (eternal), Maharsi (great sage), 
Kapilacarya (preceptor Kapila), Visvadipti (light of the 
Universe), Trilocana^^* (three-eyed), Pinakapani (holding 
Pinaka in the hand), Bhudeva (god of the earth), Svastida 
(bestower of weal), Sukrta (meritorious), Sudhi (intelligent), 
Dhatrdhaman (abode of the Creator), Dhiiinakara (creator 
of lustre), Sarvada (bestower of all), Sarvagocara (visible 
to all), Brahmasrk (creator of Brahma), Visvasrk (creator 
of the universe), Sarga (creation), Karnikarapriya (fond 
of the pericarp of the lotus), Kavi (poet), Sakha, Visakha, 
Co^akha, Siva (the cause of welfare), Bhi^ak Anuttama 
(excellent physician), Gaiigaplavodaka (water flowing in 
Ganga), Bhavya (good), Puskala (eminent one), Sthapati 
(architect) Sthira (steady), Vijitatman(self-conqueror), Vidhe- 
yatman (self-controlled), Bhutavahanasarathi (with Bhutas 
(globlins) as charioteers), Sagana (accompanied by Ganas), 
Ganakaya(with Ganas as body-guards), Sukirti(of good fame), 
chinnasamsaya (one to whom doubts have been cleared), 
Kamadeva (identical with cupid), Kamapala (protector of 
the desires), Bhasmoddhulitavigraha (whose body is dusted 
with Bhasma), Bhasmapriya (fond of Bhasma), Bhasma^ayin 
(lying on Bhasma), Kamin (lover), Kanta (brilliant), 
Kptagama (one who has created Agamas), Samavarta (who 
whirls the wheel of worldly existence), Anivrttatma 
(whose soul never turns back), Dharmapufija (mass of 
"irtue), Sadasiva (auspicious for ever), Akalma?a (sinless), 
Punyatman (meritorious saul), Caturbahu (four-armed), 
Durasada (difficult of access), Durlabha (rare one), 

17Q. Siva is said to have a third eye in the middle of the forehead. 
When it opens it destroys the universe including the gods. ^ 



Ko (irudrasarhhitd 


1401 


Durgama (impassable), Durga (Difficult of being 
attained), Sarvayudhavi^arada (expert in wielding 
weapons), Adhyatmayoganilaya (stationed in spiritual 
Yoga), Sutantu (wearing good fabric of universe), 
Tantuvardhana (enhancer of the fabric), Subhahga (having 
'»n<!picious limbs), Lokasarahga (essence of the worlds), 
Jagadlsa (lord of the universe), suppressor of (wicked) 
people, Bhasmasuddhikara (causing purity through Bhasma), 
Abhiru (non-cowardly), Ojasvin (vigorous), l^uddhavigraha 
(of pure body), Asadhya (unachievable), Sadhusadhya 
(achievable easily by the saintly), Bhrtyamarkatarupadhrk 
(assuming the form of the servile monkey), Hiranyaretas 
(gold-semened), Paurana (ancient one), Ripujivahara 
(destroyer of enemies), Balin (strong,) Mahahrada (deep 
eddy), Mahagarta (deep ditch), Siddha, Vrndaravandita 
(saluted by the gods), Vyaghracarmambara (wearing the 
tiger hide), Vyalin (clasped by serpents), Mahabhuta (great 
living being), Mahanidhi (great storehouse), Amrta (nectar), 
Amrtapa (drinker of the nectar), Srimat (glorious), 
Paftcajanya^®® (favourable to the five classes of beings), 
Prabhanjana (hailstorm) Paftcavimsatitattvastha'®^ (stationed 
in twentyfive principles or entities), Parijata (celestial 
tree), Paratpara (greater than the greatest), 

Sulabha (easy of access), Suvrata (of good rites), Sura 
(heroic), Vahmayaikanidhi (treasure stored in all extant 
literature), Varnasramaguru (preceptor of castes and stages of 
life. Varnin (the religious student),|Satrujit (conqueror of the 
enemies), Satrutapana (scorcher of enemies), A^rama (stage 

of life), Sramana (ascetic), Ksama (emaciated), Jhanavat 
(wise) Acalesvara (lord of the mountain), Pramanabhuta 
(the authoritative proof), Durjfteya (difficult to be known), 
Suparna (Garuda of good wings), Vayuvahana (having 
wind as vehicle), Dhanurdhara (wielder of the bow), Dhanur- 
veda (science of archery), Guna (attribute), Sasigu^akara 
(storehouse of the qualities of the moon), Satya (truth) 
Satyapara (devoted to truth), Adina (non-d is trussed), Dharma 
(sacred virtue), Godharma^asana (chestiser of the beastly- 

iRo. The five tribes mentioned in the RV. comprise 3 r«T, 
and 

i8i. See P, 107a note. 



1402 Swapurd^ 

iiatuicd), Aiiantacirsti (of innnitc vision), Ananda (bliss) 
Danda (punishment), Damayitr (suppressor), Dama (con¬ 
troller of senses), Abhiciiiya (woithy of being approached), 
Mahfiinaya (of great Maya), Visvakarmavisarada (adept 
in all activities of the Universe), Vitaraga (devoid of pas¬ 
sion), Vinliattran (of well-disciplined soul), Tapasvin (asce¬ 
tic), Bhutabhavana (conceiver and creator of living beings), 
Unmatlavcsa (having the guise of a mad one), Pracchanna 
(hidden one), Jilakama (conqueror of lust), Jitendriya 
(cotKjueror of scnsi*-organs), Kalyanaprakrti (ofgood nature), 
Kalya (agreeable) Sarvaloka-Prajapati (creator of worlds), 
Tarasvin (forceful) T.lraka (one who takes across and saves), 
Dhimat (intelligent), Pradhana (chief), Avyaya prabhu 
(imperishable lord), Lokapala (protector of the worlds), 
Antaratnian (invaanent soul), Kalpadi (the beginning of 
Aeon), Kamah'ksana (lotus-eyed), Vedasastrarthatattvajna 
(knower of Mic principles and meanings of the Sastras), 
Niyamin (observer of restraints), Niyamasraya (support of 
obscivanccs and restraints), Candra (identical with the 
moon), Surya (identical with the sun), Sani (Saturn), Ketu 
(planet Kt^tii), Varaiiiga (excellent-bodied), Vidriimacchavi 
f having (he lustre of Coral), Bhaktivasya (subservient 
io (U'votion), Parambrahma (great Brahman), Mrgabanar- 
!noa (one who discharged arrows on the deer),* Anagha 
(faidtless), Adri (mountain), Adryalaya (resident of the 
mountain), Kanta (the luminous), Paramatman (great 
soul), Jagadguru (preceptor of the universe), Sarvakarma- 
laya (abode of all rites), Tusta (satisfied), Mahgalya 
(auspicious), Mahgalavrta (surrounded by auspiciousness), 
Mahatapas (of great austerity), Dirghatapas (of long pena¬ 
nce), Sthavistha (grossest one), Sthavira-Dhruva (aged 

and steady), Ahan (day), Samvatsara (year), Vyapti (con- 
corniiance), Prarnana (proof), Paramtapas (supreme penance). 

Samvatsarakira (one causing the year). Mantra Pratyaya 
(credence), Sarvalapana (scorcher of all), Aja (unborn), 
Sarvesvara (lord of all), Siddha, Mahatejas (of great 
lustre), Mahfdwla (of great strength), Yogin, Yogya 
(worthy), Maharetas (of great virility), Siddhi (achieve¬ 
ment), Sarvadi (beginning of all), Agraha (elderly), Vasu 
•SI*. SkS Cli. J!) 



KotirudrasarkhitS 


1403 


(wealth), Vasumanas (of praiseworthy mind), Satya (of 
truthful existence), Sarvapapahara (destroyer of sins), Hara 
(remover of sins), Sukirli (rtf good fame), J^obhana (of 
good beauty), Sragvin (wearing garlands), Vedanga (an¬ 
cillary of the Vedas), Vedavit ( knower of the Vedas), Muni 
(ascetic), Bhrajisnu (shining), Bhojana (food), Bhoktr 
(diner). Lokanatha (lord of worlds), Dnradhara (uncon¬ 
querable), Amrta (nectar), Sasvata (permanent), Santa 
(quiescent,), Banahasta(holding arrows in (he hand), Pratapa- 
vat (valorous), Kamandaludhara (holding water-pot), 
Dhanvin (having bow), Avahinanasagocara (inexpressible 
and inconceivable), Atmdriya (beyond the scope of sense- 
organs) , Mahamaya (wielding great Maya), Sarvavasa 
(abode of all), Catuspatha (of four paths), Kalayogin 
(united in time), Mahanada (of loud sound), Mahotsfiba 
(of great zeal), Mahabala (of great strength), Mahabuddhi 
(of great intellect), Mahavirya (of great virility), Bhuta- 
carin (moving about with the Bhutas), Piirandara^**^ (des¬ 
troyer of the cities f)r identical with Tndra), Nisacara 
(stalking at night), Pretacarin (moving about with the 
ghosts), Maha^akti (of groat strength), Mahadyuti (of 
great lustre), Anirdesyavapus (whose body cannot be speci¬ 
fically indicated), iSrimat (glorious), Sarvacarya (preceptor 
of all), Manogati (having the velocity of the mind), 
Bahusriiti (of many ears, or, of great fame), Mahamaya (of 
great Maya), Niyatatinan (of restrained soul), Dhruva 
(stc.idy), Adhruva (unsteady), Tcjaslojas (splendour of 
solendouis), Dyulidhara ( having brilliance), Janaka (father), 
Sarvasasana (chastiser of all), Nftyapriya (fond of dance), 
Nityanrtya (ever-dancing), Praki^atman (of luminous soul),* 
Prakasaka (the illuminator), Spa^tak^ara (of clear words 
ind syllables), Budha (wise). Mantra, Samana (impar¬ 
tial), Sarasamplava (floating the essence), Yugadikrt (cause 
of the beginning of Vugas), Yugavarta (causing the Yugas 
to revolve), Gambhira (grave), Vrsavahana (bnll-vehicled), 
]s(a (one who is wished for or worshipped), ViiSisfa (spe¬ 
cial or well-equipped), ^i^te^ta /liked by the cultured), 

iBa- Siva obtaim'd tlus name by dr>iioyi'i|j ihr tripjr rity of (he 
Otntvtr. This city- now traceable in the iasifnifkant viUage ui Tewar on 
tbc bnaki of the Mrmadft near Jabalpur was rhe captial of Cedi KinfLs 



1404 


Sulabha (easy of access), S.irasodhana (purifier of the 
essence), Tirtbarfipa (of the form of the holy centre), 
Tirthanaman (named after the holy centres), Tirtha- 
drsya (visible at the holy centres), Tirthada (bestower of 
Tirthas), Apam Nidhi (storehouse of waters), Adhisthana 
(supporting base), Durjaya (difficult to be conquered), Jaya- 
kalavit (knower of the time of conquest), Pratisthita (well 
established), Pramanajfta (knower of Testimonies), Hira- 
nyakavaca (having golden coat of mail), Hari (identical 
with Visnu), Vimocana (releascr), Suragana (having gods 
as attendants), Vidyesa (lord of lore), Bindusamsraya 
(stationed in the mystic dot), Vatarupa (of the form of 
wind), Amalonmayin (free from impurity), Vikartr (spe¬ 
cial maker), Gahana (dense), Guha (identical with Karti- 
keya), Karana (cause), Kartr (active), Sarvabandha- 
vimocana (releascr from all bondages), Vyavasaya (deter¬ 
mination), Vyavasthana (establisher of order), Sthanada 
(bestower of proper position), Jagadadija (originating at the 
beginning of the universe), Guruda (conferer of weighty 
things), Lalita (simple and delicate), Bheda (difference), 
Navatman (new soul), Atmani Samsthita (stationed in the 
soul), Viresvara (lord of heroes), Virabhadra (Identical 
with Virabhadra), Virasana vidhi (knowing the mode of 
sitting in the heroic posture). Guru (preceptor), Viracu- 
damani (crest-jewel of heroes), Vettr (knower), Cidananda 
(sentience and bliss), Nadisvara (lord of rivers), Ajna- 
dhara (holder of behests), Trisulin (holding the Trident), 
Sipivis(a (entering and stationed in rays), .^ivalaya (of aus¬ 
picious residence), Balakhilya (identical with the sage 
Balakhilyas), Mahavira (great hero), Tigmaih^u (of fiery 
rays), Badhira (deaf), Khaga (traversing the sky), Abhirama 
(the charming one), Susarana (worthy refuge), Subrahmanya 
(identical with Kumara), Sudhapati (lord) of nectar), Magha- 
vat (identical with Indra), Kausika (identical with sage 
Kausika), Gomat (possessing cows, rays etc.), Virama (final 
stoppage), Sarvasadhana (having all equipments), Lalatak^a 
(having eye in the forehead), Visvadeha (having the 
’ini'CISC as body), Sara (essence), Sprhsara Gakrablift 
(holder (»f the wheel of worldly existence), Amoghadanda 
(of never-failing punishment), Madhyastha (stationed in the 



Ko^rudraseahhitd 


1405 


ihiddle), Hari^a (deer), Brahmavarcasa (having the brahmi- 
nical lustre), Paramartha (the greatest entity), Paramaya 
(wielding the great Maya), Saficaya (collection), Vyaghra- 
Komala (tender to the tiger), Ruci (interest), Bahuruci 
(having great interest), Vaidya (physician), Vacaspati 
(lord of speech), Ahaspati (lord of the day, the sun), 
Ravi (sun), Virocana (sun, moon or fire), Skanda 
(Karttikeya), Sastr (chastiser), Vaivasvata Yama (Yama 
the son of the Sun), Yukti (joint), Unnatakirti (of lofty 
fame), Sanuraga (loving), Purafljana, Kailasadhipati (lord 
of Kailasa), Kanta (brilliant), Savitr (sun), Ravilocana 
(having the sun as the eye), Vi^vottama (excellent ip the 
universe), Vitabhaya (free from fear), ViSvabhartr 
(supporter of the universe), Anivarita (unobstructed), 
Nitya (eternal), Niyatakalyana (of invariable welfare), 
Punya^ravanakirtana {hearing about and glorification of 
whom is meritorious), DuraSrava (heard far off), ViiSvasaha 
(forbearer of everything), Dhyeya (worthy of being medi¬ 
tated upon), Duhsvapna, nasana (destroyer of bad dreams), 
Uttarana (he who takes across), Du§krtiha (destroyer 
of wicked deeds), Vijfteya (worthy of being known), 
Duhsaha (unbearable), Dhava (lord), Anadi (having 

no beginning), Bhu (earth), Bhuvah Laksmih (wealth and 
the glory of the earth), Kiritin (wearing the crown), 
Trida^adhipa (lord of the gods), Vi^vagoptr (protector of 
the universe), Visvakartr (creator of the universe), Suvira 
(gfood hero), Rucirangada (bestower of beautiful limbs), 
Janana (the progenitor), Janajanmadi (cause of birth etc. 
of the people), Pritiman (possessing pleasure), Nidman 
(just), Dhruva (steady), Vasistha (sage Vasi^tha), Ka^yapa 
(sage Ka4yapa), Bhanu (sun), Bhima (terrible), Bhima- 
parakrama (of terrible exploit), Pranava (the mystic 
syllable OM), Satpathacara (traversing the path of the 
good), Mahakosa (of great treasure), Mahadhana (of great 
.wealth), Janmadhipa (lord of birth), Mahadeva (great 
lord), Sakalagamaparaga (one who has mastered all the 
Vedas), Tattva (tenet), Tattvavit (knower of truth), 
Ekatman (single soul), Vibhu (all-pervading), Vi?nuvibhu- 
sana (ornament of Vi^nu), Rsl (sage), Brahmana (knower 
of Brahman), Aisvaryam (lordliness), Janmamrtyujaratiga 



(who is beyond birth, death and old age), Paficatattvasamut* 
patti (origin of the five principles), Visvesa (lord of the 
universe), Vimalodaya (of pure rise), Anadyanta^ (having 
neither beginning nor end), Atmayoni (having the self as 
the source), Vatsala (darling), Bhutalokadhrk (supporter of 
the world of living beings), Gayatrivallabha (lover of the 
mantra Gayatri), Prarhsu (lofty), Visvavasa (abode of the 
universe), Prabhakara (sun), Sisu (infant), Girirata (delight¬ 
ed in the mountain), Samrat (emperor), Susena (having 
auspicious army), Sura^atruha (slayer of the enemies of 
gods). 

Anemi (having no restricting rims), Istanemi, 
Mukunda(bestower of salvation or identical with lord Visnu), 
Vigatajvara (free from fever), Svayamjyoti (self-luminous), 
Mahajyoti (of great splendour), Tanujyoti (of short 
splendour), Acancala (non-fickle), Pingala (of tawny colour), 
Kapilasmasru (of brown moustache), Bhalanetra (with an 
eye in the forehead), Trayitanu (having the Vedas for 
body), Jfianaskandha (with branching knowledge), 
Mahaniti (of great justice), Vi^votpatti (origin of the 
universe), Upaplava (obstacle, distressing), Bhaga (fortune), 
Vivasvat (sun), Aditya (sun), Gatapara (one who has 
reached the other shore), Brhaspati (preceptor of gods), 
Kalyanagunanaman (having auspicious attributes and 
names), Papaha (destroyer of sins), Punyadar^ana (of 
meritorious vision), Udarakirti (of liberal renown), Udyogin 
(enterprising), Sadyogin (of good yoga), Sadasattrapa 
(ashamed of the good and the bad), Naksatramalin (having 
the garland of stars), Nake^a (lord of heaven), Svadhistha- 
na (self-based), Sadasraya (support to the six principles), 
Pavitra (holy), Papanasa (destroyer of sins), Manipura 
(filling with jewels), Nabhogati (traversing the firmament), 
Hrtpundarikasina (occupying the lotus of the heart), 
•Sakra (identical with Indra), Santi (peace), Vrsakapi (of 
the form of Dharma or Boar incarnation), Usna (hot), 
Grhapati (lord of the house), Krsna, Samartha (capable), 
Anarthana^ana (destroyer of evil calamities), Adharma^atru 
(inimical to evil), Ajfteya (unknowable), Pumhuta (invoked 
many times), Puru^ruta (very famous), Brahmagarbha 
(having brahma within) Byhadgarbha having big 



KofirudrasaihhiUl 


1407 


womb), Dharmadhenu (cow of virtue), Dhanagama 
(source of wealth), Jagaddhitaisin (well-wisher of universe) 
Sugata (having good gait), Kumara, Ku^alagama (source 
of welfare), Hiranyavarna (golden-coloured), JyDtismat 
(luminous), Nanabhutarata (interested in different living 
beings), Dhvani (sound), Arogya (health), Namanadhyaksa 
(presiding deity of obeisances), Visvamitra(sage Vi^vamitra), 
Dhanesvara (lord of wealth), Brahmajyoti (brilliance of 
Brahman), Vasu (the semidivine beings Vasus), Dhaman 
(splendour), Mahajyoti (of great splendour), Anuttama 
(excellent), Matamaha (maternal grandfather), MatartiSvan 
(wind-god), Nabhasvat (vaporous air), Nagaharadhrk 
(wearing garlands of serpents), Pulastya, Pulaha, Agastya, 
Jatukarnya, Para^ara (all the five sages), Niravarananirvara 
(uncovered and unprevented), Vairancya (son of Brahma), 
Vistarasravas (Kusa-eared), Atmabhu (self-born), Aniruddha 
(unobstructed), Atri Jfianamurti (knowledge-bodied), 
MahayaSas (of great renown), Lokaviragrani (leader of the 
heroes of the world), Vira (heroic), Candra (moon), 
Satyaparakrama (of truthful exploit), Vyalakalpa (resembl¬ 
ing a huge serpent), Mahakalpa (of great conception), 
Kalpavrk^ (wish-yielding kalpa tree), Kaladhara (possessing 
arts), Alaiikarisnu (desirous of adorning), Acala (unmoving), 
Roci§nu (appealing), Vikramonnata (lofty in valour), Ayu 
(longevity), Sabdapati (lord of worlds), Vagmin (eloquent), 
Plavana (floating), Sikhisarathi (having fire as charioteer), 
Asamspr?ta (untouched), Atithi (guest), Satrupramathin 
suppressor of enemies), Padapasana (tree-seated), Vasu^ravas 
(wealth-eared), Kavyavaha (bearing Kavya offerings), Pratapta 
(heated), Visvabhojana (universe-dieted) Japya (worthy of 
being worshipped with Japas), Jaradisamana (subduer of old 
age etc.), Lohita (red), Tanunapat (fire-god), Prsadasva 
(wind-god), Nabhoyoni (origin of firmament), Supratika (of 
good-symbols), Tamisraha (destroyer of darkness), Nidagha 
(summer),. Tapana (sun), Meghabhaksa (devouring clouds), 
Parapurafijaya (conqueror of the cities of enemies), 
Sukhanila (pleasing wind), Sunispanna (well born), 
Surabhi (fragrant), l§i$iratmaka (winter), Vasanta Madhava 
(spring), Gri§ma (summer), Nabhasya (month of Bhadra- 
pada), Bijavahana (carrier of seeds), Angiraguru (preceptor 



1408 


Sioapurd^ 


Angiras), Vimala Atreya (pure son of the sage Atri), 
Viivavahana (having the universe as vehicle), Pavana 
(sanctifier), Purajit (conqueror of the cities j, 8akra 
(Indra), Traividya (of three lores), Navavarana (preventer 
of the nine), Manobuddhi ahariikara (mind intellect ego), 
Ksetrajfia (individual soul), Ksetrapalaka (protector of 
the field), Jamadagni (sage), Jalanidhi (storehouse of 
water), Vigala, Visvaga, Visvagalaya (universal abode.) 

Aghora (non-terrible), Anuttara (unsurpassed), Yajfia 
(sacrifice), Srestha (excellent), Nihsreyasaprada (bestower 
of salvation), Saila (mountain), Gaganakundabha (resembl¬ 
ing the sky flower kunda), Danavari (enemy of the Dana- 
vas), Arindama (suppressor of enemies), Camunda, Janaka, 
Garu (beautiful), Nih^alya (free from paining dart), Loka> 
ialyadhfk (holder of the darts of the world), Caturveda 
(four Vedas), Gaturbhava (possessed of the four-fold emo¬ 
tions), Gatura (skilful), Gaturapriya (fond of the skilful), 
Amnaya (Vedas), Samamnaya (well-recited Vedas), Tirtha- 
deva (lord of the holy centre), Sivalaya (having auspi¬ 
cious residence), Bahurupa (multiformed), Maharupa (im- 
mense-formed), Sarvarupa (omniformed), Garacara (pervad¬ 
ing the mobile and immobile being), Nyayanirnayaka (decider 
of Justice), Neya (led), Nyayagamya (knowable through 
justice), Nirafljana (spotless), Sahasramurdhan (thousand 
headed), Devendra (lord of the gods), Sarvasastra Prabhafl- 
jana (breaker of weapons and missiles), Mundin (of clean 
shaven head), Virupa (hideous-formed), Vikrta (deformed), 
Dandin (staff-bearing), Danin (donor), Gunottama (excel¬ 
ling in good qualities), Pingalaksa (tawny-eyed), Bahvak^a 
(many-eyed), Nilagriva (blue-necked), Niramaya (free from 
sickness), Sahasrabahu (thousand-armed), Sarve^a (lord of 
all)j Saranya (worthy of taking refuge in), Sarvalokadhrk 
(supporter of all the worlds), Padmasana (lotus-seated), 
Pararhjyoti (the greatest splendour), Paramparya Phalaprada 
(the bestower of benefits), Padmagarbha (lotus-wombed), 
Mahagarbha (huge-wombed), Visvagarbha (having the 
universe in the womb), Vicaksana (skilful), paravarajfta 
(knower of the greatest and the smallest), Varada (bestower 
of boons), Varenya (excellent), Mahasvana (of loud sound), 
DevSsuraguru (preceptor of the gods and Asuras), Deva- 



Kolirudrasathhiti 


1409 


devasuranamaskrta (lord adored by the gods and the 
Asuras), Devasuramahamitra (friend of the gods ard the 
Asuras), Devasuramahesvara (lord of the gods and the 
Asuras), Devasuresvara (lord of the gods and Asuras), Divya 
(divine being), Dcvasuramahasraya (great base of the gods 
and the Asuras), Devadeva (lord of the gods), Anaya 
(having no mean strategy), Acintya (inconceivable), Dcva- 
tatma (soul of all deities), Atmasambhava (self-born), 
Sadyojata (sudden-born), Asuravyadha (hunter of the Asu¬ 
ras), Devasirhha (lion among the gods), Divakara (sun) 
Vibudhagracara(going at the head of the gods), ^resfha(most 
excellent), Sarvadevottamottama (most excellent of all the gods), 
Sivajhanarata (interested in the knowledge of Siva), Srimat 
(glorious), Sikhi (fire-god), Sriparvatapriya (fond of the 
mountain Sriparvata), Vajrahasta (having the thunderbolt 
in the hand), Siddhakhacjga (having steady sword), Nara- 
sirhha nipatana (one who felled down Narasiihha), Brahm- 
carin (traverser of the path of Brahman), Lokacarin 
(moving about in the world), Dharmacarin (the traverser 
of the path of virtue), Dhanadhipa (the lord of wealth) 
Nandin (the delighted one), NandHvara (identical .with 
NandKvara), Ananta (the infinite), l^agnavrttidhara (one 
adopting the activities of the naked), §uci (the pure), 
Lingadhyaksa (the presiding lord of Lingas), Suradhyaksa 
(presiding deity of the gods), Yugadhyaksa (presiding 
deity of the Yugas), Yugapaha (destroyer of Yugas), 
Svadhama (self-housed), Svagata (self-pervading), Svargin 
(attaining heaven), Svara (accent), Svaramaya svana 
(vowel sound), Banadhyaksa (supervisor of arrows), 
Bijakartr (creator of seeds), Karmakrt (performer of rites), 
Dharmasambhava (born of virtues), Dambha (arrogance), 
Lobha (covetousness), Sambhu (bestower of the weal), 
Sarvabhutamahesvara (great lord of all living beings), 
SmaSananilaya (dweller in the cremation ground), Tryaksa 
(three-eyed), Setu (bridge), Apratimakrti (of unequalled 
features), Lokottarasphuta (most excellent in the world), 
Loka (the world), Tryambaka^®* (three-eyed), Nagabhu^ana 

183. Siva named Tryambaka represents the Various Triads on 



1410 Sivapuri^a 

(having serpents for his ornaments), Andhakari (enemy of 
Andhaka), Mayadvesin (enemy of Maya), Vi|nukandhara- 
patana (one who felled the neck of Visnu), fiinadosa 
(deficient in blemishes), Aksayaguna (of unending attri¬ 
butes), Daksari (inimical to Daksa), Pusadantabhit (tooth- 
breaker of Pusan (sun)), Purna (full), Purayitr (the filler), 
Punya (meritorious), Sukumara (very delicate and tender), 
Sulocana (of good eyesj, Sanmargapa (the lord of the 
path of the good), Priya (loving), Adhurta (non-roguish), 
Pu^yakirti (of meritorious fame), Anamaya (free from 
sickness), Manojava (having the speed of the mind), Tirtha- 
kara (maker of holy centres), Jafila (having matted hair), 
Niyame:^vara (lord of restraints), Jivitantakara (cause of 
the end of life), Nitya (eternal), Vasuretas (cold-semened), 
Vasuprada (bcstower of riches), Sadgati (goal of the 
good), Siddhida (bestower of Siddhis), Siddha, sajjati 
(of good nativity), Khalakan^aka (thorny to the knavish), 
Kaladhara (possessor of digits), Mahakalabhuta (the being 
of great Kala), Satyaparayana (devoted to tru th), Lokala- 
vanyakartf (creator of the beauty of the worlds), Lokot- 
tarasukhalaya (abode of the most excellent happiness), 
Candrasafijivana (enlivener of the moon), Sastr (chastiser), 
Lokagraha (grasper of the worlds), Mahadhipa (great lord), 
Lokabandhu (kinsman of the worlds), Lokanatha (ruler of 
the worlds), Kr^ajfta (grateful), Krttibhusita*®^ (adorned with 
the elephant’s hide), Anapaya(without danger or distress), 
Akiara (imperishable), Kanta (brilliant), SarvaiSastrabhfd- 
vara (foremost among the bearers of all weapons), Tejo- 
maya (full of brilliance), Dyutidhara (resplendent), Loka- 
mani (honouring the world), Gh^narnava (ocean of mercy), 
l^ucismita (of pure smiles), Prasannatman (of delighted 
soul), Ajeya (invincible), Duratikrama (untransgressable), 
Jyotirmaya (refulgent), Jagannatha (lord of the universe), 
Nirakara (shapeless), Jalesvara (lord of waters), Tumba- 

wliich the entire eosnios is based. It is both the deity of the three eyes 
or the conscious principles of J&grat, Svapna and Su.supti or Surya, Candra 
and Agni and also the son of three mothers Ambit, Ambik& and Amba]ik&. 
The three sisters represent the three nioiheis who create the three great 
principles of mind, life and matter 

184. For the origin of this name see .^P. RS. Yuddha Ch. 57. 



Ko firudrasa rhhitS 


1411 


Vina (having his Vina made oF the gourd), Mahakaya 
(of huge bod;), Vi^oka (free from sorrow), Sokanalana 
(destroyer of sorrows), Trilokapa (lord of the three 
worlds), Trilokesa (suzerain of the three worlds), Sarva- 
iSuddhi (the all-pure), Adhoksaja (identical with Visnu), 
Avyaktalak^an i (of unmanifest characteristics), Vyakta- 
avyakta Deva (lord of manifest and unmanifest), Visam pati 
(lord of subjects), Para Siva (great Siva), Vasu (wealth), 
Nasasara (breath, essence of the nose), Manadhara (holder 
of honour), Yama (restrainer), Brahma, Vi9nu, Prajapala 
( protector of subjects), Haihsa (swan), Hamsagati (having 
the gait of swan), Vayas (bird), Vedhas (dispenser), 
Vidh3.tr (disposer of fate), Dhitr (sustainer), Srastr 
(creator), Hartr (destroyer), Gaturinukha (four-faced), 
Kailasasikharavasin (resident on the top of Kailasa), Sarva- 
vasin (residing in all), Sadagati (always moving), Hiranya- 
garbha—Druhlna (identical with Brahma), Bhutapala 
(protector of the Bhutas), Bhupati (lord of the earth), 
Sadyogin, Yogavid, Yogin (great Yogin), Varada (bestowcr 
of boons), Brahmanapriya (fond of brahmins), Devapriya 
(fond of gods), Devanatha (lord of gods), Devaka (shining), 
Devacintaka (one considerate of the gods), Virupaksa 
(of uneven eyes) Vrsada (granter of virtues), Vrsavardhana 
(enhancer of virtues), Nirmama (detached), Nirahahkara 
(free from egotism), Nirmoha (free from delusion), Nirupa- 
drava (harmless), Darpaha (destroyer of arrogance), 
Darpada (bestower of arrogance), Dfpta (arrogant), Sarvar- 
thaparivartaka (cause of change in every thing), Sahas- 
rarcis (thousand-rayed), Bhutibhu^a (having Bhasma as 
ornament), Snigdhakrti (of loving shape), Adakfina (non- 
chivalrous), Bhutabhavya Bhavannatha (lord of the past, 
present and future), Vibhava (affluence), (Bhutina^ana 
(destroyer of prosperity), Arthanartha (of good and bad 
fortune), Mahakosa (of great treasure), Parakaryaika- 
pani^ita (sole scholar in other’s activities). 

Ni^ka^faka (free from thorns), Kjrtananda (taking 
delight), Nirvyaja (free from false pretexts), Vyajamardana 
(suppressor of false pretexts), Sattvavat (possessing Sattva), 
Sattvika, Sattva, Kftasneha (loving), Krtagama (one who 
has made Agamas), Akampita (non-trembling), Gunagrahin 



1412 



(grasping goodness), Naikatman (non-single soul), Naika- 
karmakrt (performing many activities), Suprita (well-pleased,) 
Sukhada (bestower of happiness), Suk^ma (subtlej, Sukara 
(of good hands), Dak§inanila (southern wind), Nandi Skanda 
(delighted Skanda), Dhara (mountain) Dhurya (worthy of 
being considered at the head), Prakata pritivardhana 
(enhancer of manifest pleasure), Aparajita (the undefeated), 
Sarvasaha (bearer of everything) Govinda, Sattvavahana 
(cause of the flow of Sattva quality), Adhrta (unsupported) 
Svadhrta (self-supported), Siddha, Putamurti (pure formed), 
Ya^odhana (considering fame as wealth Varahairhga dhrk 
(holding the horn of Boar), Sj-ngin (having a horn), Balavat 
(strong), Ekanayaka (sole lord), Sruti prakasa, (Illuminator 
of the Vedas), Srutimat (possessing renown), Ekabandhu- 
Anekadhrk (sole kinsman supporting many), Srivatsala 
(darling of the goddess of Glory), Sivarambha (of auspicious 
beginning), Santabha (tranquil and well), Sama(equanimous) 
Yasas (fame), Bhusaya (lying on the ground), Bhusana 
(ornamented), Bhuti (prosperity), Bhutikrt (creator of pro¬ 
sperity), Bhutabhavana (conceiver of all living beings), 
Akampa (non-trembling), Bhaktikaya (Having devotion as 
body) Kalahani (destroyer of Kala), Kalavibhu(lord of arts), 
Satyavratin (of truthful rites), Mahatyagin (great renouncer) 
Nitya (eternal) Santi Parayana (devoted to peace) Pararthavjrtti 
(actively engaged for others) Varada (granter of boons), 
Virakta (unattached) Visarada (skilful), Subhada (Bestower 
of auspiciousness), Subhakartr (maker of auspicious circum¬ 
stances) , Subhanaman (of auspicious names), !§ubha (himself 
auspicious), Anarthita (non-requested), Gunagrahin (acceptor 
of Gunas), Akartr (non-doer) Kahkaprabha (Gold lustred) 
Svabhavabhadra (naturally good), Madhyastha (stationed in 
the middle), iSatrughna (Destroyer of enemies), Vighnana^ana 
(destroyer of obstacles) Sikhan^in (having tuft), Kavacin 
(having a coat of mail) l^ulin (having a trident) Jatin 
(having matted hair). 

Mundin(having clean-shaven head), Kund^lin(having ear¬ 
rings), Amftyu (deathless) Sarvadrk (seeing ali)Simha (leonine) 
Tejora^i (heap of splendour), Mahamani (of great jewel), 
Asamkhyeya (innumerable), Aprameyatman (of immeasurable 
Atman), Viryavat (of great virya), Viryakovrcj|i(knower of vir- 



KofirudrasaMitS 


1413 


ility), Vedya (comprehensible), Viyogatman (of disunited soul), 
Saptavaramunisvara (Identical with the seven junior sages), 
Anuttama (the most excellent), Duradharsa (incapable of 
being attacked), Madhura (sweet), Priyadarsana (ofloving 
vision),iSure^a (lord of gods), Smarana (recollection) Sarva 
(destroyer), Sabda (comprehensible through words of the 
scripture). Pratapatdvara (foremost among those who 
blaze), Kalapaksa (time-winged), Kalakala (destroyer of 
death) Valayikrtavasuki (having Vasuki as his wristlet), 
Mahesvasa (having great bow), Mahibhartr (lord of the 
earth),,Niskalahka (stainless), Visriikhala (free from fetters), 
Dyumani (Jewel of the firmament), Tarani (sun),Dhanya 
(Blessed), Siddhida (Bestower of Siddhis). Siddhisadhana 
(achiever of Siddhis) Visvatah sampravrtta (engaged in 
activities from everywhere) Vyudhoraska (of broad chest), 
Mahabhuja (of great arms), Sarvayoni (source of everything) 
Niratanka (free from terror), Naranaraynapriya (fond of 
Nara and Narayana), Nirlepa (free from attachment) 
Yatisangatman (associating with the ascetics). Nirvyanga, 
(free from crippledness Vyanganasana (destoryer of mutilated 
state) Stava (Hymn), Stutipriya (fond of eulogy), Stoty 
(eulogiser) Vyaptamurti (of pervasive body), Nirakula (unag¬ 
itated), Niravadyatamayopaya (of blameless means) Vidyarasi 
(heap of learning), Satkrta (honoured and welcomed) 
Prasantabuddhi (of calm intellect), Aksun^a (unbeaten), 
Samgraha (collection), Nityasundara (ever beautiful), 
Vaiyaghra dhurya (of tigerish nature and considered at the 
head) DhatriSa (lord of the earth), Samkalpa (conception), 
l3arvaripati (lord of the night), Paramarthaguru (real precep¬ 
tor), Datta identical with, Datta (Atreya), Suri (wise), 
A^ritavatsala (favourably disposed towards dependants) Soma 
(accompanied by Parvati) Rasajfia (knower of the taste) 
Rasada (Bestower of Sweetness), Sarvasattvavalambana 
(Supporter of all living .beings). 

132. Thus Vi^ou eulogised Siva with the thousand 
names. Siva was prayed to and worshipped with lotuses. 

133. O brahmins, then the enthusiastic Siva performed 
something wonderful and pleasing. Listen to that attentively. 



1414 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 


^wapuri^ 


(^fficacy of the thousand names of Siaa) * 


SUta said :— 

1. On hearing the eulogy made by Vi^nu consisting of 
the hymn of his thousand divine names lord Siva became 
delighted* 

2. In order to test Vi?nu, Siva, the lord of the worlds 
concealed one of the lotus-flowers. 

3. There was a shortage of one lotus-flower from 
among the thousand lotuses. Hence Visnu was distressed in 
the course of his worship of Siva. 

4. He thought within himself “Where could the lotus- 
flower have gone ? If it has gone, let it go for good. Is 
not my own eye a lotus ? 

5. After thinking thus, he plucked out his eye and 
repeated the last name Sarvasattvavalambana. Full of 
emotion he worshipped and eulogised Siva. 

6. On seeing Vi§nu in that attitude, Visnu the 
preceptor of the universe appeared before him and forbade 
him do that. 

7. Lord Siva descended from the pedestal of that 
earthern phallic image installed by Vii^nu. 

8. Bowing to Siva, rising up in the form of a mass 
of splendour as mentioned before, Visnu stood in front of 
him and eulogised him particularly. 

9. Looking mercifully at Visnu, who stood before him 
with palms joined in reverence, the delighted lord Siva 
laughingly said then. 

Siva said :— 

10. O Vi^nu, all the desires in your mind, particularly 
the task of the gods have been understood by me. Indeed 
you are engaged in the task of the gods. 

185. In the list of one thovisand names of iSiva, this name stands at 
the end. There beinR no lotus left for the propitiation of 8iva in this 
name (one lotus having been coijccaled by lord Siva himself for the test) 
ViijQU plucked off his own eye and offered the .'same to Siva. 



Ko ^rudrasaMtd 


1415 


11. For the achievement of the task of the gods and 
for the destruction of the Daityas without strain, I shall 
give the auspicious discus Sudar4ana to you. 

12. O lord of the gods, for your benefit ponder over 
this form, pleasing to all the worlds, which has seen by you 
(now ). 

13. If this discus, this form and this hymn of 
thousand names is remembered in the battlefield it will 
quell the misery of the gods. 

14. O one of good rites, thanks to my blessings, all 
those who listen to this will achieve their desires without 
serious dangers. 

SUta said :— 

15. After saying this, the lord gave the discus of the 
brilliance of ten thousand suns, born of his own feet and 
destructive of all enemies, to Vi§nu. 

16. Vi?nu purified himself and accepted it facing the 
north. After making obeisance to lord Siva, Vi?nu spoke 
these words to him. 

Vifnu said :— 

17. O lord, O benefactor of the worlds, listen. Please 
tell me what I shall meditate upon and what I shall recite 
for the destruction of the distress. 

S&ta said :— 

18. On being thus asked by him, !§iva becoming 
t satisfied and delighted in his mind spoke to Vi^nu who 
helped the gods. 

^iva said :— 

19. O Visnu, it is my form that is to be meditated 
upon for subduing all mishaps. Recite my thousand names 
for destroying the distress that troubles you. 

20. For the attainment of your desires you shall hold 
this discus always. O Visnu^ this is the best of all discuses. 

21. There is no doubt that those who recite and 
teach this hymn will have no misery at all even in dreams. 

22. When kings are in distress this worship with 



1416 


Sivapurd^u 


thousand names shall be repeated hundred times in 
accordance with the rules laid down and after due perfor¬ 
mance of the ancillary services people will have welfare. 

23. This is destructive of distress. It yields learning 
and wealth. It is excellent and meritorious and bestows all 
desires and devotion to Siva always. 

24. People undoubtedly derive excellent benefits 
which they will have in view in rqciting this. 

25. Achievement is not far off if a person rising in 
the morning, performs my worship and recites this in my 
presence everyday. 

26. There is no doubt in this that he will attain 
all the worldly pleasures and desires and in the end 
Sayujya*®® type of salvation. 

Snta said :— 

27. Delighted in his mind, §iva spoke thus to Vi?rui 
and touched him with his hands. I^iva then told him again. 

^iva said :— 

28. O most excellent of gods, I am the granier of 
the boons. Choose the boons you desire to have. O one 
of good rites, I am attracted by your devotion and by this 
hymn as well. 

Suta said :— 

29. Urged thus the delighted Visriu bowed to the lord 
of gods and spoke with palms joined in reverence. 

Vifnu said :— 

30. O lord, you shall be equally merciful to others 
as well just as you are merciful to me now. 

31. O great lord, devotion to you is the excellent 
boon I wish to have. Be pleased. I do not wish for any¬ 
thing else, because, O lord, devotees arc never distressed. 

i(i6. Asa kind of liberation ( 5 P. KRS 4f. 3 » 7 ) Siyujya denotes 
a complete absorption of the devotee into his personal god. Sec P. 1341 
note. 



KotinidrasaAhitd 


1417 


Sata said :— 

32. On hearing these words, the extremely 
sympathetic lord touched him. Then the moon-crested deity 
spoke. 

^iva said :— 

33. O Vi?nu, your devotion to me will always 
remain firm. Be worthy of the reverence and worship of 
all gods in the world. 

34. O most excellent god, there is no doubt in this 
that, thanks to my favour, your name—Vi^vambhara 
(bearer of the universe) will be destructive of all sins. 

Suta said :— 

35. O great sages, after saying this, lord Siva, the 
lord of the gods, vanished there itself even as Visnu was 
watching. 

36. After securing the auspicious discus and hearing 
the words of Siva, lord Vi§nu was extremely delighted in 
his mind. 

37. Meditating on Siva, he repeated the hymn 
incessantly and instructed the devotees too in this. 

38. O excellent ones, thus I have narrated the story 
in accordance with your enquiry. It destroys the sins of 
those who listen to it. What then do you wish to ask ? 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 

{Devotion to lord Siva) 

The sages said :— 

1. O Suta, O fortunate Suta, you are endowed with 
knowledge, O one of good rites. Please narrate the story 
of Siva again in detail. 

2. The ancient kings, sages and gods propitiated that 
excellent deity Siva alone. 



1418 


SivapurU^ 


SUta said '— 

3. O great sages, you have put the question properly. 
I shall narrate the charming story of l§iva. It is eonducive 
to the attainment of worldly pleasures and salvation by 
those who listen to it. May it be heard. 

4. Brahma was asked by Narada this alone. Delighted 
in his mind, he replied to Narada, the excellent sage. 

Brahma said '.— 

5. O Narada, listen. I shall narrate the excellent 
story of Siva with pleasure out of affection to you. It des¬ 
troys great sins 

6. Visnu, accompanied by Laksmi, performed the 
worship of Siva. Thanks to the mercy of lord Siva, he 
attained all desires. 

7. I, the grandfather of the worlds, am a worshipper 
of Siva. Thanks to his mercy that I create the worlds 
always. 

8. My sons, the great sages, always worship Siva. 
Many other sages also do so. 

9. O Narada, particularly you are a worshipper of 
Siva. The seven sages, * Vasi^t^a and others too are the wor¬ 
shippers of Siva. 

10. The great chaste lady Arundhati, Lopamudra, 
and Ahalya the wife of Gautama, do also worship Siva. 

11-12. These sages, viz.—Durvasas, KauiSika, Sakti, 
Dadhici, Gautama, Kanada, JIva, Bhargava, Vai^ampayana, 
ParaSara and Vyasa are the worshippers of Siva. 

13. Upamanyu is a great devotee of Siva, the great 
soul. Yajfiavalkya, Jaimini and Garga are great followers 
of Siva. 

14. Sukra, Saunaka and others are the worshippers of 
Siva. There are many other sages, excellent sages, who 
worship Siva. 

15. Aditi, the mother of the gods, performed the 
worship of Siva in earthen phallic idols every day. She 
is a lady engaged in Siva’s devotion. 


♦See P 1212 noic 



KofirudrasaMtS 


1419 


16. Indra and other guardians of the quarters, 
Vasus,^** Maharajika gods, Sadhyas are the worshippers of J^iva. 

17. The subordinate gods, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and 
others are worshippers of Siva. Similarly the Asuras of noble 
minds are the worshippers of Siva. 

18. O sage, the Daitya Hiranyaka^ipu, his ' sons and 
younger brother, as well as Virocana and Bali worship 
Siva every day, 

19. Bana is a great follower of Siva. So also the sons 
of Hiranyak^a. O dear one, Vrsaparvan and other Dana- 
vas are the worshippers of Siva. 

20 Se?a, Vasuki, Taksaka and many other great 
serpents are devotees of Siva. Garuda and other birds too 
are so. 

21. O great sage, the two gods, the Sun and the Moon 
who started two lines of kings on the earth are devoted 
to the service of Siva always along with their descendants. 

22. O sage, the self-born Brahma and other Manus 
performed the worship of Siva and they were in the guise 
of Siva too. 

23. Priyavrata, his son Uttanapada, and his son and 
successors, were kings worshipping Siva. 

24. Dhruva, R.sabha, Bharata, his brothers the nine 
Yogins and others too were worshippers of Siva. 

25. Vaivasvata’s sons, Tarkjya, Iksvaku and other 
kings, were always devoted to the worship of Siva and 
enjoyed happiness. 

26. Kakutstha, Mandhata, Sagara, Mucukunda, Hari^- 
candra and Kalma$anghri were all excellent devotees of Siva. 

27. Bhagiratha and other kings, many excellent kings 
are known as worshippers of Siva assuming the guise of Siva. 

28. The great king Khatvanga, who helped the 
gods, worshipped the earthen idol of Siva always. 

I ■’7. Lokap&las are the gpiardian deities who preside over the four 
intermediate quarters viz. (1) Indra, east; (2) Agni, southeast (3) Yama, 
south (4.) Surya, .southwest (5) V^rut^a, west; (6) Vayu, north-west; 
(7) Kuvera, north; (K) .foma, north cast 

t88. Vasus are a class of deities, eight in number. They seem to 
have been pcnsunifications of natural phenomena. They are Apa twater), 
Dhruva (pole-star). Soma (moon). Dhara (earth), Anil (wind), Anaia 
(fire), Prabhasa (dawn) and Pratyu$a (light). 



1420 




29. His son Dilipa was a perpetual worshipper of 

l^iva. Raghu, his son, was a great devotee of Siva. He 
worshipped Siva with pleasure. , 

30. Aja, his son, who waged a virtuous war was a wor¬ 
shipper of Siva. Dasaratha who was born of him became 
a great king. 

31. At the behest of the sage Vasistha, Dasaratha 
particularly worshipped the earthen idol of Siva for obtain¬ 
ing sons. 

32. As directed by Rsyasrhga this excellent king, 
devoted to Siva performed the sacrifice called Putrc?ti* 

33. Urged by Rsyasrnga, Kausalya, the beloved 
queen of Dasaratha joyously performed the worship of the 
earthen idol of Siva for the acquisition of a son. 

34. O excellent sage, Sumitra, and Kaikeyi the 
beloved queens, performed the worship of Siva with pleasure 
for the acquisition of good sons. 

35. O sage, they obtained auspicious sons of great 
valour and prowess who followed the path of the good. It 
was due to the favour of Siva. 

36. Then at the behest of Siva, Visnu himself was 
born of the ladies in four different forms. 

37. Kausalya’s son was Rama, Sumitra’s Lak$mana 
and Satrughna and Kaikeyfs Bharata. All of them performed 
Siva’s rites. 

38. Rama performed the worship of the earthen idol 
every day in the company of his brothers. He wore Bhasma 
and Rudraksa and followed the Siva-cult.^^ 

39. O sage, the kings born of his family worshipped 
the earthen idol of Siva along with their followers. 

40. O sage, the great king Sudyumna, the son of a 
sage, became a woman along with his attendants as a result 
of Siva’s curse for the sake of his beloved. 

41. Thanks to the worship of the earthen image of 
Siva, he became an excellent man again. By remaining a 


j8''. \ iiaj.'pHiii.i is lli«‘ cult nf .^iva fitr fiom pij.syion and ignoiancr. 



KoprufirasattihitS 


1421 


inan for a month and a woman for a month, his woman¬ 
hood disappeared. 

42. Then he forsook the kingdom and engaged himself 
in the Siva-cult assuming the guise of $iva. By virtue of 
devotion he attained salvation inaccessible to others. 

43-44. His son Pururavas, a great king, was a worship¬ 
per of lord 3iva. His son Bharata performed the great 
worship of Siva always. Nahusa, a great devotee was 
interested in the worship of Siva. 

45. Yayati realised his desires due to Siva’s worship. 
He begot five sons all interested in Siva cult. 

46. Yadu and others, the five sons of Yayati were the 
worshippers of Siva. Thanks to the power of the worship 
of Siva, they realised all their desires. 

47. Other fortunate persons of his race and of other 
races, O sage, worshipped Siva and obtained worldly pleasures 
and salvation. 

48. Ki-sna himself performed the worship of Siva on 
the excellent mountain Badari^®“ for seven months. 

49. After securing several divine boons from Siva who 
was delighted, lord Krsna brought the entire universe under 
his control. 

50. O dear, his son Pradyumna was a worshipper of 
Siva always. Samba and other excellent descendants of 
Kr^na were also great worshippers of Siva. 

51. Jarasandha was a great devotee of Siva. His suc¬ 
cessors were also so. Nimi and his son Janaka and his sons 
too were worshippers of Siva. 

52. Worship of Siva was performed by Nala the son 
of Virasena. In his previous birth he was a forester who 
protected the travellers there. 

53. In the presence of Siva a sage (who was Siva 
himself) was saved by him. He was himself devoured by 
tigers and other beasts at night. 

54. Thanks to that merit, the forester became Nala. 
He became a great emperor and the husband of Damayanti. 

55. O dear, thus I have narrated the divine story of 
Siva as .asked by you. What else do you wish to hear? 


u)0. See P. • i;tJ 7 Hole 



1422 


SiwpwS^a 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 

{‘Ihe greatness of Sivardtri) 


The sages said :— 

1. O dear, you are blessed and contented. Your 

life is fruitful since you narrate to us the auspicious nar> 
rative of lord oiva. 

2. O Suta, although this matter has been heard 

from many sages, our doubt is not set at rest. Hence we 
ask you. 

3. By what sacred rite is Siva satisfied. By what 

sacred rite does he impart happiness to the good. You arc 
expert in the knowledge of Siva’s legends and so we ask you. 

4. O disciple of Vyasa, obeisance be to you. Please 

explain clearly the rite by which the devotee can secure 
both worldly pleasures and salvation. 

Suta said: — 

5. O great sages, :the question is well put by you. 
There is sympathy brimming in your hearts. After remem¬ 
bering the lotus-like feet of Siva I shall mention it in the 
manner I have heard. 

6. The same question had been put by Brahma, 
Vi§nu and Siva before Siva in the manner in which you 
are asking me now. 

7. On a certain occasion they asked Siva, the great 
soul. ‘‘What rite satisfies you to bestow worldly pleasures 
and salvation ?” 

8. When he was asked thus, Siva replied thus. I 
shall mention it now. It quells the sins of those who 
listen to it. 

^im said :— 

9. There arc many rites yielding worldly pleasures 
and salvation. The most important among them are ten 
in number. 

10. Those who have mastered the text *‘Jabalasruti** 
have mentioned ten sacred rites of Siva. These rites shall 



Ko firudrasaifthitd 


1423^ 


be performed by the brahmins always strenuously with 
great devotion. 

11. On A^tami days (the eighth day in the lunar 
fortnight) meals shall be taken only at night. O Visnu, on 
Kalastami day food shall be eschewed altogether. 

12. O Vi^nu, on the eleventh day in the bright lunar 
fortnight, food during the day is forbidden. O Vi?nu, on 
the eleventh day in the dark half food shall be taken at night 
after my worship. 

13. On the thirteenth day in the bright half, food shall 
be taken at night, In the dark half, it is forbidden to those 
who follow Siva’s rites. 

14. O Visrm, in both the halves on every Monday, 
food shall be taken only during the night bv the followers 
of Siva-cult. 

15. In all these rites, excellent brahmin devotees of 
Siva shall be fed according to one’s ability for the 
completion of the sacred rites. 

16. The sacred rites shall always be performed 
regularly by the brahmins. By abandoning these Vratas, 
brahmins become robbers. 

17-18. The rites shall be performed regularly by the 
persons who are adepts in the path of salvation. The four 
vratas that bring about salvation are the worship of Siva, the 
repetition of Rudra Mantra by way of Japa, observance of fast 
in Siva’s temple and death in Varanasi. That salvation is 
eternal. 

19. Astami that falls on Monday, and Caturda^i in 
the dark half are sure to bring about the propitiation of 
Siva. 

20. O Vi§nu, among the four the most powerful is 
the rite of Sivaratri.^®^ Hence that alone shall be performed 
by those who desire the fruits of worldly pleasures and 
salvation. 

21. There is no other rite more beneficial to men. 
This rite is the most excellent means of virtue for all. 

22. To those without desire, to those with specific 


191 , See P. 1063 note. 



1424 


Sivafwlb^a 


desires, to all men of all castes and stages of life, even to 
women and to children, this rite is very beneficial. 

23. To men and women slaves, to gods aijd others 
and to all embodied souls this excellent rite is most 
beneficial. 

24. In the dark half of the month of Magha, Sivaratri 
is specifically glorified. The lite of Sivaratri is performed 
when the Caturdasi extends up-to mid-night. The observance 
of the rite on that Tithi quells the sin of even a crore of 
human slaughters. 

25. O Visnu, what shall be done on that day from 
morning onwards you hear with attention. I shall explain it 
to you with pleasure. 

26. Rising in the morning, the intelligent man with 
great delight, shall perform his daily routine of bath with 
care. 

27. He shall then go to the temple of Siva for 
worship. After making obeisance to Siva, he shall observe 
the Ritualistic affirmation of his performance according to 
the prescribed course. 

28. *‘0 lord of gods, “O blue-necked, obeisance be to 

you. O lord, I wish to perform the Sivaratri rite sacred to 
you. 

29. O lord of gods, thanks to your power, let it 
conclude peacefully. Let not passion and other enemies 
afflict me.” 

30-32. After this affirmation the devotee shall collect 
the articles of worship. The phallic image shall be taken 
from a good place by the devotee himself at night by going 
there. The phallic image shall be that which is prescribed in 
the Agamas. The materials of worship shall be placed on 
a good spot near Siva either to the South or to the West. 
Then the devotee shall take bath again duly. 

33. The undercloth and the usual cloth shall be pure. 
'I’hc devotee shall perform the Acamana thrice and begin 
worship. 

34. The worship shall be performed in due concor¬ 
dance' with the material and the mantras. Siva’s worship 
shall always be performed in accompaniment with the mantras. 

35. The intelligent devotee shall repeat the mantras 



Ko tirudrasathfiitS 


1425 


ftitcr performing worship in the first 3-hour period with music, 
songs, dances and devotional services. 

36. If he knows the sacred verses, he shall make 
earthen images of excellent type. After performing the daily 
routine he shall worship the earthen image. 

37. Al.er making the earthen image, he shall install 
it thereafter. The devotee shall propitiate the bull-bannered 
lord, with several hymns. 

38. The glory of the Vrata shall be proclaimed by 
the intelligent devotee. It shall be heard by the devotee 
desiring the completion of the Vrata. 

39-40. Thus four different idols shall be made for the 
four 3-hour periods. They shall be duly invoked and duly 
dismissed. All the intermediary rites .shall also be performed. 
He shall keep awake with pleasure and jubilation. In the 
morning he shall take bath again. After installing the idol, 
he shall perform the worship. 

41. After concluding the rites and bowing to Siva 
again and again he shall pray to him with p.ilms joined in 
devotion and shoulders drooping down. 

42-43. “O great God, the rite I have started at your 
behest has been performed and concluded. It has become 
excellent. O lord, the idol is being ritualistically dismissed 
now. O lord of gods O Siva, be satisfied with the Vrata 
that I have performed strenuously. Please be merciful to me. 

44. The devotee shall offer a handful of flowers to 
Siva and make charitable gifts. After making obeisance 
to Siva formally he shall conclude the rites. 

45 . After feeding brahmin devotees of Siva and 
ascetics in particular, as far as possible and making them 
satiated, the devotee shall take food himself. 

46. O Vi§nu, I shall tell you how the worship is to be 
performed by the devotee, especially in every 3-hour period 
at the SivarStri night 

47. O Vi?nu, during the first 3-hour period the devotee 
shall worship with great devotion the earthen phallic image 
duly installed by way of good devotional services. 

48. Siva shall always be worshipped with the five 



1426 


Sivt^urSifa 


materials at the outset. The different articles of worship 
shall be separately offered with theii respective maptras. 

49. After offering the materials the steady water-pouring 
shall be made. The intelligent devotee shall consecrate the 
materials of worship with the steady pouring of water. 

50. He shall worship Siva, both Nirguna and Saguna, 
by the steady pouring of water, reciting the 108 mantras. 

51. He shall worship the bull-bannered deity by 
reciting the mantra imparted by the preceptor. Or he shall 
worship Sadasiva by means of Namamantras. 

52. The worship of Siva the supreme soul shall be 
performed with sandal-paste, unbroken rice-grains and black 
gingelly seeds. 

53. Again Siva shall be worshipped with lotus and 
and Karavira flowers. The devotee shall offer the flowers 
with the eight Namamantras to Siva. 

54. They are Bhava, Sarva, Rudra, Pasupati, Ugra, 
Mahat, Bhima and Hana. 

55. When the names are used for worship they shall 
be prefixed with,“Om” and then the names shall be put in the 
Dative case. The incense and the lamps shall be used. The 
food-offering shall be made thereafter.] 

56. In the first 3-hour period the intelligent devotee 
shall make cooked rice as food-offering. Half a cocoanut, and 
Tambula shall be offered afterwards. 

57. Obeisance and meditation shall follow and the 
mantra taught by the preceptor shall be used for Japa. Or 
the devotee shall propitiate Siva by means of the five-syllabled 
mantra. 

58. The devotee shall exhibit the mystic gesture of 
cow and offer Tarpana with pure water. He shall then 
feed five Brahmins or more in accordance with his capacity. 

59. Then till the end of that 3-hour period festivities 
shall be observed. After dedicating the fruit of the worship 
to the deity himself, the ritualistic dismissal shall be performed. 

60. Then in the second 3-hour period Samkalpa rites 
shall be performed duly as before. Or the Samkalpa rite 

iga. The first half of this versc is repeated in the last half of the 
previous verse. 



Kofirudrasaihhitd 1427 

shall be performed once for all the four 3-hour periods. Wor¬ 
ship shall be performed as before. 

61. After performing the worship with the materials 
as before, the Jaladhara shall be offered. Then the devotee 
shall worship !§iva with gingelly seeds, barley grains and lotii«' 
flowers. 

62. The devotee shall worship lord Siva particular!) 
with the leaves of the Bilva tree. 

63. The Arghya shall be offered with citron fruit. 
The Naivedya shall consist of milk pudding. O Vi^nu, the 
repetition of the mantra shall be twice as that of the previous 
one. 

64. Then the brahmins shall be fed sumptuously. 
Other rites shall be performd as before till the end of the 
second 3-hour period ,of time. 

65. In the third 3-hour period the worship shall be 
done as before. But instead of barley, wheat grains shall be 
used and the flowers of the sun-plant shall be offered. 

66 . Incenses and lamps shall be of various types. O 
Visnu, the Naivedya shall consist of fried pies and various 
vegetable dishes. 

67. The waving of light, as part of worship, shall be per¬ 
formed with camphor. The Arghya shall consist of the pome¬ 
granate. The Japa repetition shall be thrice that of the pre¬ 
vious. 

68 . The feeding of brahmins shall follow along with 
the monetary gifts. Till the end of that period, festivities 
shall be celebrated as before. 

69. When the fourth 3-hour period arrives the ritualistic 
dismissal of the previous worship shall be performed. The 
worship shall be performed duly with due ritualistic ges¬ 
tures. 

70. The devotee shall worship lord Siva with black 
gram, green gram, Priyahgu grains or any of the seven cereals, 
the flowers of Sahkhi and the leaves of Bilva. 

71. The Naivedya shall be offered with different sweets 
or cooked black gram and rice in order to propitiate Sada- 
Siva. 

72. O Vijou, Arghya shall be offered to Siva with 
the plantain fruit or with different types of fruits. 



1428 Swapuri^ 

73. The exclient man shall perform the mantra japa 
twice in number of that on the previous occasion. The intelli¬ 
gent devotee shall decide on the number of brahmins to 
be fed. 

74. Till day-break the devotee shall pass time in songs 
of prayer, musical instruments, devotional dances and other 
festivities along with his fellow devotees. 

75. When the sun rises he shall take his bath and then 
worship Siva. The ablution of the deity shall be performed 
with devout services and adorations. 

76. Charitable gifts shall be offered, brahmins and 
ascetics shall be fed with different dishes, their number 

being in accordance with what was decided before. 

77. After making obeisance to Siva, handful of flowers 
shall be offered. The skilful devotee shall then pray after 
eulogising the lord with the mantras:— 

78. “O Mrda, the storehouse of mercy, knowing that 
I belong to you, my very life is embedded in you and my 
mind is dedicated to you, please do what is proper. 

79. O lord of living beings, be favourable to me 
viewing sympathetically at the Japa and worship conducted by 
me with the requisite knowledge or in ignorance. 

80. May lord 8iva the bestower of happiness be pleased 
with the fruit arising out of this fast and other rites. 

81. O lord Siva, may your worship flourish in my 
family always. Let me not be born in the family where you 
arc not a deity.” 

82. After offering Puspafijali and accepting the Tilakas 
and blessings from the brahmins, the devotee shall ritualis- 
tically dismiss the deity. 

83. If the rite is performed thus, 8iva is not inaccessible 
to him. The fruit that he derives is inexplicable. There 
is nothing which I shall not give in return. 

84. If this excellent rite is performed without attach¬ 
ment, salvation will come to him in the form of seed. There 
is no scope for any doubt in this matter. 

85. This Vrata shall be performed with great devotion 
every month. After performing the concluding rite, the devotee 
shall reap the fruit with subsidiary benefits. 

86 . Certainly for the performance of^this Vrata, I, 



Kotirudrasaiiihiti 


1429 


Siva, the destroyer of all miseries grant all desired benefits, 
worldly pleasures and salvation. 

SUta said :— 

87. After hearing these beneficial and wonderful 
words of Siva, Visnu returned to his abode. Thereafter this 
excellent rite became popular among the people desiring 
welfare of their sou^ 

88 . Once Visnu narrated to Narada this divine Sivara- 
trivrata which yields worldly pleasures and salvation. 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 

[The conclusion of the rile of Sivardtri) 

The sages said :— 

1. Please narrate the Udyapana (formal concluding) 
of the rite of Sivaralri as a result of which Siva himself 
becomes delighted. 

Suta said :— 

2. O sages, may the concluding rite be heard with 
devotion and respect. By performing it, the Vrata certainly 
becomes complete. 

3. The auspicious Sivaratrivrata shall be performed for 
fourteen years. On the TrayodaSi day only one meal 
shall be taken and a complete fast shall be observed on the 
Gaturdasi day. 

4-5. On the Sivaratri day after performing the routine, 
the devotee shall go to the temple of Siva and peribrm 
worship. He shall make the mystical diagram famous in the 
three worlds by the name of Gaurltilaka.**® 

6 . In the middle of the mystical diagram Lihgatobhadra 
and Sarvatobhadra shall be delineated. 

193. Gauritilaka, Liftgatobhadra and Sarvatobhadra (Verses 5 
and 6) are the circular diagrams of particular type depicting the positions 
of the deities to lie Invoked therein for oficring worsltip, propitiation, eulogy 
etc, 



1430 


7. As in the Prajapatya rite, auspicious water-pots 
shall be placed wrapped in cloth, with a cocoanut above and 
the Daksina in. 

8 . The pots shall be carefully placed at the sides of 
the altar. In middle either a discus or a gold-pot shall 
be placed. 

9-10. The devotee shall make an idol of Siva accoin- 
panied by Uma, of gold a pala in weight. According to his 
capacity the weight may be reduced to half of a pala. 
Siva shall be on the left side and Siva on the right. The 
devotee shall worship the idol at night. 

11 . He shall woo a pious preceptor accompanied by 
Rtviks. With their formal permission he shall begin the 
worship of Siva. 

12. He shall keep awake during the night performing 
worship in the different 3-hour periods and singing songs of 
prayer or devoutly dancing. 

13. After performing the worship thus in accordance 
with the injunctions he shall propitiate the lord. He shall 
worship again in the morning and perform Homa duly. 

14. He shall perform the Prajapatya rites according to 
his ability. With pleasure he shall feed brahmJ is and with 
devotion he shall make charitable gifts. 

15. He shall give the Rtviks and their wives good 
clothes and ornaments for bedecking themselves and make 
gifts to them separately. 

16. Saying “May Siva be pleased**, he shall make 
the gift of a cow and a calf together with the essential 
requisites to the preceptor. 

17. He shall offer to him the waterpot and the 
Siva idol with all ornaments, placing them on a’ bullock. 

18. He shall pray to lord Siva the great lord with 
great pleasure, with palms joined in reverence, with shoulders 
drooping and words choked with emotion. 

19. “O great lord, lord of the gods, favourably dis¬ 
posed to the devotees, be merciful to me, thanks to this 
Vrata. 

20 . O Siva, this Vrata is performed by me according 
to my ability. O lord, if it is deficient in any respect let it 
become perfect by your favour. 



Kofirudrasarhhita 


1431 


21. Japa and worship and other things have been 
performed partly in ignorance and partly with knowledge 
by me. May these be fruitful, O Siva, by your mercy.” 

22. After saying this the flower-offering shall be made 
to Siva the great soul. He shall make obeisance and pray 
again. 

23. If the Vrata is performed thus it will be com¬ 
plete and no deficiency will remain. The devotee will attain 
Siddhi desired by him. There is no doubt in it. 


CHAPTER FORTY 

( The glory of Sivardtri ) 


The sages said :— 

1. O Suta, we are extremely delighted on hearing your 
words. Please narrate the excellent Vrata in detail. 

2. O Suta, by whom was this excellent Vrata per¬ 
formed formerly ? Was an excellent benefit derived by 
any by performing it without full knowledge? 

Suta said: — 

3. May this be heard, O sages. I shall narrate the 
ancient story of the hunter*®^ which destroys all sins. 

4. Formerly there was a hunter in a forest, Gurudruha 
by name. He had a large family. He was strong, ruthless 
and engaged in cruel activities. 

5. Everyday he used to go to the forest incessantly and 
kill deer. There in the forest he committed thefts also in 
various ways. 

6 . No auspicious action was performed by him from 
childhood onwards. Thus the wicked fellow passed a long 
time in the forest. 

194. Thr slory of the cruel hunter and his change of heart for the 
better is found with minor variations in details in the PadmapuiSt^a 
also. 



1432 


SinapurS^a 

7. Once it was a Sivaratri day. But the wicked 
hunter, staying in the great forest did not know that. 

8 . On this occasion he was requested by his parents 
and wife who were oppressed by starvation, “O forest-roamer 
give us food.*’ 

9. Thus requested he took up his bow and started im¬ 
mediately for hunting deer. He roamed here and there in 
the forest. 

10. Due to adverse fate no game was secured by him. 
The sun too had set and he was greatly distressed. 

11-12. “What shall I do? Where shall I go ? 
Nothing has been obtained by me. What will happen to my 
parents and my children at home? Then there is my wife 
too. What will happen to her ? I must go home only 
with something in my hand. It is impossible to face them 
empty-handed.” 

13. Thinking thus, the hunter went near a pond. 
He stood near the path leading to water. 

14. “Some animal is sure to come here. I shall kill 
it and go home with pleasure. My purpose will be served 
fully. 

15. Thinking thus the hunter climbed up a Bilva tree, 
taking some water with him. He sat on its branch. 

16. With hunger and thirst oppressing him he waited 
and thought. “When will some animal come here? When 
shall I kill it?” 

17. During the first part of the night a thirsty hind 
came there springing and jumping timidly. 

18. On seeing it he was much delighted. He fixed an 
arrow to his bow immediately in order to kill it. 

19-20. When he did this, some water (that he had 
with him) got spilt and a few leaves of the Bilva tree fell 
down. There was a phallic idol of Siva beneath the tree. 
Hence this became his worship for the first part of the night. 
As a result of this his sin was dissolved. 

21. On hearing the noise, the hind became frightened. 
It was much distressed on seeing the hunter. It spoke thus. 

Tht hind said :— 

22. “O hunter, what is it that you jjropose to do ? 



KotirudrasathhitS 1433 

Please speak truth before me.” On hearing the words of 
the hind, the hunter said. 

The hunter said :— 

23-24. “My family is starving today. I shall satisfy 
their hunger by killing you.” On hearing these terrible words 
and seeing that ruthless knave, the hind thought “What shall 
I do ? Where shall I go ? Well, I shall use a trick, ” 
thinking thus the hind spoke. 

The Hind said : — 

25. There is no doubt that I am blessed. You will 
be happy with my flesh. What greater merit can I have 
through this body which is in every respect harmful? 

26. It is imposible to expatiate on the merit of a 
person who helps others even- if we take a hundred years. 

27. But all my infant fawns are in the hermitage. I 
shall intrust them to the care of my sister or husband and return. 

28. O forest-roamer, do not take my words to be lies. 
Undoubtedly I will come again to you. 

29. The earth stays steady through truth. The ocean 
is steady through truth. The water flows steadily through 
truth. Everything is founded on truth. 

Suta said ’.— 

30. When the hunter did not accept its proposal even 
after being implored thus, the bewildered and frightened 
hind spoke again:— 

The Hind said :— 

31-34. O hunter, listen. I shall explain. I take this 
vow. After going home if I do not return to you 
let me be smeared with the sin that these people have 
viz—A brahmin who sells the Vedas, one who docs not offer 
Sandhya prayers, women who transgress the commands of 
their husbands and do various rites, an undgrateful person, a 
person who is averse to fviva. a person w'ho illtreats others, 
who violates Virtue, a person committing breach (if trust, 
and a person who deceives others. 



1434 


35. When the hind made these promises the hunter 
believed it and said “Go home’*. 

36. The delighted hind drank water and w^nt to its 
hermitage. By that time the first part of the night came to 
a close and the hunter did not have a wink of sleep. 

37. The sister of the hind, not able to see it and so 
distressed came there in search of that hind. It too was 
thirsty. 

38. On seeing the hind, the Bhilla drew the bow and 
was about to shoot the arrow. As before, water and Bilva 
leaves fell on Siva. 

39. Incidentally it became the worship of the second 
part of the night. It was pleasing to the hunter. 

40. The hind asked “O forest-roamer what are you 
doing?” After seeing him, the hunter replied as before. 
On hearing it, the hind said again. 

41-42. “O hunter, listen. I am blessed. My life is 
fruitful. A service can be rendered through this evanescent 
body. But my fawns, young ones, are in the house. I shall 
entrust them to the care of my husband and come again.” 

The hunter said '.— 

43. “I do not agree to what you say. Undoubtedly 
I am going to kill you.” On hearing that the hind said 
on the oath of Siva. 

The hind said :— 

44-47. “O hunter, listen. I shall explain. If a person 
breaks his words he forfeits his merits. If I do not return 
let me be smeared with the sin that accrues to such people 
who forsake their legally wedded wife and cohabit with 
another, who transgress the Vcdic virtue and follow an 
imaginary and fictitious cult ; who profess to be devoted to 
Visnu and censure Siva, who perform the K$ayaha rites of 
their parents on a Sunyatithi day and who add insult to 
injury.” 

Suta said :— 

48. Implored by the hind, the hunter said to the 
hind, “go.” It drank water and delightedly went away to 
its hermitage. ^ 



KotirudrasafkhiUl 


1435 


49-50. By that time the second part of the night too 
came to a close without a winlc of sleep to the hunter. 
When the third part arrived, the stag who was bewildered 
by the delay caused by the hind came there in search of it. 
The hunter saw it standing on the path leading to water. 

51. On seeing the stout stag the hunter was delighted. 
He fixed the arrow to the bow and was about to kill it. 

52. O dear, while he attempted to do this, a few 
Biiva leaves fell on Siva as a result of his Prarabdha. 

53. In view of this, the worship of the third part of 
that night became realised due to his good fortune. Siva’s 
merciful nature was evident in this. 

54. On hearing the noise the stag asked, “what are 
you doing ?” The hunter replied “I am going to kill you for 
the sake of my family.” 

55. On hearing this, the stag was delighted in his 
mind. Immediately he spoke to the hunter. 

The stag said :— 

56. I am blessed that I am well-nourished and enough 
to satisfy your needs. Of a person everything is useless if 
his body is of no avail. 

57. If a person does not help others though he is 
capable of it, all his efficiency is vain. He will fall into 
hell after death. 

58. But I must entrust my young ones to the care of 
their mother. I shall console them and return again.” 

59. Thus requested the hunter was much surprised in 
his mind. With his heap of sins destroyed and with a 
purified mind he spoke these words. 

The hunter said :— 

60-61. O stag, every animal that came here has gone 
after promising in the manner that you have done nov,. 
They have not yet come. You too are in distress now and 
want to go under a false pretext. How, then, will I have 
my livelihood ? 

The stag said :— 

62. O hunter, listen, I shall explain. I do not utter 



1436 ^ivapurdffa 

lies. The entire univ^erse including the mobile and immobile 
beings is steady, thanks to truth. 

63. The merit of a liar melts away in a trice.* Still O, 
hunter, listen to my truthful promise. 

64-66. If I do not come again, let me have the sin 
of these activities viz:—in having sexual intercourse at 
dusk, in taking food on Sivaratri day, in perjury, in misap¬ 
propriation of Trust funds, in neglecting Sandhya prayers, 
in not uttering Siva’s name with the mouth, in not helping 
despite the ability, in breaking cocoanut on Parvan days, in 
taking forbidden food, in taking food before worshipping 
Siva or without applying Bhasma. 

Suta said :— 

67. On hearing these words the hunter said “Gk) and 
return quickly.” Thus permitted by the hunter, the hunter 
drank water and went away. 

68-69. All these animals who had promised in good 
faith, met at the hermitage. Hearing the news of one 
another in its entirety they decided that they should go 
because they were bound by the promise. They consoled 
the fawns and became eager to go back. 

70-71. The senior hind spoke to its mate “O stag, 
without you, how can the young fawns stay here ? O lord, 
it was I who promised at the outset. So I shall go. Both of 
you stay here.” 

72. On hearing those words the junior hind spoke ”1 
am your servant. Hence I go. You shall stay here.” 

73. On hearing it, the stag said—“I am going there. 
Both of you stay here. Infants are guarded and looked 
after by their mothers.” 

74. On hearing the words of their husband the two 
hinds did not consider it righteous. They lovingly told their 
husband, ”Fie upon that life in widowhood.” 

75. Then all of them consoled their fawns and en¬ 
trusted them to the care of their neighbours. They went 
to the place where the hunter was waiting- 

76. The fawns too seeing all these followed them 
thinking. ‘‘Let what befalls them happen to us as well.” 

77. On seeing them, the delighted hunter fitted the 



Ko (trudrasat^iid 


1437 


arrow to bis bow. Water and leaves of tbe Bilva tree fell 
on $iva again. 

78. Tbanks to that, the worship of the fourth part 
of the night too became auspiciously performed. Thereafter 
his sins were reduced to ashes in a trice. 

79. The senior hind, the junior hind and the stag 
said—**0 excellent hunter, make our body purposeful. Be 
merciful to us.** 

Sata said: — 

80. On hearing their words the hunter was surprised. 
Thanks to the power of the worship of Siva, he acquired 
perfect knowledge inaccessible to others. 

81. The deer are blessed. Though devoid of know¬ 
ledge, they are ready to help others by offering their own 
bodies. 

82. What have I achieved despite being born as a 
human being? I have nourished my body by torturing 
others. 

83. I reared my family by committing many sins every 
day. Alas ! what will be my fate after committing all 
these sins? 

84. Sins have been committed by me ever since my 
birth. What goal shall I attain? “Fie, Fic upon my life !** 

85. Acquiring perfect knowledge thus, he withdrew 
the arrow and explained—‘*0 excellent deer ! you are all 
blessed. You can safely go back.** 

86. When he said this, Siva became delighted. He 
revealed his form that is worshipped and honoured by the 
good. 

87. Touching him mercifully Siva spoke lovingly to 
the hunter, hunter, I am delighted at this Vrata. Ask 
for the boon you wish to have.** 

88. On seeing 8iva*s form, the hunter became liberated 
in a trice. He fell at l§iva*s feet saying, ^‘Everything has 
been attained by me now.** 

89. 8iva, delighted in his mind, gave him the name 
Guha. Glancing at him mercifully he gave him a divine 
boon. 



1438 


Stvapurd^ 


Siva said ’.— 

90. O hunter, listen. Have your capital at Srhgavera- 
pura^®* and enjoy divine pleasures at your will. • 

91. Your race will flourish without any calamity. O 
hunter, certainly lord Rama praised even by the gods will 
come to your house. 

92. He will make alliance with you. Go-operating 
with my devotee^ your mind indulged in rendering service 
to me, you will attain salvation rare to others. 

Suta said :— 

93. In the meantime, having viewed §iva, the deer 
bowed to him and attained liberation from their birth as 
deer. 

94. They attained divine bodies, ascended the aerial 
chariot and went away. Released from curse at the very 
sight of Siva they attained heaven. 

95. Siva became Vyadhesvara on the Arbuda'®® mount¬ 
ain. Viewing and worshipping this phallic idol bestows 
worldly pleasures and salvation. 

96. From that day onwards the hunter attained godly 
pleasures and being favoured by the god attained Sayujya*®^ 
salvation with Siva. 

97. Even after performing this rite in utter ignorance 
he attained Sayujya; what about those who are endowed with 
devotion? They will surely attain complete identity with the 
lord. 

98. After considering all Sastras, and the sacred rites 
enjoined by these Sivaratrivrata, has been glorified as the 
most excellent. 

99-100. Different Vratas, various holy centres, gifts of 
variegated nature, diverse sacrifices, different austerities and 
many forms of Japas, are not equal to Sivaratrivrata. 

101. Hence this auspicious Vrata shall be performed 


It is idf-ntic.'il witli Ui«’ niod'’in .SirRtaiir, a (own on (Jie Irft 
I'iink of thr Canges yi miles norilt-wesi ol Allaliab.id and on the fioiUiei 
nl Knsala and (lie Hhil.i eoiintiy. Ihe counUy atcund was inliabi(erl by 
Nisiidas i>r wild tribes and Cuh-a. (be ftiend of Rama was their chiel. CD. 
Pp. 19.!. 19.J. 

196 See 1 *. I I fib no(r. 

H) 7 . .See infia, eh. ; 



Kotirudrasarhhitd 


1439 


by those who wish for beneficence. Sivaratri Vrata is divine 
and it always yields worldly pleasures and salvation. 

102. Thus I have narrated the auspicious §ivai‘atri 
Vrata entirely. It is famous as the chief of sacred rites. 
What else do you wish to hear ? 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

{Review of salvation) 


The sages said .— 

1. What is liberation has been explained by you. 
What will happen in that state ? What is the nature of 
that state ? Please explain to us. 

Siita said :— 

2. Liberation is of four types. May this be heard. 
I shall tell you. It quells the pain of worldly existence. It 
bestows the greatest bliss. 

3. It is fourfold:—Sarupya (identity in form), Salokya 
(being within the view of the lord or in the same world), 
Sannidhya (proximity with the lord), and Sayujya (complete 
identity with him). The fourth arises out of this Vrata. 

4. O great sages, only Siva can bestow liberation. 
Brahma and others cannot do that. They shall be known as 
bestowers of virtue, wealth and love. 

5. Brahma and others are dependent on the attributes. 
Siva is beyond the attributes. He is free from aberrations. 
He is the great Brahman, the fourth deity, greater than 
Prakrti. 

6. He is in the form of knowledge. He is imperishable 
and unchangeable. He is the cosmic witness, attainable 
through knowledge. He is without a second. He is the 
bestower of Trivarga (Dharma, Artha, Kama) and the 
Kaivalya*®® liberation. 

H)». When the soul is drliti-hed I'loni matur and d« barred from 
further transmigration, it is said to be in isolation or the state of beatitude. 



1440 Sivi^S^ 

7. A fifth type of salvation Kaivalya is inaccessible to 
men in every respect. O excellent sages, I shall explain its 
characteristics. May that be heard. • 

8-9. O great sages, Siva’s form is twofold: Saguna and 
Nirguna as explained in the Vedas. It is that from which the 
entire universe originates, by which it is protected and in 
which it merges and by whom all this has been pervaded. 

10. It is not known to Visnu nor to Bhahma. It is 
not known to Kumara and others nor to Narada. 

11. It is not known to Suka, son of Vyasa nor to Vyasa 
or other great sages. It is not known to the earlier beings, 
all the gods, all the Vedas and all the Sastras. 

12. It is truth, knowledge, the infinity. It is named 
Saccidananda (existence, knowledge, bliss). It is Nirguna, 
Nirvyadhi (free from limitations and conditions). It is im¬ 
perishable. It is pure and unsullied. 

13. It is neither red nor yellow, neither white nor 
blue, neither short nor long, neither gross nor subtle. 

14. That great Brahman iSiva is said to be that from 
which all words return along with the mind, unable to attain 
it. 

15. This is all pervasive like the expansive firmament. 
It is the great soul beyond Maya. It is beyond Dvandvas- 
mutually clashing opposites and free from rivalry. 

16. O brahmins, good people attain it when knowledge 
of Siva rises up or when they worship him with deep 
devotion. 

17. The knowledge is difficult to attain but worship 
can easily be performed. Hence, O excellent sages, worship 
Siva for the attainment of salvation too. 

18. Siva is subservient to worship. He is knowlcdge- 
souled and the greatest bestower of salvation. Many Siddhas 
have joyously attained the great salvation through devotion 
alone. 

19. Devotion to Siva, characterised by sprouting pure 
love, is the mother of perfect knowledge. It is easy of 
access by means of his benevolence. It yields worldly 
pleasures and salvation too. 

20-21. Devotion is of various types. O brahmins, it is 
both Sagupa and Nirguna^ Whatever is legitimate and 



Kofmtdrasarhkitd 


1441 


natural is the most excellent and the greatest. It is again two¬ 
fold : Naisthika (permanent and attended with ritualistic 
observances) and Anaisthika (non-Naisthika). The Naisthika 
is of six varieties and the other is only of one type. 

22. Learned men consider devotion to be of different 
sorts, such as ordained and non-ordained. Since they are of 
various types they are not explained in detail. 

23. Differentiated by the differences in those who 
observe ^ravana (listening) etc. both these are of nine sub¬ 
divisions each. Without his favour they are difficult of 
performance and with His favour they can easily be 
performed. 

24. O brahmins, devotion and knowledge^®* are 
essentially non-different from each other as explained by 
Siva. Hence, they should not be differentiated. Happiness 
befalls him who observes them always. 

25. O brahmins, a person who is against devotion 
will never attain perfect knowledge. Knowledge rises up 
immediately only in him who observes devotion to Siva. 

26. Hence, O great sages, devotion to lord Siva shall 
be practised. There is no doubt in this that everything is 
realisable solely through devotion. 

27. Thus, what has been asked by you has been 
explained. There is no doubt in this that on hearing this, 
one is rid of his sin completely. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

{The difference between Saguna and Mrgurut) 

The sages said :— 

1. Who is Siva ? Who is Visnu ? Who is Rudra ? 
Who is Brahma ? Of these who is Nirguna ? Please clear 
this doubt of ours. 

199. Devotion and realization are separate (41.17) but not con* 
tradictory terms. The two paths leading to the goal of liberation are 
complementary, running parallel to each other. 



1442 


Swafmrnnc 


Suta said :— 

2. Masters of the Vedas and Vedanta know that 
which originates from the Nirguna great soul as tlfe one 
termed Siva. 

3-4. Prakrti accompanied by Purusa originated from 
him. Penance was performed by them both. The famous 
city Ka§i known as PaficakrosI, dear to all, originated in 
the water there at the base. There was water everywhere 
in the universe. 

5. Visnu famous as Narayana slept there enveloped 
by Maya. The Prakrti is known as Narayani (belonging 
to Narayana.) 

6. He who was born of his umbilical lotus was 
Pitamaha. He who was seen by him through penance is 
said to be Visnu. 

7. The form that was revealed by Nirguna Siva at 
the time of subduing the dispute between the two is, O 
learned ones, famous as Mahadeva. 

8. This was said by him, “I will be Siva with fire in 
my forehead.” He became fartious by the name Rudra. He 
is the cause of blessing the worlds. 

9. The formless one became one with forms in order 
to facilitate meditation. He alone is 8iva himself, favourably 
disposed towards his devotees. 

10. Essentially there is no difference between Siva who 
is different from the three Gunas and Rudra the abode of 
Gunas, as in the case of gold and an ornament made thereof. 

11. Their forms and activities are the same; they 
bestow good goal on the devotees equally ; they are equally 
worthy of being served by all and they indulge in various 
divine sports. 

12. Rudra of terrible exploits has the form of Siva in 
every respect. He was born for carrying out the tasks of the 
devotees. He helps Visnu and Brahma. 

13. Other beings and gods who are born get dissolved 
in due order but not so Rudra. Rudra gets merged in 8iva. 

14. This is the directive in the Vedas that all these 
Prakftas (born of Prakrti) meet Rudra and go but Rudra 
does not meet these and go. 



Ko ^irudrasathhitS 


1443 


15. All worship Rudra but Rudra does not worship 
any one. Yet due to his favourable attitude to his devotees 
sometimes he worships himself. 

16. Those who worship others get dissolved in them. 
That is why they attain Rudra in due course, O learned ones. 

17. Tho'C who are Rudra’s devotees attain the state of 
Siva in a trice. They need not depend on any one else. 
This is the eternal statement in the Vedas. 

18. O brahmins, ignorance is of various types. Perfect 
knowledge is not so. I shall explain their modes. Listen 
respectively. 

19. Whatever is seen here beginning with Brahma is 
Siva himself. The concept of manifoldness is unreal. 

20. Siva is said to be before creation. iSiva is there 
in the midst of creation. Siva is said to be at the end of 
creation. When everything is a void, Sadasiva exists. 

21. O great sages, thus Siva is fourfold. He alone 
shall be known as Saguna. In view of the possession of Sakti 
he is twofold. 

22. It is by him that the eternal Vedas, syllables, 
syllabic instants and his meditation and worship were given 
to Visnu. 

23. The eternal Sruli says—“Isanah Sarvavidyanam”. 
Hence Siva is the creator of the Vedas and the lord of the 
Vedas. 

24. He alone is iSiva himself who blesses all. He is 
the creator, sustainer and annihilator. He is the cosmic 
witness and Nirguria. 

25. Restriction of time is for others and not for Rudra. 
He is Mahakala himself associating with Mahakali. 

26. It is so that Brahmins mention Rudra and Kali. 
Thanks to their wish and truthful sports everything is 
obtained by them. 

27. He has no progenitor, no sustainer and no anni¬ 
hilator. He himself is the cause of all Visnu and others are 
his creations. 

28. He is not the creation of any one. Though single 
he assumes manifold shapes. Seeming to be many he 
becomes unified into one. 



1444 


29. A single seed grows into a tree and produces many 
seeds. Even in their multiplicity they are of one tree. 
MaheSvara in the form of Siva is verily like this. 

30. This is the great knowledge of Siva explained 
factually. O great sages, only the wise know this, none 
else. 

The sages said :— 

31. Please explain that knowledge with all its chara¬ 
cteristics realising which one attains the state of Siva. How is 
Siva all and how is all Siva ? 

Vyasa said :— 

32. On hearing these words, Suta the excellent pro¬ 
pounder of the Puranas remembered the lotus-like feet of Siva 
and spoke these words to the sages. 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

{Review of Knowledge) 


Suta said :— 

1. O ye sages, may this be heard. I shall explain 
the perfect knowledge of Siva in the manner I have heard. 
It is a great secret as it is the form of the highest salvation. 

2. In the assembly of Brahma, Narada, Kumara, 
Vyasa and Kapila they had discussed this and come to this 
conclusion. 

3. It shall be known that the entire universe is wholly 
Siva. That Siva is in everything must be known by the 
learned scholar. 

4. Beginning with Brahma and ending with a blade of 
grass whatever is seen as constituting the universe is Siva 
himself. That deity is called Siva. 

5. When he wishes, this is created. He alone knows all. 
No one knows him. 

6. He himself creates it and enters it but stands far 



Kolirudrasaihhitu 144s5 

off. The Gitsvarupa (knowledge-formed) being who is pure 
does not really enter it. 

7. Luminary beings are reflected in water etc. They 
do not actually enter them. Similarly Siva too appears ente¬ 
ring other things. 

8. Really Siva alone, the auspicious being, manifests 
himself. The ignorance of the same is a defect of the mind. 
In fact there is no second entity. 

9. In all philosophical systems the concept of duality 
is evident. But the Vedantins call him eternal and non- 
dualistic. 

10. The individual soul, though it is a part of his 
becomes deluded by Avidya. He then thinks that he is 
different. If he is released from Avidya he becomes Siva. 

11. Siva pervades all creatures. He is the lord of the 
sentient and the insentient. He is the benefactor. 

12. He who cleverly tries means of realising him after 
resorting to the Vedantic path attains the fruit of hi.s 
sight. 

13. Just as the pervading fire is latent in ever/ 
block of wood but only he who churns it secs it manifested, 
to be sure. 

14. So also, the clever devotee who makes use of the 
expedients of devotion etc. certainly reaches Siva. This is 
undoubtedly true. 

15. Lord Siva is everywhere. There is nothing else. 
I§iva appears in different forms always due to our illusion. 

16. The ocean or the lump of clay or the piece of 
gold attains different shapes due to delimiting conditions. Siva 
too is so. 

17. There is one essential diflerence between the 
material cause and its effect. The difference is due to illusory 
perception. If the one ceases to exist, the other is quelled. 

18. The shooting sprout from a seed may exhibit multi¬ 
plicity but ultimately it becomes the seed and the shoot 
perishes. 

19. The perfectly wise is the seed. Deformity is the 
sprout. When the deformity disappears he becomes the 
perfectly wise again. There is nothing to doubt in this 
regard. 



1446 


Sivafntrd^a 


20. Everything is Siva. Siva is everything. There is 

no difference at ail. How is this manifoldness seen ? How 
is the unity regained ? * 

21. Just as the luminary called the sun is seen diffe¬ 
rently in water etc. so also is the case with it. 

22. The all-pervading sky is not bound or fettered 
anywhere. So also the all-pervading lord is not bound 
anywhere. 

23. The individual soul is contaminated by the ego. 
Siva is free from it. The individual soul is insignificant and 
it experiences the fruits of actions. But the great Siva is un¬ 
contaminated. 

24. Gold mixed with silver or other base metal de¬ 
preciates in value. So also is the individual soul in its associa¬ 
tion with the ego. 

25. When a gold alloy is purified with chemicals it 
regains its original value. Similarly the consecrated soul too 
attains purity. 

26. The devotee at the outset shall go to a com¬ 
petent preceptor with devout and reverential feelings. He 
shall worship and serve him considering him Siva. 

27. Thanks to this conception, all sins and dirts are 
removed from the body. When he gains knowledge his 
ignorance disappears. 

28. Freed from the ego, the individual soul attains 
pure intellect. Thanks to Siva’s grace he attains the state 
of !§iva again. 

29. Just as one sees one’s own form in the mirror 
so also the pure soul sees the all-pervading Siva, certainly. 

30. He becomes the living liberated soul. When the 
body perishes he merges into Siva. The body is begot by 
the Prarabdha karman. The perfectly wise is considered 
different from it. 

31. If a person is not elated on acquiring something 
good and is not annoyed on acquiring something bad and 
if he has equanimity, he is said to be perfectly wise. 

32-33. By the practice of Yoga, discrimination between 
the different principles is generated. Then there is a desire 



Kofirudrasaifihitd 


1447 


to get released from the body. The aspirant then is blessed 
with devotion to Siva.®>« 

34. From devotion there arises love; from love, the 
desire to hear about the lord; from this desire, association 
with the good and from this association a competent 
preceptor is attained. 

35. If knowledge is attained he certainly becomes 
liberated. Hence if one desires to be perfectly wise one 
should worship Siva alone always. 

36. He shall worship iSiva with unflinching and 
exclusive devotion. Salvation is the result. There is nothing 
to be doubtful about this. 

37. There is no other deity greater than Siva for the 
attainment of salvation. After seeking refuge in him one 
withdraws from worldly existence. 

38. O brahmins, these words have been uttered by 
me after considering the statement of sages. You shall retain 
these strenuously in your minds. 

39. At the outset this instruction was given to Vi§nu 
by Siva in front of his phallic image. It was then given to 
Brahma by Vi.snu and to Sanaka^®! and others by Brahma. 

40. That knowledge was then imparted to Narada by 
Sanaka and others. Narada communicated it to Vyasa and 
the merciful Vyasa communicated it to me. 

41. I have now communicated it to you. For the 
welfare of the world you shall establish this in the world 
strenuously. It is conducive to the attainment of Siva. 

42. O great sages ; thus, what I have been asked has 
been narrated by me. You shall preserve this carefully. 
What else do you wish to hear ? 

J^dsa said -.— 

43. On hearing this, the sages attained great bliss. 
After bowing to him they eulogised him again and again 
with words choked with pleasure. 

200. Ihe Skt text of the v<‘i.sos is defective, 'the jjrrstnl 

translation is not literal therefore. 

2 01. Sinaki, Sananda, Saii-itatia, Sanatkumaia are the four 
mind'born sens of Brahma who dt( lining to cieate progenv remained boys 
forever. The pnranas recount tin n minibtr variously, font, fi\e oi seven. 



1448 


The sages said :— 

44. O disciple of Vyasa, obeisance be to yi>u. You 
are blessed. You are the most excellent of the devotees of 
Siva. The highest thing, the excellent knowledge of Siva 
has been imparted to us. 

45. Thanks to your mercy, our mental delusion has 
vanished. Securing the excellent knowledge of Siva from 
you we are satisfied. This knowledge yields salvation. 

SSta said :— 

46. O brahmins, this shall not be mentioned to an 
atheist or an unfaithful man or a rogue. Nor shall it be 
mentioned to one who has no devotion to Siva or who does 
not wish to hear. 

47' After poring through Itihasas, Puranas, Vedas and 
Sastras many a time, Vyasa extracted this essence and 
imparted it to me. 

48. On hearing this once, all sins are reduced to 
ashes. A non-devotee becomes a devotee. This enhances the 
devotion of the devotee. 

49. If it is heard again one attains good devotion. If 
it is heard again liberation is attained. Hence this must be 
heard again and again by the devotees who desire to get 
the benefit of worldly pleasures and salvation. 

50. With the expectation of the greatest benefit it shall 
be repeated five, times. There is no doubt. He will attain it. 
Vyasa has said so. 

51. Nothing is difficult to get for a man who hears this 
excellent thing. By repeating it five times 8iva*s vision is 
attained. 

52. Ancient kings, brahmins and excellent Vai^yas 
have attained great Siddhis by listening to this with attention, 
five times. 

53. Even now if a man listens to this with devotion he 
will attain perfect knowledge of 8iva, worldly pleasures and 
salvation. 

Vjtdsa said :— 

54. On hearing his words the sages were extremely 



Kofirudraseuhhitd 


1449 


delighted. They worshipped Suta with reverence offering 
him various articles. 

55. Satisfied and cleared of their doubts they bowed 
to him, eulogised him, hailed him. and blessed him. 

56. Considering Suta to be the great lord Siva they 
worshipped him and bowed to him. With good intellect 
they praised him speaking to one another, 

57. The excellent knowledge of Siva is pleasing to 
Siva ; it yields worldly pleasures and salvation ; it enhances 
devotion to Siva It is divine. 

58. Thus the fourth meritorious and pleasing 
compendium of Sivapura^a named Kotirudra has been 
narrated. 

59. He who listens to this with devotion and narrates 
this with pure mind enjoys all pleasures here and attains 
salvation hereafter. 



UMASAMHITA 


CHAPTER ONE 

{Krfna meets Upamanyu) 

1. We meditate upon Siva, the perfect deity, who sup¬ 
ports the seven^®® worlds with the Sattva Guna as his attribute, 
who creates them resorting to Rajas and who annihilates them 
when endowed with Tamas; who is beyond Maya con¬ 
sisting of the Gunas and who stands firm; who is truth, bliss, 
and the infinite pure consciousness; who assumes the names 
of Brahma etc. and who is attained always by the applica¬ 
tion of Sattva Guna. 

The sages said :— 

2. O Suta of great intelligence, O Suta, disciple of 
Vyasa, obeisance be to you. The fourth compendium Koji- 
rudra sarhhita has been narrated by you. 

3. Now please narrate the story of Siva, the supreme 
soul, accompanied by Uma—Parvati—the story that is full of 
incidental anecdotes. 

Suia said :— 

4. O Saunaka^®* and other sages, please listen with 
devotion to the divinely auspicious story of Siva, that yields 
worldly pleasures and salvation. 


ao;{. l.okas aic Cdinmonly enuinrraud as thice, \ix htnvcn, raith and 
the atmosphere or lower iTgions bill a I'ltllrr (lassification gives seven 

worlds, viz (i^ the earth, (ii) VIST', the space between the earth and the 

C\ 3 

son inha*'ited b»' Munis, Siddhas etc. (lii) India's heaven above 

the sun or between it and ih<; polar star (iv ) a region above the 

polar star, inhabited by Bhrgu and other saints w'ho survive the destruction 
of the 3 lower worlds (v) inhabited by Bramha’s son Sanat-Kumara 
etc., (vijcTT! inhabited by deified Vair.'igins (vii) TTcST or abode of 


204. See P I note. 



UmdsaihhitS 


1451 


5. This same holy question was put by the excellent 
sage Vyasa to Sanatkumara who narrated the story of Siva. 

Sanatkwndra said :— 

6. O Vyasa, the story of lord Siva which was men¬ 
tioned to Krsna by the sage Upamanyu,*®^ l narrate to you. 

7. 'Formerly Krsna, son of Vasudeva went to Kailasa*®* 
the abode of Siva in order to perform the penance to propi¬ 
tiate Siva for obtaining a son. 

8. On seeing the sage Upamanyu performing the 
penance on the excellent summit he bowed to him with 
devotion and asked him with palms joined in reverence. 

Lord Krsna said :— 

9. O Upamanyu of great intellect, O foren-ost of the 
devotees of Siva with good intellect. I have come here to 
perform the panance of Siva for obtaining a son. 

10. O sage, please narrate the greatness of Siva, de¬ 
lightful to the good, on hearing which I shall perform the 
penance of Siva with devotion. 

Sanatkumara said :— 

11. On hearing these words of the intelligent Kr^na, 
Upamanyu was delighted in his mind. Remembering Siva, 
he replied. 

Upamanyu said :— 

12. O Krsna, great devotee of Siva, listen to the 
glory of Siva which I have witnessed myself. It is excellent 
story that enhances devotion to Siva. 

13. While performing penance, I saw Siva, his 
weapons, his followers and Vi§nu and other gods. 

14. He was shining with his three parts. He was of 
permanent happiness. He was imperishable. He had one 
foot and huge teeth with laces having mouthfuls of blazing 
flame. 

15. He was shining with the brilliance of two thousand 

2i),i L’uani.Tnyii. pupil of Ayoila Dhaumya propagated Siva cult 
and received the Ocean of milk fiom lord Siv.i. 

2o 6. See P. <141 note. 



1452 Sivapurlbfa 

'ays. He was whirling excellent missiles. He had many 
eyes and a thousand legs.^* 

16-17. He who decisively annihilates the universe at 
the end of a kalpa and for whom there was none to be 
spared from death in the three worlds consisting of the 
mobile and immobile beings which being cast away from his 
hands burnt instantaneously and entirely, certainly within 
half a moment. 

18. While performing penance, I saw at the side of 
Rudra the imperishable highly secret weapon which had no 
other missile superior or equal to it. 

19. It was the weapon Vijaya, the trident of the 
fierce weapon that destroyed all other weapons and missiles. 

20. There is no doubt that it could pierce through 
the entire earth, dry up the big ocean and cause all the 
luminary bodies to fall. 

21. It WM the weapon with which Yauvana^va*®* the 
emperor of great refulgence and Mandhatr the powerful 
king who conquered the three worlds were killed formerly. 

22. The arrogant Haihaya*®* king was killed with it. 
When the demon Lavana*“ challenged king'Satrughna this 
missile was hurled at him. 

23. When that demon was killed this trident had re¬ 
turned to Rudra. It had a sharp point and was highly 
terrifying. 

24. It stood as if threatening all with the three spikes 
for its knit eyebrows. It was like a blazing smokeless fire 
and the rising sun. 

25-26. I saw his sharp-edged axe decorated with 
serpents etc. It was as terrible as the god of death holding 


207. The epithet identifies Siva uith the thousand-footed Puiu;a 
mentioned in the Purusasiikta of the 8^gveda. 

2( 8 Yauvanaiva was the patronymic of MSndhatf- It should not be 
confused with yauvan&Sva, the grandson of Mindhatf. 

209. Most probably it refers to tlie Plaihaya king Arjuna K&rttavirya, 
of a thousand arms who was clefrated and had his arms cut off by 
Para^urama. 

210. Lavana, king of Mathurl, was the son of Madhu by Kumbhi- 
nasl, the sister of Rivapa. He had inherited from his father an invincible 
trident which had been presr nud to him by iSiva. He was surprised 
without his weapons and killed by 8atrughna. 



Umdsarhhitd 


1453 


the noose in his hand. It was like an indescribable ray of 
the sun and the features of the fire at the end of Kalpas. 
It had the size of a full-grown man. Bhargava Rama 
had used it in the battle for the extermination of K^atriyas. 

27. It was given to Rama by Siva formerly.*^! Stre¬ 
ngthened by it the delighted sage burnt the K^atriyas 
twentyone times.*^^ 

28. I saw the discus Sudarsana in the shape of a 
human being with a thousand faces and two thousand 
hands. It was divine and lordly. 

29. It had two thousand eyes of fiery brilliance, and 
one thousand legs. It shone like a crore suns. It was capable 
of burning the three worlds. 

30. I saw the sharp and refulgent thunderbolt of 
hundred spikes of extreme excellence. I saw the great bow 
Pinaka of excessive brilliance and its quiver of arrows. 

31. I saw the Sakti, the sword, the noose of great 
brilliance and a goad, the great divine iron club, and 
many other weapons. 

32. On either side of Lord Rudra, I saw the weapons 
of the guardians of the quarters. 

33. To the right of the lord was Brahma, the grand¬ 
father of the worlds seated in his aerial chariot fitted with 
a swan. It was divine and as speedy as mind. 

34. Narayana, holding conch, discus and mace, stood 
on his left, seated on the Garuda. 

35. Brahma and other Manus, Bhrgu and other 
sages, Indra and other gods, all were there. 

36. Holding his l§akti and a bell and seated on his 
peacock, Skanda stood near the goddess like another firegod. 

37. Nandin stood in front of Siva holding the 
trident. All the goblins, Gan as and the mothers were pre¬ 
sent there. 

38. Bowing to lord Siva and surrounding him on all 
sides, the gods eulogised the lord: with different kinds of 
hymns. 

211. With the axe received from lord Siva, ParasurSma cleared the 
earth of the K^atriyas tlirirr seven limes and gave the earth to the 
3 rahmins. 

212. The Skt text of this verse is defective 



1454 SivapwOna 

39. I saw on either side of the lord whatever is seen 
or heard in this world. I was surprised at it. 

40-41. O Krsna, it appeared as though somtf sacrifice 
was going on there. In that sacrifice I became immersed in 
great delight. I was bold to a great extent on sensing Siva in 
front. With palms joined in reverence and words choked 
with tears of joy I worshipped him duly with various kinds of 
hymns. 

42. Then the delighted lord Siva spoke to me laugh¬ 
ingly in sweet words with great pleasure. 

43. “O brahmin, you cannot be shaken by me though 
I try again and again. You have been tested by me. Wel¬ 
fare be to you You are steadily endowed with devotion. 

44. O one of good rites, I am delighted. Choose the 
boon. There is nothing which cannot be given to you 
even if it happens to be something rare and inaccessible to 
all the gods.” 

45. On hearing the loving words of Siva I spoke to 
the lord sympathetic with the devotees with palms joined in 
reverence. 

Upamanyu said :— 

46. “O lord, if you are satisfied and if my devotion is 
firm and steady, may, in virtue of that truth, my knowledge 
comprehend the past, present and future. 

47. Grant me infinite devotion never swerving or 
straying from you. Let me and my family have milk pudding 
every day. 

48. O lord, may you be present in my hermitage 
every day. Let my mutual friendship with your other devo¬ 
tees flourish for ever.” 

49. O leading scion of the family of Yadus, thus 
requested by me, lord Siva laughed and glanced at me 
with his merciful eyes. He said to me. 

^iva said :—> 

50. O Upamanyu, O dear, O sage, you will be 
free from the defects of old age and death. Achieve all 
desires. 

51. You will deserve the worship of the sages. You 



UmSsathhitd 


1455 


will have fame as your wealth. Thanks to my grace, step by 
step, you will possess good conduct, beauty, good qualities 
and riches. 

52. O sage, wherever you wish it to be, the milk 
ocean*^® will flow to and be present there. 

53. By the time that nectarine milk is fully controlled 
you will see Vaivasvata Kalpa along with your kinsmen 

54. O great sage, may your family be never-ending 
due to my grace. I shall be always present in your her¬ 
mitage. 

55- Let your devotion to me be permanent. O dear one, 
whenever remembered by you I shall appear before you. You 
are by all means my beloved. 

55. Be happy realising all your desires. Do not get 
anxious or worried. There is no doubt that everything you 
think ofwill be fulfilled. 

Upamanyu said '.— 

57. After granting me the boons and saying this, lord 
Siva of the brilliance of a crore suns vanished there itself. 

58. O Krsna, Siva, the supreme lord the bestower of 
worldly pleasures and salvation, was thus ‘'een by me accom¬ 
panied by his followers. 

59. Whatever was mentioned by the intelligent lord 
Siva has been wholly acquired by me by meditating on the 
lord of the gods. 

60. See for yourself the Gandharvas, Apsaras, sage.s, 
Vidyadharas and the well arranged Siddhas. 

61. See the beautiful trees endowed with glossy leaves, 
fragrant with seasonal flowers and bearing fiuits and 
flowers. 

62. O mighty hero, all these arc the results of the 
grace of Siva the great soul, the lord of gods. The universe 
is emotionally agreeable. 

63. I have the perfect knowledge of everything, thanks 
to the grace of the Trident-bearing lord. I know factually 
the past, present and the future, everything. 


21.}. See P. 224 note. 



1456 SivapurS^a 

64. I have seen the lord whom even the great gods 

do not see without propitiating. Who can be more 
blessed than 1 ? • 

65. The eternal principles arc known as twentysix.*** 
Learned men meditate on the great and imperishable thus. 

66. That great lord alone is the knower of well-orda¬ 
ined principles, the direct perceiver of all true objects and 
the lord of Prakrti and Purusa. 

67. It was he who created, for the protection of the 
worlds, Brahma, the cause of the worlds, from his right hand 
and Visnu from the left hand side. 

68. When the Kalpa came to an end, the lord created 
Rudra from his heart. Then he annihilated the universe in¬ 
cluding the mobile and immobile beings. 

69. At the end of Yugas, lord Siva becomes Kala 
and stands devouring all the living beings, like the fire of 
dissolution Sarhvartaka. 

70. The lord is omniscient, the soul and the material 
and effective cause of all living beings. He is all-pervasive 
and visible to all deities. 

71. Hence, propitiate him for the acquisition of a soli. 
6iva, favourably disposed to his devotees will become 
delighted with you, soon. 


CHAPTER TWO 

( Upamanyu's instruction ) 

Sanatkumara said : — 

1. On hearing the words of sage CJpamanyu the great 
soul, devotion to lord Siva was generated in Kr9na and he 
spoke to the sage. 

Lord Krfm said :— 

2. O dear, O Upamanyu, be merciful to me. Please 


214. S«e P. 1104 nolr. 



UmSsaifihitd 1457 

mention the details of the persons who have attained their 
desires by propitiating Siva. 

Sanatkumdra said '.— 

3. On hearing the words of Krsna, that sage 
Upamanyu, tlie great devotee of Siva, the storehouse of 
mercy praised him and said. 

Upamanyu said: — 

4. O leading scion of the family of Yadus, I shall 
enumerate the various devotees, by whom the cherished 
desires of their hearts have been realised through the 
propitiation of Siva. Please listen. 

5. Formerly Hiranyakasipu attained ^he glory of 
the suzerainty over all the gods for a period of a million 
years from the moon-crested lord Siva. 

6. His excellent son Nandana was very famous. 
Thanks to Siva’s boon he kept Indra under him for ten 
thousand years. 

7. O Krsna, the terrible discus of Visnu and the 
thunderbolt of Indra became shattered against his person 
during a great battle. 

8. The weapons, missiles, discus, thunderbolt never 
became effective in the body of Graha of great might during 
battles, thanks to the Dharma of that intelligent one. 

9. The gods were harassed by Graha the mighty one. 
Leading Asuras to whom the lord had granted boons killed 
gods with impunity. 

10. Siva, the lord of all worlds, when satisfied 
granted the lordship over the three worlds to Vidyutprabha 
for a period of a hundred thousand years. 

11. Siva blessed him with ten million sons also and 
said “You will become my follower for ever.” 

12. O Krsna, the delighted lord Siva, lovingly gave 
him an auspicious kingdom in Ku^a Dvipa.-** 

13. The Daitya Satamukha created by Brahma, 

215. WiUbid ^A&iaiic Rescart\ ol. \ lll. P. idcniifies 

Kusadvlpa with a part of the .\iabian IVninsula. .See .S.M Ali. GeograpJiy 
of the Puraiias P. 1113. 



1458 ^ivapurd^ 

performed the penance of Siva formerly for a hundred 
years and obtained a thousand sons. 

14. The iamous sage Yajnavalkya glorified * in the 
Vedas, propitiated him and acquired excellent knowledge. 

15. The sage Vedavyasa who had acquired unequalled 
glory propitiated him and attained knowledge of the three 
times—past, present and future. 

16. The Balakhilyas harassed by Indra secured from 
Siva the invincible Garuda who brought them Soma juice. 

17. When all the waters became dried up and lost by 
the prior fury of Siva they were worshipped and made 
to flow again by the gods through the skull. 

18-19. Anasuya, the chaste wife of Atri observed fast for 
three hundred years sleeping only on the threshing rod. She 
secured the three sons—the sage Dattatreya, T^urvasas and the 
moon, thanks to Siva’s favour. She made Gahga flow 
in Citrakuta.*** 

20. O Madhusudana, after pleasing Mahadeva the 
bestower of happiness to the devotees, Vikarna obtained great 
Siddhi. 

21. King Citrasena of steady devotion delighted Siva 
and attained freedom from the terror of all other kings and 
unequalled pleasure as well. 

22. Srikara, the son of a cowherdess, became his devotee 
on seeing the worship of Siva performed by the king and 
attained great Siddhi. 

23. O Krsna, prince Citrahgada, the husband of 
Simantini, was drowned in Yamuna but was saved by Siva’s 
blessings 

24. He went to the abode of Taksaka*^’ and gained 
his friendship. The delighted prince of good rites then 
returned to his house with diverse riches. 

25. O Krsna, his beloved wife Simantini who regularly 

216. It is a mountain in the Himavat region round tie lake 
Manasarovara in the vicinity of the peak Kii^canajaAgha. It is distinct 
fi om the hill of that name on the Paisuni river in Bundelkhand on which 
the hermitage of BharadvSja was founded. 

217. The mythical abode of Tak^a or Taksaka, the serpent 
chief is placed in (he nether region. 



UmasahrhitS 1459 

performed Somavrata acquired excellent blessedness and 
fortune, thanks to diva’s grace. 

26. While she was performing this Vrata a certain 
brahmin boy, out of greed, had assumed the guise of a 
woman fraudulently. Due to her power he became a woman 
permanently. 

27. Cahcula, a vicious harlot, heard a virtuous story 
from a brahmin at Grokarna and became a devotee of Siva. 
She attained the great goal. 

28. Binduga*^® the sinning husband of Gahcula heard 
Sivapurana through the good offices of his wife and attained 
the good goal of Siva. 

29. Pihgala a notorious prostitute and the base 
brahmin Mandara worshipped the bull of Siva and attained 
the supreme goal. 

30. A certain prostitute Mahananda devoted to Siva, 
dedicating herself at the feet of Siva delighted him and 
attained good goal. 

31. Kaikeyi, a brahmin girl, respectfully performing 
Siva’s Vratas attained great happiness, thanks to the regular 
performance of Siva’s vrata. 

32. O Krsna, king Vimarsana adopting Siva’s devotion 
attained great goal formerly, thanks to Siva’s blessings. 

33. Durjana, a sinful knavish king running after 
women attained Siva, thanks to devotion to Siva. He was 
unaffected by all actions. 

34. A hunter Sankara performing Sivavrata along with 
his wife and attached to the Bhasma from the funeral pyre 
attained the great goal by his devotion. 

35. O Kfsna, a canqlala woman Saumini performed the 
worship by ignorance and attained the goal of Siva by the 
blessings of the lord. 

36. A hunter Mahakala, a wild Kirata habitually 
injuring others, worshipped Siva with devotion and attained 
the goal of the good. 

37. Durvasas a leading sage popularised his cult in 
the world, thanks to the bles.sings of Siva. He spread Siva’s 
cult of devotion that yields salvation to the devotee. 

>in. For details see Chapters 3-*, on the glory of 5 ivapur§tia. 



1460 


38. Propitiating Siva, the benefector of the worlds, 

Visvamitra a Ksatriya became a brahmin. was as 

though a second Brahma since he created a new heaven. 

39. O Kfsna, by worshipping Siva with devotion 
Brahma, the most excellent devotee of Siva, became the 
creator and grandfather of the worlds. 

40. O Krsna, it was due to Siva’s blessings that the 
excellent sage Markandeya, the holy lord and foremost 
among Siva’s devotees, became long-lived. 

41. O Kfsna, thanks to Siva’s blessings, Devendra, a 
great devotee of Siva, enjoyed the three worlds formerly. 
He became the lord of all the gods. 

42. Bana, the son of Bali, was a great devotee of Siva 
and had great control over senses. Thanks to Siva’s 
blessings he became the leader of the universe and lord 
of all. 

43-41*. Sakti became Visnu due to great devotion, 
Oadhlca became a great Isvara, Rama became a devotee 
of Sankara. Kanada, Bhargava, Guru and Gautama became 
great masters and lords due to devotion to Siva. 

45. O Krsna, Sakalya, the praiseworthy soul propi¬ 
tiated Siva for nine hundred years by means of mental 
sacrifice. 

46. The lord was satisfied and said:—“O dear, you 
will become the writer of a book. Your fame in the three 
worlds will never fade. 

47. Your family will never be extinct. It will be 
adorned by the sages. O excellent sage, you will be the 
composer of Aphorisms later on.” 

48. O descendant of Yadu, thus the great sage 
secured boons from Siva and became well known and 
honoured in the three worlds. 

49. In the Krta Yuga there was a sage famous as 
Savarnl. He performed penance for six thousand years. 

50. Lord Rudra spoke to him directly—‘‘O faultless 
one, I am satisfied with you. You will become the writer 

2[<). Bana, the eldest son of Bali and the ruler of Tripuri, was the 
descendant of Hira^yakaiipu. He was a staunch devotee of ^iva. For 
details see 5 P. R.S. yuddh. Chapters yj j 6 . 



UnUlsaihhitS 


1461 


of a book and attain fame. You will be free from death 
and old age.** 

51. Such is lord Siva. Worshipped by the meritorious 
devotees of yore he confers all auspicious desires as wished 
by them. 

52. I am incompetent to describe with a single 
mouth the qualities that exist in the lord even in hundreds 
of years. 


CHAPTER THREE 

{^The greatness of ^iva) 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

1. On hearing his words Kfsna was much surprised. 
He spoke to the sage Upamanyu of quiet mind. 

AV^na said :— 

2. O great brahmin, you arc blessed. Who can ade¬ 
quately eulogise you and be contented. In your hermitage 
the lord of the gods himself is ever present. 

3. O leading sage, will the lord Siva grant me his 
vision ? Will he do me this favour ? 

Upamanyu said :— 

4 O Purusottama, there is no doubt that ere long 
you will see lord Siva, thanks to his own grace. 

5. In the sixteenth month you will get good boons 
from lord Siva and his wife. O Kr$na, why should not 
the lord grant you the boons ? 

6. O Visnu, thanks to your good qualities, you deserve 
worship of the gods. You are always praiseworthy. 1 shall 
explain a mantra if you have faith enough. 

7. By the virtue of that mantra yon will see l§iva. 
You will acquire a son, equal in strength to you, by the 
favour of lord Siva. 

8. O Kr^na, perform the Japa of this most eilicacious 



1462 ^itktptarS^a 

mantra viz. “Om Namah Sivaya.” It yields all desires. 
It is divine. It bestows worldly pleasures and salvation.’* 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

9. O sage, even as he was narrating these stories 
about lord Siva, eight days passed by as it were a single 
Muhurta. 

10. When the ninth day dawned he was initiated. 
He was instructed in Siva’s mantra, the great one mentioned 
in the Atharvaveda. 

11. Immediately he grew matted hair and then clean¬ 
shaven. With great purity of mind he began to perform 
penance standing on the big toes of the feet and lifting up 
the hands. 

12. When the sixteenth month arrived lord Siva was 
satisfied. Accompanied by Parvati, Siva granted his vision 
to Krsna. 

13-16. Lord Kr?na saw Siva thus:—He was accom¬ 
panied by Parvati. The moon-crested lord had three eyes. 
He was being eulogised by Brahma and others and worship¬ 
ped by crores of Siddhas. He was wearing divine garlands 
and cloths. He was being bowed to by gods and Asuras, 
humbled by devotion. He was bedecked in different 
ornaments. He was lustrous. The unborn and imperishable 
god was full of wondrous things. He was accompanied by 
various Ganas and his two sons. On seeing him lord Kr$na 
was much surprised. His eyes beemed with wonder. De¬ 
lightedly and jubilantly he bowed to him, 

17. He worshipped him with different hymns. With 
drooping shoulders he eulogised the lord of gods with the 
thousand names. 

18. Thus the gods, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas and 
the great serpents showered flowers and congratulated him 
delightfully. 

19. Glancing at Parvati’s face the delighted lord 
Rudra, favourably disposed towards his devotees spoke to 
Kesava even as his splendour spread all round. 

Lord Siva said :— 

20. O Krsna, I know you are . my stapnch devotee, 



UmSiarhhitd 1463 

steady in my rites. Choose holy boons from me even if 
they be inaccessible to the people of the three worlds. 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

21. On hearing his words Krsna spoke to Siva the lord 
of all, respectfully, with palms joined in reverence, after 
bowing to him again and again. 

Krfna said :— 

22. O lord Siva, lord of the gods, I solicit eight 
excellent boons from you, O Mahe^vara, you have already 
thought of them. 

23-25. Let my mind be always in your cult. Let 
my fame be steady. Let me have nearness to you. Let 
my devotion to you be always unflinching. Let my senior 
sons have ten sons each. Let all my enemies who are 
arrogant by their might be killed in battle. O lord, nowhere 
shall I suffer dishonour from enemies. I shall be the 
beloved of all Yogins. 

26. O lord of gods, grant me these eight good boons. 
Obeisance be to you. You alone are the lord of all and 
especially my master. 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

27. On hearing his words, lord Siva said to him. 
Let your desire be fulfilled. After saying this the trident¬ 
bearing lord said again. 

28. The terrible sun Sarhvartaka at the time of dis¬ 
solution cursed by the sages will be born as your mighty 
and virile son Samba. 

29. (The curse was) “You will be born as a man.” 
He will become your son. Whatever you have sought you 
will obtain.” 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

30. After getting the boons from lord Siva, lord Krsna 
delighted him with hymns. 

31. The delighted Parvati favourably disposed to her 
devotees, spoke to lord Kr^na the noble soul, the devotee 
of Siva and who had performed the penance of lord Siva. 



^ieapurit^ 


1464 

Parvafi said :— 

32. O Kfsna of great intellect, O sinless son *of Vasu- 
dcva, I am delighted with you. Take from me too some 
boons that are rare in the world. 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

33. On hearing the words of Parvati the leading 
descendant of Yadu**°, very much delighted in his heart, spoke 
with great devotion in his mind. 

Lord Krfna said :— 

34-35. O goddess, if you arc satisfied, if you arc 
going to giant me boons due to my penance, truly let not 
my heart be inimical to brahmins. Let it be full of good will. 
1 shall always worship the brahmins. My parents shall 
remain pleased with me. 

36. Wherever I go let me be agreeable to all living 
beings. As a result of seeing you, let there be the birth of 
deserving progeny in my family. 

37. 1 shall propitiate Indra and other gods with a 
hundred sacrifices and honour thousands of ascetics and 
guests always. 

38. Let me feed every one at my house with dishes 
sanctified by faith. Let there be pleasure and excellent 
satisfaction amongst the kinsmen. 

39. O goddess, consort of Siva, I shall be the beloved 
lover of thousands of wives. Let my love appeal to them 
and remain unfading and unfailing. 

40. Let their parents be the speakers of truth in the 
world. O Parvati, thanks to your grace, let these and other 
excellent boons take effect. 

Sanatkumara said :— 

41. On hearing his words, the eternal goddess, the 

220. Krfpa was of the Yadava race, being descended from Yadu, 
one of the sons of Yayati. The yadavas of old were a pastoral race and 
dwelt on the river Yainunfi in VrndSvana on the western side and in 
Cokula on the other. 



UmSsarhhiUl 


1465 


bcstower of all desires, spoke to him in surprise “Hail to 
you. Let it be so.” 

42. After granting Kf§na these boons and blessing 
him mercifully Parvati and Siva vanished there itself. 

43. O great sage, Kr?na, felt as if he had achieved his 
purpose. Immediately he went to the excellent hermitage 
of the sage Upamanyu. 

44. Bowing his head to the sage, Kfsna, the slayer of 
Keiin, narrated all the details to Upamanyu. 

He said '.— 

45. “O Janardana, except lord Siva who else can 
there be the lord of great gifts or very unbearable if 
infuriated ? 

46. O Kr?na of great fame, listen to the lordly glory 
of Siva about his perfect knowledge, austerity, heroism and 
fortitude during dangers. 

47. On hearing that, Krsna became endowed with 
faith and devotion to Siva. He asked him about Siva’s glory. 
The great sage narrated thus. 

Upamanyu said ’.— 

48. Formerly in the region of Brahma lord Siva was 
eulogised with his thousand names by the noble-souled 
Brahma bearing the staff. 

49. The Samkhyas read that song of prayer as it were 
a big lexicon. That hymn bestows all desires on men 
though inscrutable to them. 

50. O Krsna, return home happily remembering Siva 
constantly. O dear, you will always be the foremost among 
Siva’s devotees. 

51. Thus permitted by him, Ke^ava the son of 
Vasudeva made obeisance to the sage and returned to 
Dvaraka mentally remembering Siva. 

Sanatkumdra said '.— 

52. O great sage, Kr^a became contented and invinci¬ 
ble after propitiating Siva, the benefactor of the worlds. 

221. For a thousand names of Siva see KRS Ch. 35. 



1^66 Sivapurd^a 

53. Similarly, O great sage, Rama, the son of Da^a- 
ratha, devoutly propitiated Siva and became contented and 
victorious everywhere. 

54. O sage, after performing a great pcnanctf on the 
mountain, Rama secured from Siva a bow and an arrow and 
the excellent knowledge. 

55. He built the bridge on the ocean, killed Ravana 
w th his followers, regained Sita, returned home and enjoyed 
the whole earth. 

56-57. Similarly Parasurama, who was distressed on 
seeing his father killed by the K^atriyas, propitiated lord 
Siva by his penance. From the delighted lord Siva he 
secured a sharp-edged axe. With that he exterminated the 
Ksatriyas twentyone times. 

58. Even today Siddhas and Garanas see this store¬ 
house of penance deathless and invincible engaged in 
worshipping the phallic image. 

59. Rama stays on the mountain Mahendra^^^ and 
performs penance. At the end of the Kalpa he will attain 
the region of the sage. 

60-61. The ascetic Devala, younger brother of Asita, 
harassed the universe formerly by clutching at its root. He 
was then cursed by the lord, destroyer of cities. He performed 
penance by propitiating the phallic image that bestows all 
desires and removes the past evil. 

62-63. Grtsamada, son of Caksu^amanu became a 
deer in the desert in the Darwjaka^s* forest by the curse of 
Vasistha. Alone he roamed about, devoutly remembering in 
his heart, Siva along with the Pranava oih. After his death he 
became a deer-faced Gana. 

64. Thus passing through the curse he was made free 
from death and old age by Siva and lovingly appointed as 
a permanent follower of Ganesa. 

65-66. To Gargya Siva granted salvation rare in the 

222. Compare US. Ch. i. v. 27. 

223. The mountain Mahcndra represents the Eastern Ghat. Sec 
Studies in Sk. P. P. i '{ 4 * 

224. It stretched from Citrakuta to the south of the God&vari, thus 
included the Vindhya and ^aivala mountains. For its identification with 
Ton^aimap^ala or Dip^ivanam see GEAMl P. 103. 



Umdsarhhitd 


1467 


world, the ability to go as he pleased in holy centres, the 
knowledge of all time coupled with prosperity, and 
permanent mastery of the words of the four Vedas. Siva 
granted him a thousand peerless sons too. 

67. The satisfied lord Siva granted to Para^ara, a 
powerful Yogin as the son who was free from old age and 
death and was known as Vedavyasa. 

68. Mandavya who had been fixed to a s'ake for a 
million years was released by Siva and blessed with 
longevity. 

69-77. Formerly there was a poor brahmin house¬ 
holder. He had kept his son Galava in the house of his 
preceptor. Whenever any mendicant visited his house 
this brahmin hid himself. He used to tell his wife, “No 
doubt I am a householder. But what can I offer to a guest? 
If any poor man comes you shall tell him “My husband is 
not here.” It happened once that a guest oppressed by 
thirst and hunger visited the house. He asked the lady 
“Where is your husband ? Where has he gone ?” She replied 
“My husband is not here.” Knowing the truth by his 
divine vision the sage said, “He is hidden inside the house.” 
The brahmin died in his hiding place. When permitted by 
his preceptor ViSvarxiitra, the son of the brahmin, Galava 
returned home and heard from his mother the terrible 
calamity that had overtaken them. He propitiated lord 
Siva and performed Siva’s worship. When he went out of his 
house remembering Siva in his heart, he saw his father alive 
again who on seeing the son standing with palms joined in 
reverence said—“Thanks to the favour of lord Siva I am 
blessed and satisfied. I have been resuscitated to life again 
and also blessed with wealth”. 

78. Thus everything has been narrated to you. I am 
really not competent to express the qualities of Siva in 
brief or in detail. Even Sera’s tongues may not be 
compietent for the task. 



CHAPTER FOUR 


{The exhibition of Siva^s spell) 

The sages said: — 

1. O dear, O fortunate one, you are blessed, O dear 
one of great intellect. This wonderful narrative of Siva 
that bestows great devotion has been narrated. 

2. Mention again the story of Siva in accordance 
with Vyasa’s enquiry. You are omniscient. You are the 
disciple of Vyasa and an expert in Siva’s principles. 

Stlta said :— 

3. It was in this very same manner that my preceptor 
Vyasa asked Sanatkumara, son of Brahma, who was an 
omniscient great sage and a devotee of Siva. 

Vjdsa said :— 

4. O omniscient Sanatkumara, this auspicious story of 
Siva, the great lord indulging in different sports has been 
narrated to you. 

*5. Speak again particularly of the greatness of lord 
Siva. O dear, my faith and eagerness to hear the same is 
great and it increases. 

6. Who ajre the people deluded by the Maya of Siva 
who indulges in great sports ? What is that greatness by 
which their knowledge has been deluded ? 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

7. O Vyasa, of great intellect, listen to the pleasing 
story of Siva, the mere hearing of which generates devotion 
to Siva. 

8. Lord Siva is the lord of all, soul of all and the 
vision of all. The entire universe has been pervaded by his 
greatness. 

9. It is the great image of Siva that manifests as 
Brahma, Vi^nu and Siva. It is that which has become the 
soul of all living beings. It is both three-symbollcd and 
symbolless. 

10. There are eight classes of gods. Human beings 



UmdsafMiitd 


1469 


constitute the ninth. There are five types of lower beings. 
Thus there arc fourteen types of living beings. 

11. All living beings past, present and future originate 
from Siva, flourish in him and finally merge into him. 

12-13. Siva is the kinsman,, friend, guide, protector, 
leader, purposeful preceptor, wish-yielding Kalpa tree, 
brother, father or mother of Brahma, Indra, Vi?nu, moon, 
the gods, danavas, serpents, Gandharvas, human beings and 
all others. 

14. Siva is identical with all ; self-manifest to all 
men, greater than the greatest. Than him it is impossible to 
predicate anyother greater thing. 

15. O .sage, his Maya is divine and great pervading 
everything. The entire universe is subservient to it, in¬ 
clusive of the gods, Asuras and human beings. 

16. All heroic beings , even Vi?nu and mighty people, 
have been overwhelmed by the mighty Kama, born of the 
mind who has no other helper. 

17. O great sage, Visnu was deluded by Kama by 
the power of Siva’s Maya. He outraged the modesty of 
other men’s wives many times. 

18. Indra, the lord of the gods, became fascinated by 
Gautama’s wife. That vicious one committed sin and so was 
cursed by the sage. 

19. Even the firegod, the most excellent in the 
universe was deluded by Siva’s Maya. Due to his pride he 
became subservient to lust and was ultimately saved by Siva. 

20. The wind-god, the vital air of the universe was 
deluded by Siva’s Maya due to his arrogance. Overwhelmed 
by Kama, Vyasa too, had sexual intercourse with other 
men’s wives. 

21. The sun of fierce rays, deluded by Siva’s Maya 
became lustful on seeing a mare and assumed the form of a 
horse. 

22. The moon deluded by Siva’s Maya became lust¬ 
ful and abducted the wife of Brhaspati and had his sexual 
union with her. But he was finally saved by Brhaspati 
himself. 



1470 


SivapurSna 


23. Formerly the two gods Mitra and Varuna, whil'^ 

performing a severe penance, were fascinated and deluded 
by Siva’s Maya. , 

24. On seeing the youthful maiden Orvasi, both of 
them had the emission of their semen. Mitra deposited his 
semen in a pot and Varuna in water. 

25. Vasistha was born out of the pot and is called 
Mitra’s son. Agastya born of Varuna has the lustre of the 
submarine fire. 

26. Daksa, son of Brahma deluded by Siva’s Maya, had a 
desire for sexual intercourse with his sister along with his 
other brothers. 

27. Many times, Brahma, deluded by Siva’s Maya, 
had the desire for sexual union with his own daughter and 
other women. 

28. Gyavana the great Yogin. deluded by Siva’s Maya, 
became lustful and had sexual dalliance with Sukanya. 

29. Ka.<yapa became passionate on being deluded by 
Siva’s Maya. Formerly, out of delusion, he requested king 
Dhanvan to give his daughter to him. 

30. The deluded Garuda while abducting the virgin 
Sandili was found out by her and got his wings burnt. 

31. The sage Vibhandaka became lustful on seeing 
a woman. At the behest of Siva, Rsyasriiga®*® vvas his son 
born of a hind. 

32-33. The sage Gautama had his mind deluded by 
Siva’s Maya. On seeing Saiadvati in the nude he was excited 
and he indulged in sexual intercourse with her. He collected 
the semen emitted in a wooden bowl. Drona the foremost 
among marksmen was born of that bowl. 

34. The great yogin Parasara, deluded by Siva’s 
Maya, indulged in sexual intercourse with Matsyodari the 
virgin daughter of a fisherman. 

35. O Vyasa, Visvamilra became deluded by Siva’s 
Maya and lustfully indulged in sexual dalliance with Menaka. 

2j-,. .XciorcljriR lo ihe Rimayin^a and the MaliabhSrata R$yai>rnga, 
son of Viljhr'nd.ika. horn of a doe and h.Td a small horn on his 

forehead. 



UmdsatfihUS 


1471 


36. Becoming confounded in thought he rivalled with 
Vasistha. But thanks to Siva’s grace he became a brahmin. 

37. Ravana, the son of Vi^ravas, became lustful due 
to Siva’s Maya. The wicked-minded one abducted Sita, 
became deluded and courted death. 

38. The excellent sage Brhaspati deluded by Siva’s 
Maya had sexual intercourse with his brother’s wife and 
Bharadvaja was born. 

39. O Vyasa, thus the power of the Maya of Siva, 
the great soul has been narrated to you. What else do 
you wish to hear ? 


CHAPTER FIVE 

{The Great Sins) 


Vyasa said :— 

1. O holy lord, son of Brahma, obeisance be to you. 
Please describe those living beings who are engaged in sins 
causing their fall into great hells. 

Sanatkumara said :— 

2. I describe to you in brief the living beings who 
are engaged in sins that cause their fall into great hells. 
Listen attentively. 

3. Pondering over other men’s wives and wealth, 
wishing for the ill of others mentally, conception of various 
evil actions and ardent longing for various mean acts, 
these arc the four types of mental activity. 

4. Unconnected jabber, untruthful utterance, dis- 

226 M-mu ditirrs in regard to the number of sins arising from the 
misjise of the mind, tongue and body. Acrordir.g to him the sins of the 
mind are three, those of the spet rh pie four and those cf ihe body are 
three (Manu i2. 5)» 



1472 SvoapwSna 

pleasing words and backbiting, these arc the four type* 
of verbal activity. 

5. Eating forbidden food, violence, wild goose chase 
and pilfering of other’s property, these are the four types 
of physical activity. 

6. Thus there are twelve types of activity intended 
to achieve three aims. I shall explain their further sub¬ 
divisions, the results of which are endless and manifold. 

7. Very great is the sin of those who hate lord Siva 
who enables people to cross the ocean of worldly existence. 
They are sure to be immersed in the ocean of hell. 

8. Those who censure the propoundcr of Siva’s 
perfect knowledge, ascetics, preceptors or parents are mad. 
They fall into the ocean of hell. 

9-10. The following six are the great sins attended 
with endless evil results, viz:—censure of Siva, censure of the 
preceptor, censure of Siva’s perfect knowledge, misappropri¬ 
ation of the wealth of the lord, destruction of the wealth 
of brahmins and the foolish stealing of the sacred text of 
Siva’s perfect knowledge. 

11-22. The following too are great sins and those 
who commit them are great sinners. Those who do not take 
delight on seeing a well-arranged worship of Siva, who do 
not bow to or eulogise it on seeing his phallic image that 
is worshipped, those who do not scrub, clean and sanctify 
the spot of worship during festival days; those who do not 
duly cooperate with the preceptor in their sacred rites; 
those who misbehave as they please, play about mischievously 
and do not render service in front of Siva or in the presence 
of the preceptor; those who eschew §aiva course of conduct 
and discipline, those who hate Siva’s devotees; those who 
begin to study or write about Siva’s knowledge without 
worshipping; those who give without justice or justification; 
those who listen or recite indiscriminately; those who sport 
about covetously; tho.se vho pursue false knowledge or do 
not have proper rules and regulations; those who lie down 
and sleep in dirty uncleaned spots; he who abuses Siva’s 
story and knowledge and begins to expatiate on other 
things; he who does not speak the truth; he who does not 



UmSsarhkkS 


1473 


make gifts; he who is bodily impure and begins to explain 
or listen to Siva’s story in an unclean place; he who begins 
to listen without worshipping the preceptor; he who does 
not render service to him or pay heed to his behests 
with devotion; he who does not support the preceptor’s 
statement; he who retorts to his preceptor; he who con¬ 
veniently ignores the most difficult task of his preceptor; 
he who deserts his preceptor when he is in distress, or 
when he is unable to maintain the disciple, or when he 
has gone abroad or when he is attacked by enemies; he 
who treats with contempt the teacher of virtuous activities 
and ability to discourse; he who disrespects the teacher’s 
wife, son or friends. O excellent sage, these activities are 
as sinful as censure of Siva. 

23. The murderer of a brahmin, the addict to wine, 
the habitual thief, the defiler of the preceptor’s bed and 
he who associates with these is the great sinner fifth in all.^*^ 

24. He who kills a brahmin out of fury, greed, fear or 
hatred or uses heart-rending taunts becomes the slayer of a 
brahmin. 

25. He who invite? a brahmin and makes him some 
gift but later on takes it back and criticises him and rebukes 
him without any fault is the slayer of a brahmin. 

26. He who, being arrogant of his gift of learning, 
puts to shame any good brahmin keeping silence and in¬ 
different in the assembly is also a brahmin-slayer. 

27. He who pretends to have the qualities he does not 
have and gains recognition for the same and he who conceals 
his bad attributes is a brahmin-slayer. 

28. He who hinders cow? when bulls mate with them 
or brahmins when they seek preceptors is called a brahmin- 
slayer. 

29. He who forcibly occupies the land given in sup¬ 
port of the temples, brahmins or cows, though the lease 
might have lapsed due to efflux of time, is called a brahmin- 
.slayer. 

30. The misappropriation of the wealth of the deity or 


237. Cp. Mann 11. 



1474 SivapurSna 

a brahmin and wealth earned through injustice js no less 
than the sin of slaying a brahmin undoubtedly. 

31. If a brahmin learns the Vedas and acquires 
knowledge of Brahman and Siva, but eschews it later on he 
commits a sin equal to that of drinking wine. 

32. The abandonment of sacred rites, worships and 
the five daily sacrifices,228 after performing the same for some 
time is attended with a sin equal to that of the drinking wine. 

33-35. These are terrible sins like the murder of a 
brahmin:—abandonment of parents, perjury, lying to brah¬ 
mins, flesh-eating in regard to the devotees of Siva, eating 
forbidden food, killing of innocent living beings in the forest, 
failure to use for charitable purpose the funds left by good 
men for the sake of brahmins and committing of arson in the 
forest or village or in the pathway of cows. 

36-40. The following sins are equal to the theft of 
gold:—The forfeiture of the entire property of a poor man; 
the selling of these by a brahmin knowingly done except in 
a grave emergency—man, woman, elephant, horse, cow, land, 
silver, cloth, medicinal herbs, juices (or quicksilver) sandal 
paste, Aguru, camphor, musk, silk garments etc. and misap¬ 
propriation of deposits kept in trust. The following are sins 
on a par with that of defiling teacher’s bed—the non-disposal 
of marriageable daughters by giving them in marriage to 
deserving husbands, having sexual intercourse with the wives of 
sons and friends or with the sisters, raping virgins; cohabitation 
with an intoxicated woman or a woman of one’s own caste. 
These are the great sins I have mentioned. Now listen to the 
minor sins. 


a3u. Sec r. ii2,j note. 



UmasarhhiUi 


1475 


CHAPTER SIX 

{Different types of sins) 

Sanatkumara said ’.— 

1. Removal of a brahmin’s money, transgressor of the 
rules of inheritance, too much of arrogance, great fury, false 
prestige, ingratitude. 

2. Debauchery, miserliness, malice towards good men 
illicit approach to another man’s wife, defiling the virgins of 
good men. 

3 Parivitti (the elder brother who is not married but 
who has allowed the younger brother to marry); Parivettr 
(the younger brother who marries thus) ; Giving daughters 
to these two or allowing them to officiate in sacrifices. 

4. The spoilation of flowers and trees around the tem¬ 
ple of Siva; even the slightest injury to the people in the 
hermitage. 

5. The theft of cattle, grain, wealth etc. of the family 
of servants, theft of base metals, food-grains and milch cattle, 
dirtying of waters. 

6. Selling of sacrificial parks and ponds, wives and 
children, pilgrimages and fasts, sacred rites and investiture 
with sacred thread. 

7. Dependence on dowry, servitude to women, non- 
protection of the womenfolk, carrying on affairs with women 
through fraudulent means. 

8. Non-return of time-barred debts, taking grain as 
interest, acceptance of monetary gift from a despicable person, 
deceitful life through merchandise. 

9. Using bullock constantly as a vehicle through wild 
jungles, Uccatana (exorcising) and Abhicara (black magic) 
acceptance of grains as gift, working as a physician. 

10. Engagement in sacred rites to satisfy the palate 
or the sexual urge, teaching only the text of the Vedas (not 
the meaning). 

229. For the comparison of the Piincipal and subsidiary sins as 
mentioned in the previous and present chapters, see Manu Ch. ii. The 
treatment of the subject in .^P is more elaborate. 



1476 


Sivapuri^ 


11. Eschewing of Brahma and other Vratas and adop¬ 
tion of ther modes and customs, learning of spurious holy 
lore, engagement in hair-splitting arguments. 

12. Censuring gods, fire-god, preceptors and virtuous 
men openly and the kings and his officers indirectly. 

13. Those who have ceased to perform sacrifices to the 
gods and the manes, those who have abandoned their duties 
and rites, persons of evil conduct, atheists, sinners, and 
habitual liars. 

14. He who indulges in sexual intercourse during new 
moon and full moon days during day time, or in the vagi¬ 
nal passages of animals, or through other passages or emits 
semen in water, or cohabits with a woman in her monthly 
course. 

15. Those who shatter the hopes of obtaining wives, 
sons and friends; those who speak displeasing words; ruth¬ 
less persons and those who break agreements. 

16. Those who damage or demolish lakes, wells or 
water causeways; he who serves different kinds of food 
among persons sitting in the same row. 

17. The foregoing are some of the minor sins. Men 
or women guilty of the same are minor sinners, I shall 
mention some others also. Listen. 

18. Those who cause injury to cows, brahmins, vir¬ 
gins, master, friends or ascetics are sure to go to hell. 

19. Those who undergo agony due to another man’s 
wife; those who have an eye on another man’s wealth; 
those who steal that and those who make use of false 
weights. 

20. Those who cause misery to brahmins by means 
of kicks and blows; the brahmins who serve iSudra women 
and drink wine due to passion. 

21. Those who are cruel and engaged in sinful acts; 
those who arc fond of violence and those who perform Dana, 
Yajfia and other rites as a profession for livelihood. 

22. Those who evacuate their bowels in cowpens, 
streets, near water and fire, shades of trees, mountains, 
parks and temples. 



UmSsaihkitd 


1477 


23. Those who are engaged in drinking bouts in 
hermitages and palaces; those who are in search of weak 
points in others; those who are in association with others. 

24. Those who block roads by means of bamboos, 
bricks, logs of wood, horns or poles and those who violate 
the boundaries of others’ fields. 

25. Those who make counterfeit documents, those 
who are engaged in fraudulent activities, those who indulge 
in fraud in dealing in food and clothing and in law suits. 

26. The maker, buyer and seller of bows, weapons 
and darts, he who is merciless to servants and he who 
ill-treats animals. 

27. He who listens slowly to the words of liars, who is 
traitor to masters, friends and teachers, a cheat, a fickle- 
minded and a rogue 

28. Those who leave their wives, sons, friends, child¬ 
ren, the aged, lean and sick persons, servants, guests and 
kinsmen hungry but take food themselves. 

29. He who sumptuously feeds himself on delicacie.s 
but does not give any tiling to biahmins, shall be known 
as Vrthapaka (a man of fruitless cooking). He is despised 
by those who propound Brahman. 

30. Those who voluntarily decide to perform certain 
rites with self-imposed checks and restraints but leave them 
off because they have not conquered their sense-organs; 
those who renounce but again come back to householder’s 
life; breakers of the idols of Siva. 

31. Cruel persons who beat cows and bulls; suppress 
them; do not feed them properly and let them alone weak 
and feeble. 

32. Those who ill-treat bullocks with weighty burden; 
those who make them draw heavily-laden carts; those 
who do not let them off free for lei.sure. 

33. Those who do not rear cows and bullocks pro¬ 
perly, let them starve; ill treat them with heavy burdens; 
do not treat their wounds and bruises are called the killers 
of cows. They arc sure to fall into hell. 

34. The most sinful persons who castrate bulls by 



1478 SivapuTibfa 

squeezing out their scrotum and those who make heifers 
draw carts are great sinners sure to fall into hell. 

35-36. Those fools who do not take pity oft guests, 
helpless persons, independent casual guests, children, old men, 
emaciated and sick persons overwhelmed by hunger, thirst 
and weariness and desirous of food surely go to hell. 

37. The assets of a man take leave of him at the house 
itself as the kinsmen do at the cremation ground but his merits 
and sins follow wherever he goes. 

38. The base brahmin who rears goats, sheep and 
buffaloes and who marries a Sudra woman and who lives on 
fishing etc. is a 8udra. If he follows the occupation of a 
K§attriya he is sure to go to hell. 

39. Sculptors, blacksmiths, physicians, goldsmiths and 
royal pretenders and deceitful servants are sure to go to hell. 

40. The king who imposes improper taxes out of his 
own will and takes undue delight in punishment is tortured 
in jhcll. 

41. The king whose .subjects are harassed in the 
following way is tortured in hell. The way they are harassed 
may be due to bribery, favouritism of the officers and rob¬ 
bery. 

42. There'is no doubt that the brahmins who take 
monetary gifts from an unjust king fall into terrible hells. 

43. The king who confiscates the properties of 
brahmins unjustly and passes them on to others certainly 
falls into hell. 

44. Sin accrues to the fierce robbers ^ind to those 
cohabiting with other men’s wives. It accrues to the king 
who indulges in amorous sports with other’s women. 

45. If the king does not discriminate between a non¬ 
thief and a thief and kills the wrong person he is sure to fall in 
hell. 

46-49. If people steal even a small quantity of these 
things they will fall into hell—ghee, oil, food and drink, 
honey, flesh, wine, toddy, jaggery, sugarcane, vegetables, 
milk, curds, roots, fruits, grass, firewood, leaves, flowers, 
medicine, shoes, umbrella, cart, seat, waterpot, copper, tin, 
lead, weapon, conch, and aquatic products, medicinal con- 



UmSsathhitS. 


1479 


coctions, bamboo, household articles, etc. Those who steal 
coarse or fine clothes out of greed fall into hell. 

50. There are other similar things the stealing of which 
even in small quantities causes fall into hell. 

51. There is no doubt that stealing another man's 
possession, whatever it is, be it of the size of mustard 
seed, causes fall into hell. 

52. By these sins the man after his death is born as 
a serpent for suffering the tortures. 

53. At the behest of Yama the sinners go to the 
world o.f Yama in their bodies, which are dragged by 
Yama’s terrible emissaries and are subjected to grief. 

54. Yama is the chastiser of all gods, human beings 
and animals engaged in evil practices. He chastises them 
by inflicting diverse terrible punishments. 

55. For those who regularly observe restraints and 
disciplined life but who err slightly due to oversight, the 
preceptor is the chastiser through expiatory rites and not 
Yama as explained by learned men. 

56. The king is the chastiser for outragers of others’ 
wives and thieves and unjust persons. But for those who are 
hidden Yama is the chastiser. 

57. Hence one should perform expiatory rites for the 
commission of sins. If the sin is not consumed it will not 
perish even in hundreds of crores of Kalpas. 

58. If the action is by oneself or through one’s incite¬ 
ment or instigation or if it is applauded by one later, 
physically, mentally or verbally he reaps the fruit of the 
sin. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

(Pathway to Hell and the Emissaries of Tama) 
Sanatkum&ra said :— 

1. As a result of the four kinds of sins, all living 
beings go to Yamaloka. They are helpless. 



1480 iist^ur^a 

2. It shall be known to all living beings whether in 
the womb, in the process of birth, as children, <^outh or 
middling whether women, man or a eunuch. 

3. Here the result of the auspicious and the inaus¬ 
picious actions of all embodied beings is being considered by 
Gitragupta Vasistha and others. 

4. There are no living beings who do not go to 
Yama’s abode. The result of the action must of necessity be 
undergone. Let that be considered. 

5. Men who have performed auspicious rites who are of 
gentle minds, endowed with the quality of compassion, go to 
Yama’s abode through the gentle entrance at the East. 

6. Sinners, habitually performing sinful actions and 
devoid of charitable nature, pass through the terrible path 
and enter Yama’s abode by the southern gate. 

7. It must be known that the multiformed city of 
Yama'-*®® is situated at a distance of eightysix thousand Yojanas 
from the Earth. 

8. To men of auspicious deeds it appears to be very 
near, but to the sinners who go along the terrible path it is 
situated far off. 

9. At places the path is strewn with sharp thorns, at 
places it is full of sand, elsewhere it is full of pebbles sharp 
like the razor-edge. 

10. Somewhere the place is marshy, .somewhere full 
of long or short Darbha grass like iron pins that split 
the legs. 

11. Elsewhere it is full of mountains overgrown with 
trees and resembling impassable bunds. The distressd persons 
go along the path full of glowing coal. 

12. In other places it is full of deep irregular chasms 
and canyons, elsewhere, of rugged lumps of clay; of burning 
sands here and sharp spikes there. 


Vaivasvatapurs, the capital ofYama, is placed at the distance 
of eighty-six thousand Yojanas below thi.s earth. Yama, the loid of the 
manes rules in the regit^n called Yamaloka. Attended by thousands of his 
emissaries—Gitragupta and others, he inflicts punishment upon the 
wicked. The chapter describes some frightful tortures suflered by the 
sinners 



Umdsarhhitd 


1481 


13. Somewhere it is pervaded by bamboo groves with 
many branches spreading, elsew’here the path is enveloped 
in darkness, in some places (he path has no support at all. 

14. Somewhere the cross-roads are full of sharp iron 
pieces, elsewhere there is a forest-fire; in other places these 
are hot rocks; in some places snow spreads over it. 

15. Some places are full of fine sand where the persons 
sink up to the neck; elsewhere it is full of stinking muddy 
water and some places arc covered with burning balls of dry 
cowdung. 

16. Different places are infested with different terrible 
beasts of prey such as lions, wolves, tigers and huge pythons or 
terrible mosquitoes or huge leeches. 

17. Terrible flies, extremely poisonous serpents, herds 
of elephants in rut mad and mighty, crushing everything 
under their feet infest the paths. 

18. -19. The persons who go that way are tortured and 
hara.ssed by big boars digging and butting against the path 
with their sharp fangs, buffaloes with sharp horns, all sorts of 
beasts of prey, terrible evil spirits like Dakinis, horrible 
Raksasas and pernicious diseases. 

20. They are without any shelter when fierce gusts of 
wind raising huge columns of dust blow sharply against them 
or showers of massive stones smother them. 

21. They go on, burnt and scorched by lightning 
falls and pierced through by heavy showers of arrows. 

22. They are scorched and burnt by the showers of 
burning coal, the falling terrible thunderbolts and meteors. 

23. They cry when heavy showers of dust envelop 
them. They tremble with fear ever and anon at the terrible 
rumbling sounds of massive clouds. 

24. They are split by the shower of sharp weapons and 
drenched with acid-currents as they go on. 

25. They shrink and wither when oppressed by the 
rough and chill wind all round. 

26-28. All those foolish persons who habitually sin are 
led through such paths by the terrible emissaries of Yam \ 
forcefully, in canying out his behests.—the paths that are 
terrible, devoid of feeding, devoid of basic support, im- 



1482 


Sivapurd^ 

passable, lacking in water, rugged, desolate, dark and 
gloomy and full of pain and misery and all sorts of evil 
things, * 

29. - They are lonely, devoid of friends and relatives. 
They are dependent on others. They bewail their evil actions. 
They cry again and again. 

30. They have by this time become ghosts. They 
have no cloth on. Their throats, lips and palates are parched. 
They are frightened of terror. They are hungry and feel 
a burning sensation all over. 

31. Some are bound with fetters and forced to keep 
their legs lifted up. They are dragged again and again by 
the extraordinarily powerful emissaries of Yama. 

32. Others with downcast faces are against the chest. 
They are distressed. They are dragged with a rope fastened 
to their tresses. 

33. Men in supine position are dragged along the 
thorny path or that covered with burning coal, by means 
of a goad clutching at their foreheads. 

34. The hands of some are tied behind and they are 
hit in the belly. Others are completely bound with iron 
fetters. Still others are nailed in their hands. 

35. A few others are dragged with a noose tied 
round their necks. They go ahead in distress. Others are 
dragged by ropes. Their tongues are pierced through by 
goads. 

36. The noses of others arc bored and ropes arc tied 
through them and they are dragged. Similarly others have 
their cheeks and lips bored and are dragged by ropes. 

37. The tips of the hands and the legs of some arc 
cut off. The ears, noses and lips of others are cut. The 
penis and the scrotum of some are cut. A few others have 
all their limbs and joints cut. 

38. Pushed, pierced and thrust by spears and arrows 
some run about helplessly here and there shrieking and 
squealing. 

39-1-0. Hit and thra^lied by iron clubs and rods, 
bruised by terrible thorns of various sorts, luminous like fire 



UmOsarfihitd 


1483 


and sun and pierced through by javelins, some men shed 
putrid blood or evacuate faeces infested with worms. They 
are taken ahead thus. 

41-42. Those who had not made any charitable gifts 
in the world feel thirsty along this path and vainly beg for 
water, feeling hungry they beg for food; oppressed by sun¬ 
shine they beg for shade and distressed with chillness they 
request for fire. They vainly beg for happiness. But those 
who had made charitable gilts in the world have all the 
food and drink necessary for this journey and go ahead to 
Yama’s abode happily. 

43. Having thus traversed the path they finally reach 
the city of the dead with great hardship. They are then 
ushered into the presence of Yama by the emissaries after 
due announcement. 

44. Yama welcomes with pleasure and due honour, 
all those who had performed auspicious rites in this world. 
He offers them seat, padya and Arghya. 

45. Yama tells them—“You are noble souls duly 
blessed, since you have performed what is ordained in the 
Vedas. Good deeds that are conducive to divine happiness 
have been performed by you. 

46. Ascend the celestial aerial chariot and go to 
heaven to enjoy the pleasures in the company of celestial 
damsels and fulfil your cherished desires. 

47. After enjoying pleasures there, in the end when 
the merit is exhausted return to this place for reaping the 
fruit of what little evil you may have committed.” 

48. Men who have been virtuous are treated as friends 
by Yama. They see Yama with a gentle face, 

49-53. Men who have been guilty of cruelties sec 
him in a terrible form. His face is terrible with curved 
fangs. His eyes are cruel with knit eyebrows. The hair on 
his head stand lifted up. He has a big moustache. His 
lips arc pouted and they throb. He has eighteen hands* 
He is furious. He resembles black collyrium. His uplifted 
hands hold all w'capons. He threatens with punishment. He 
is seated on a great buffalo. His eyes resemble blazing 
fire. He wears red garlands and garments. He is as tali as 



1484 


\a 


the mountain Maha Mem. His voice resembles the rumbl¬ 
ing sound of the clouds at the time of dissolution. He ap¬ 
pears ready to drink up even the big ocean. * 

53. He appears ready to swallow even great mountains. 
He appears to vomit fire. Very near him is Mftyu, whose 
lustre is like that of black fire. 

54. Black in colour resembling coHyrium he is very 
terrifying. Mari, Ugramahamari and Kalaratri arc terrible 
spirits attending on Yama. 

55 Various ailments, leprosies of various forms arc 
terrible. They hold Saktis, tridents, goads, nooses, discuses 
and swords in their hands. 

56. AH of them are heroic and terrible. They have 
curved snouts. They bear shafts, quivers and bows and 
weapons of various sorts. 

57. The attendants of Yama are innumerable. They 
arc great heroes. They have complexions like the black 
collyrium. They appear terrifying with weapons lifted up. 

58. The sinners see Yama terrific to behold, surround¬ 
ed by his attendants and they see Citragupta too equally 
terrible. 

59. Yama rebukes and reproaches the sinners. Lord 
Citragupta enlightens them with statements on virtue. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

{Description of the 


Citragupta said :— 

1-2. O ye sinners, of evil actions, stealers of other 
man’s riches, outragers of the modesty of other’s wives, 
arrogant by your comeliness and might, why was sin 

ii]! The ch.'iptri mctitirns srvf'ial hills and their cells to each of which 
it assigns a group of fiv<- einniissHrics who look after the tortures inflicted 
upon the wicked in accordaiue with their sins The puranas vary 
greatly as to the number and names of the hells. Manu mentions twenty one 
helU only. 



UmSsathhitS 


1485 


committed by you all, for your own ruination ? The actions 
committed by you shall be endured and the fruits thereof 
shall be reaped. 

3. Why do you lament now ? You are being tortured 
by your own actions. Reap the fruits thereof. This is not 
the fault of anyone else. 

Sanatkumara said: — 

4-5. Similarly, the infuriated great lord Gitragupta, 
the knower of virtuousness, at the behest and instruction of 
Yamaraja imparts the following advice to the kings who 
proud of their might had committed many misdeeds and 
had been brought near him ultimately. 

Citragupta said :— 

6. O ye wicked kings, who had tyrannised over and 
repressed your subjects, why were misdeeds committed for 
your rule of a very short duration ? 

7. O kings, let the fruits be reaped now (of the evil 
actions) in having punished your subjects unjusticiably due 
to vour fascination for kingly pleasures. You have misused 
your might. 

8. Where is that kingdom ? Where is your mistress ? 
Where are those for whom sin and evil have been perpet¬ 
rated ? You have left them all and stand here alone. 

9. I see that might quelled, the might that suppressed 
the subjects. How will you fare when you too are subjected 
to the same treatment by the emissaries of Yama ? 

Sanatkumara said :— 

10. The kings who are treated with these and other 
similar taunts by Yama bewail their own lot and stand silent. 

11. After having proclaimed their evil actions, Yama, 
Dharmaraja speaks to the messengers thus, for wiping off 
the sins of those kings. 

TamarSja said :— 

12. O Canda, O Mnhacanda, seize these kings forci¬ 
bly and purify them giadu;»lly in the fires of hell. 



Sivi^rtllfa 


1486 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

13-14. Then they immediately catch hold of |hc kings 
by their feet, whirl them with great velocity, throw them 
up and when they fall they catch them again and dash them 
against a heated rock. They are thus felled like great trees 
smitten with the thunderbolt. 

15. Then the man sheds blood through his ears. He is 
wholly shattered. He becomes unconscious and motionless. 

16. When the wind blows against him he is resuscitated 
to life again. In order to purify him of his sins they .throw 
him into the ocean of hell. 

17. At the end of the seventh nether-world Tala, there 
are twentyeight Narakakotis situated in terrible darkness. 

18. The first cell is called Ghora. Sughora is situated 
beneath it. Atighora and Mahaghora come next and Ghorarupa 
is the fifth. 

19. The sixth is named Tala tala. The seventh is 
Bhayanaka. The eighth is Kalaratri and the ninth is 
Bhayotkafa. 

20-21. The tenth beneath the previous is Can^a. 
Mahacant^a is lower still. Candakolahala is another. Pracanda, 
Gandanayika, Padma, Padmavatl, Bhita, Bhima, Bhlsana- 
nayika and Vajra arc terrible, very terrible. 

22. The next eight cells are Trikona, Paficakona, 
Sudirgha, Akhilartida, Sama, Bhimabala, Atyugra and the 
eighth Diptapraya. 

23 Thus the cells of Naraka have been mentioned to 
you by their names. Each of these is meant for the torture 
for a particular sin. Thus the twentyeight cells for twenty- 
eight type of sins. 

24. For each of these cells there are five officers-in 
charge. Now I shall mention the names of the hells of each 
of these ceils. Understand them well. 

25. Raurava is the first where the embodied beings 
cry. Maharaurava is the next. Due to the tortures here 
even greatmen cry. 

26-42. There are cool and hot hells. The first five are 
the leading hells. The hells are named thus : Sughora 
$umah3tik:.fAa, Sahjivana, Mahatamas, Viloma, Vilopa 



UmSsarhfUtd 


1487 


Kantaka, Hvravega, Karala, Vikarala, Prakampana, Maha* 
vaktra, Kala, Kalasutra, Pragarjana, Sucimukha, Suneti, 
Khadaka, Suprapidana, Kumbhipaka, Supaka, Krakaca, 
Atidaruna, Angararalibhavanam, Medaprahita, Asfkprahita, 
Tik$natunda, iSakuni, Mahasamvartaka, Kratu, Taptajantu, 
Pankalepa, Pratimaihia, Trapudbhava, Ucchv^a/ Suniruc- 
chvasa, Sudirgha, Kuta^almali, Durista, Sumahavada, 
Pravaha, Supratapana, Megha, Vf^a, Salma, Simhanana, 
Vyaghranana, Gajanana, Svanana, Sukaranana, Ajanana, 
Mahi^anana, Ghukanana, Kokanana, Vrkanana, Grahakhya, 
Kumbhlnakhya, Nakraskhya, Sarpakhya, Kurmakhya, 
Vayasakhya, Grdhrakhya, UlukSkhya, Jalaukakhya, Sardula, 
Kratha, Karkafa, Manduka, Putivaktra, Raktak^a, Putimrttika, 
Kanadhumra, Agni, Krmigandhivapus, Agnidhra, Aprati$tha, 
Rudhirabha, Svabhojana, Lalabhak^a, Antrabhaksa, Sarva- 
bhak^a, Sudaruna, Kanfaka, Suvilala, Vikata, Kataputana, 
Ambarlsa, Kafaka, the grievous river Vaitarani, Sutap- 
taloha^ayana, Ekapada, Prapurana, Asitalavana, 
Asthibhahga, Supurapa Vilatasa, Asuyantra, Kutapaia, 
Pramardana, Mahacurna, Asucurna, Taptalohamaya, 
Parvata, K^uradhara, Yamalaparvata, Mutrakupa, Visthakupa, 
A^rukupa, K^arakupa, Sitala, Musalolukhala, Yantra, 
Sila, Sakatalaiigala, Talapatrasigahana, Maha^akafa, 
Mandapa, Sammoha, Asthibhahga, Tapta, Gala, 
Ayoguda, Bahudu^kha, Mahakle^a, Ka/mala, Samala, 
Mala, Halahala, Virupa, Svarupa, Yamanuga, EUapada, 
Tripada, Tivra, Acivara and Tamas. 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

43-45. Thus for twentyeight cells there are five officers 
in charge of each. Raurava and other hells are thus hundred 
and more. The great zones of hell are forty hundreds. 
Thus O Vyasa, I have described the hells to you. The 
enumeration arotincs detachment from the sin. Now listen 
to the pangs of sinners. 



1488 


SivapurS^a 


CHAPTER NINE 

{Pangs of hell) 


SanalkumSra said '.— 

1. In the hellish hres, the sinners are roasted and 
dried up by diverse tortures till their action is exhausted 
completely. 

2. Just as metals are melted in fire to remove their 
impurities so also sinners are put in hells in order to remove 
their sins. 

3. The hands are tightly tied and the men are 
battered. Then they are suspended from the branches of 
tall trees by the attendants ofYama. 

4. Then they are pushed by the servants till they 
begin to oscillate a Yojana unconscious by their rapidity. 

5. Even as they are suspended in mid air, iron hundred 
Bharas in weight is tied to their feet by the emissaries of 
Yama. 

6. Afflicted by such a heavy weight the sinners begin 
to think about their evil actions and keep quiet and motion¬ 
less. 

7. Then the sinners are beaten with goads of fiery 
colour and terrible iron rods by the terrible servants of Yama. 

8. Then they are again smeared with glowing acid 
more unbearable than fire. 

9-11. Their limbs are cut and smothered, gradually 
torn and severed and smeared with molten metal. They are 
then roasted like brinjal in red-hot iron cauldrons. They 
are then cast into wells full of filth, swarms of worms or in 
tanks full of putrid fat and blood. They are eaten by worm 
and crows with beaks strong as iron. 

12. Dogs, mosquitoes, wolves and tigers of terrible and 
hideous faces too devour them. They are roasted like fish 
over glowing heaps of coal. 

13-14. Due to their sinful actions men are pierced 
through with sharp spears. They are put in oil extracting 
machines called Cakra and crushed like gingelly seeds and 
beaten into pulp. They are fried in iron cauldrons red hot 
in the blazing sunlight. 



UmdsatMiitd 


1489 


15. They are fried in boiling oil in cauldrons again 
and again. Their tongues, chests and feet are struck in 
many ways. 

16. Here the tortures to the body are very severe. 
Men thus go from one hell to another and are tortured in 
all the hells. 

17. O vyasa, terrible tortures are inflicted in diverse 
ways in all the hells by Yama’s emissaries. They are grievous 
and painful to every part of the body. 

18-19. Their mouths are filled with the burning coals 
and again with acid red hot, copper hot clarified butter and 
oil and they are beaten afterwards. 

20. They are filled with faeces and worms and arc 
forced to embrace the red hot fierce iron-silk cotton tree. 

21-22. They are then beaten on the back with heated 
hammer. Their heads and their limbs are crushed with too 
blunt tooth-edged strong scissors. They are thus tortured by 
their own actions. Their flesh is eaten and their blood is 
drunk by them. 

23. Those who fed and nurtured only themselves and 
never made any gift of food or drink are crushed with iron 
rods like sugarcane. 

24. In the terrible hell Asitalavana they arc cut into 
pieces. Their limbs are pierced through with needles. They 
are staked on to heated spearheads. 

25. Tossed about many times their bodies do not 
perish but are severely pained. They become u.sed to bear 
the pleasure or pain. 

26. Flesh is torn off their bodies and they are pounded 
with iron clubs of tooth-edged shapes by terribly mighty emi¬ 
ssaries of Yama. 

27. In the hell Nirucchvasa they are forced to stand 
without breathing, for a long time. In the hell Ucchvasa 
they are hit and thrashed in a house of sand. 

28. In the hell Raurava they arc made to cry and 
inflicted pain by various tortures. Due to the tortures in 
the hell, Maharaurava, even great men cry. 

29. They arc beaten on the faces, feet anus, skull, 



1490 SwapurSM 

eyes and forehead with blocks of iron and sharp-edged redhot 
iron spikes. 

30. They are again and again rolled on hot sand. 
Cast into boiling marsh of creatures they make harsh shrie¬ 
king sounds. 

31. O sage, in the hell kumbhipaka sinners of 
ruthless misdeeds are fried in unbearable boiling oil. 

32. The sinners are felled and dragged along various 
torturing places again and again in the hell named 
Lalabhak^a. 

33. Sinners devoid of merit are beaten by Yama*s 
servants. They are hurled into the torturous hell Sucimukha. 

34. They are put into iron pots. They breathe 
hard and slow. They are scorched by great fire, as if by 
their own sins. 

35. They are tied tightly with ropes and arc rolled 
on rocks and harassed. They are cast into deep gloomy wells. 
They are subjected to bee-bites. 

36. When their bodies are cut, bitten and gnawed by 
worms in a hundred places, they are hurled into wells of pun¬ 
gent acid. 

37. In the blazing hell the distressed sinners, shriek 
and run about here and there scorched by its flames. 

38-39. People are clubbed and tied together with 
mouths resting on shoulders and hands brought through the 
hollow and tied with nooses and ropes to the back. Such 
bundles of bodies are seen in the Mahajvala undergoing 
tortures. 

40. They are tied with ropes, smeared with mud and 
scorched in husk and cowdung fire but do not perish. 

41. Dragged and rolled through rough and coarse 
rocks, beaten and burnt like straw, the sinners of ruthless 
conduct, are tortured. 

42-43. The worms eat through their bodies with their 
sharp mouths and teeth. With their bodies gradually hurled 
over swarms of worms, heaps of putrid flesh and bones they 
stay there distressed, dejected and crushed between two 
mountains 

44. They are kept with face down and legs up and 



UmSsathhitS 


1491 


scorched in fire. Their bodies are smeared with hot adaman¬ 
tine solution. 

45. Red hot iron clubs are thrust into their mouths. 
They are helplessly forced to gnaw at it. They arc then beaten 
with iron threshing rods. 

46. O Vyasa, thus the sinners of misdeeds are cooked 
and scorched in hells. I shall now describe their various 
modes of undergoing the tortures of hell. 


CHAPTER TEN 

{The mode of sufferings in the Hell) 

Sanatkvmdra said :— 

1. He who follows false scriptures goes to the hell 
Dvijihva. He is tortured by the tongue-like ploughshares 
extending to one and a half kilometres. 

2. The mouth of the man who had been cruel to his 
parents and had reproached them is filled with faeces and 
worms and he is beaten. 

3-5. Men who defile the temple of Siva, the park 
surrounding it and the wells, tanks and lakes therein, in various 
ways such as playing there, applying oil and unguents over the 
body, drinking bouts, taking food, indulgence in sexual inter¬ 
course, game of dice etc. are tortured by being crushed in 
the sugercane-cruohing machine and other mechanical 
contrivances. They are scorched in hellish fire till the final 
day of dissolution. 

6. Sinners who indulge in illicit union with other’s 
wives are forced to embrace red-hot iron images of those 
women with whom they had illicit relation and struck in 
various ways. 

7. Images of those men are made of red hot iron and 
the erring women are forced to embrace those images. They 
cry and shriek. 

8-10. Those who listen to the censure of good 
people are punished thus : ears filled with red hot pins of 



1492 


Stpe^uri^a 

iron, copper, tin, lead or brass, or with boiling milk or oil or 
adamantine liquid again and again. The tortures in the 
hells are inflicted by filling the ears with these and other parts 
one after the other. The procedure here too is the same as in 
the case of ears. 

11 Similar tortures are inflicted on ail the organs of 
the body with which the acts of sin had been committed. 

12. The hands of those sinners who touch other’s wives 
are filled with red hot fillings. 

13. Their bodies are smeared with corrosive substances 
such as acid etc. Tortures are acute and grievous in all 
the hells. 

14. The faces of men who show wry faces with knit 
eye-brows to their parents are scratched from end to end 
with sharp pikes. 

15. The organs wherewith men defile or harass women 
are respectively tortured. 

16 If they had looked at other women with greedy 
gaping eyes, red hot needles arc stuck in their eyes. 

17. O excellent sage, it is true, true. There is no doubt. 
Tortures of Yama by acids etc. take place here itself in the 
hells. 

18. If people take food without first offering it to the 
gods, firegod, preceptors and brahmins, their tongues and 
mouths are pierced through and filled with hundreds of red- 
hot nails of iron. 

19-20. If men, out of greed, pluck and sniff at flowers 
of the temple parks, or wear them on their heads,*®* their 
heads arc covered with iron spikes and their noses are filled 
with plenty of acid and other things. 

21-23. Red-hot three-pointed iron rods are thrust and 
pushed through the chest, neck, tongue, tooth-joints, palate, 
lips, nostrils and all the limb-joints of those persons who 
slander and censure the noble-preacher of virtue, devotees of 
the gods, fire-god and preceptor as well as the eternal 
scriptural texts. 

332. Adorning the locks of hair is the common characteristic of the 
people of Dakfinipatha across the NarmadI river. This practice never 
prevailed among North Indian people. 



UmSsathhita 


1493 


24. The crevices of the body are filled with corrosive 
acid. Severe tortures are inflicted all over the body. 

25- 26. Those who take other's wealth or kick or 
even touch a brahmin with their legs go from hell to hell 
serially. Those who touch illegally or stamp with the foot 
the materials for Siva's worship, cow, or a Manuscript in 
which words of wisdom arc written, are tortured by filling— 
(as mentioned before). 

27. In all hells various tortures of grievous nature 
are inflicted on hands and feet. 

26- 30. If sinners evacuate their bowels or pass urine 
near Siva's temple or in the premises of the lord’s parks 
their penis along with the scrotum is pounded into powder 
by iron-threshing rods. Red hot needles arc stuffed into his 
anus and penis. Acute corrosive acid or molten metals are 
poured into them. 

31-32. As a result of the previous tortures their minds 
and all sense-organs are put to great misery. Those who, 
despite being rich do not make monetary gifts due to greed, 
and those who dishonour guests visiting their houses at the 
proper time, commit sins and fall into dirty hell. 

33-34, Those who take food before offering oblations 
to dogs and crows are tortured by beating two nails into 
their open mouths. They are further harassed through worms, 
fierce living beings and by means of crows with iron beaks. 
Various other sorts of tortures too arc in store for them. 

35-40. He who is dark and he who is multi-coloured— 
these two are the obstacles to the path of Yama. To these 
two dogs®** I am offering this oblation. Let them take this 
oblation. Let the pious crows in the direction of Vanina 
(west), of Vayu (north-west), of Yama (south) and of Nairrti 
(south-west), accept this oblation of mine”. Those who offer 
this Bali with Siva's mantras, after worshipping Siva with 
devotion and performing Homa duly* do not face Yama. 
They go straight to heaven. Hence this oblation shall 
be offered daily. A square mystic diagram is made and sweet 

333. The text mentions the two dogs and crows to whom the offer- 
irigs shall be made in favour of the departed spirit. It inentions the 
cow that takes the spirits across Vaitaraal. 



H94 


scents are offered. The oblation to Dhanvantari is made in the 
If ana corner (north-east); that to Indra in the east; that 
to Varna in the south; that to Siva with Dak^a and'Uma in 
the west; that to the Pitrs in the south; that to Aryaman in 
the east and to Dhatr and Vidhatr at the entrance. 

41-4-4. The offerings to dogs and lords of dogs and 
to the crows are made on the ground. A householder is 
depended upon by the gods, Pitrs, ghosts, all sorts of living 
beings, Guhyakas, birds, worms and insects. The four nipples 
of the cow are respectively Svahakara, Svadhakara, 
Vasatkara and Hantakara.*®^ The Svahakara nipple is sucked 
by gods; the Svadhakara by the manes, the Vasatkara by the 
other gods as well as lords of the Bhutas and the Hanta- 
kara nipple is drunk by human beings. 

45-46. He who serves the cow thus with faith and 
reverence deserves to maintain the sacrificial fires. He who 
forsakes it is drowned in the hell Tamisra. Hence after 
offering Bali to these at the door, the householder shall medi¬ 
tate for a short while. 

47. One shall feed the hungry guest staying in the 
same village with auspicious food, in accordance with his 
ability and with the same dishes as he partakes of himself. 

48. If a guest turns back from a house disappointed he 
takes away all the merits of the householder and leaves his 
own sins behind. 

49. A man eating delicious food by himself stays in 
the hdl for a long time fettered in the body and pierced in 
the tongue with force. 

50-51. Bits of his own flesh, of the size of a small 
gingelly seed, arc cut off from his body and are given to 
him for eating. Blood is similarly taken and given for 
drinking. He is then beaten with whips. Thus he is tor¬ 
mented with hunger and thirst. 

52. These and similar things constitute the terrible 

234. The gifts offered to the principal gods, manes, subsidiary gods, 
and human beings with the utterance of words ^PTSand^r^T 

are likened to the niilk-drops from the four teats of Ute cow. 



VmSsmhhitlt 

tortures inflicted on sinners. What comes off in the end may 
be listened to in brief. 

53. There may be a person who has done more sin 
than good or a person who has done more good than evil. 
Now listen to the result of their actions. 

54. The fruit of good actions is immaterial because it is 
the sin that is prominent. His pleasure is insignificant since 
he has to undergo manifold suffering due to his bad deeds. 

55. He is put to misery and distress. As sumptuous food 
is not pleasing to a person if that is not repeated every day 
so his small joys are of no avail in the face of various suffe¬ 
rings he has to undergo.*'® 

56. On the other hand a man of more good actions is 
not distressed by a few sufferings due to small sins just as a 
rich householder is not distressed by hunger when he fasts 
for a day. 

57. There are great sins in the world which shatter a 
man into hundreds of pieces like a mountain struck down by 
thunderbolt. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

{Thi glory of the gift of food) 

Vydsa said :— 

1. Those who commit sins go along (he path to 
Yama with great misery. O holy lord, now narrate the 
righteous deeds which render pleasure in the path of Yama. 

Sanatkumara said :— 

2. Auspicious or inauspicious, one has of necessity to 
reap the fruit of actions committed by him without thinking. 
I shall now mention those sacred rites that yield happiness. 

235. Hie text of the second half of the verse is defective. We have 
adopted the reading for to suit 

the context. 



1496 


Sivapm^ 


3. Men who perform auspicious rites here, whose 
minds are gentle and who are merciful pass through the 
terrible path of Yama happily. 

4. He who makes gifts of sandals of leather or wood 
to leading brahmins goes happily to the abode of Yama on a 
great horse. 

5. By making gifts of umbrella they go holding an 
umbrella. By making gifts of palanquin he goes by means 
of a chariot. 

6. By making giBs of beds tind seats he goes with 
ample rest. Those who make shady parks or those who 
plant trees on the wayside go without wearine.ss even in the 
hottest region. 

7. Men making flower gardens go by the aerial 
chariot Puspaka. Makers of temples feel at home on the way. 

8. The founders of hermitages of ascetics and Rest 
houses for the orphans feel as if they play in the house. 

9. Worshippers of the gods, fire-god brahmins and 
their parents go along that path as they please. They are 
honoured on the way. 

10. Those who gift lamps, go brightly illuminating all 
the ten quarters. By giving dwellings and asylums they go 
without ailments on the way. 

11. Those who habitually serve their preceptors go 
without difficulty. They get ample rest on the way. Those 
who gift musical instruments to brahmins go happily feeling 
at home on the way. 

12. Givers of cows go along the path flourishing with 
all their desires. They get those food-stuflfs and drinks which 
they give away here, on that path also. 

13. By giving water for washing the feet one goes 
along the path full of water. He who gifts oils for massaging 
the feet goes on horseback along that way. 

14. O Vyasa, Yama never comes near the man who 
always makes gifts of water for washing the feet, oil for massa¬ 
ging, lamps, foodstufls and dwellings. 

15. By making gifts of gold and gems he crosses all 
impassable hurdles. By gifting silver and oxen he g^oes to 
Yamaloka happily. 



Umdsathhitd 


1497 


16. By these and similar charitable gifts people go 
happily to Yama’s abode. They attain different pleasures 
in the heaven. 

17. Of all charitale gifts the gift of food is the greatest. 
It is pleasing. It gives pleasure immediately. It enhances 
strength and intellect. 

18. O excellent sage, there is no other charitable 
gift on a par with the gift of food. All living beings origi¬ 
nate from food. In its absence they die. 

19. Food gives blood, flesh, fat and semen and out of 
semen living beings are born. Hence the universe is identical 
with food. 

20. Hungry men are not delighted even if they possess 
these things viz—gold, gems, horses, elephants, women, 
garlands, sandal paste and the like. 

21. All persons, the child in the womb, the new born 
babe, the child, the middle aged man, the old man, the 
gods, the danavas or Raksasas desire food. 

22. Hunger is the acutest of all ailments. There is no 
doubt that it perishes on the application of the medicinal 
ointment viz food. 

23. There is no misery equal to hunger ; no sickness 
equal to hunger ; no happiness on a par with being free 

from sickness and no enemy equal to anger. 

24. All embodied beings die when scorched by the 
fire of hunger. That is why it is glorified that there is great 
merit in the charitable gift of food. 

25. The giver of food is the giver of life. The giver 
of life is the giver of all. Hence one attains the benefit of 
gifting everything by means of the charitable gift of food. 

26. If a man performs holy and sacred rites after 
being nourished with the food gifted by someone, the merit of 
the sacred rites is shared half and half by the two—namely 
by the giver of food and the performer of the rites. There 
is no doubt in this. 

27. The giver of charitable gift of food obtains here 
and hereafter whatever means of pleasure there are in the 
three worlds such as gems, women and vehicles. 

28. This body is the greatest of the means of achieve- 



1498 Sioapwitfa 

merit of virtue, wealth, love and salvation. Hence one should 
preserve one’s body with food and drink. 

29. They praise only food. Everything is founded on 
food. There has never been a charitable gift like that of 
food, nor will there ever be any. 

30. O sage, the entire universe is sustained by food. 
It is food that infuses virility in the people. The vital airs 
are founded on food. 

31. Even by putting one’s family to inconvenience and 
trouble one should give food to a mendicant brahmin of 
noble soul, if one wishes for one’s prosperity. 

32. He who gives food to a suppliant brahmin in 
distress actually makes an excellent deposit facilititing his 
benefit in the other world. 

33. A householder, desirous of prosperity shall worship 
a brahmin who has approached him at the proper time for 
his livelihood, or who is travel-weary and comes to his house 
as a guest. 

34-35. O Vyasa, a giver of food, of good conduct and 
free from malice, is honoured. A gift of food never goes in- 
vain be it to a dog or a person who cooks dogs. If a person 
eschews anger that surges up he derives happiness here and 
hereafter. He should not encourage it even if it is natural. 
One shall try to eschew it somehow. 

36. He who gives food to a weary, unknown traveller, 
without feeling distressed for the same will derive prosperity. 

37. The meritorious benefit of the man, O great sage, 
who delights Pitrs, gods, brahmins and guests with food-stuffs, 
in really immense. 

38. Gift of food and drink whether to a 8udra or to 
a brahmin is equally excellent. One should not ask the 
spiritual lineage,*®* branch of the Vedas*®^ or the country of 
the recipient. 

39. He who gives food when begged by a brahmin, 
goes to the highest heaven and remains there till the final 

336. Gotra is a family name supposed to be sprung from and named 
after celebrated teachers as Vasi;tha, Gautama, Kaiyapa, Bharadvflja, 
etc. 

S37. Caraoa signifies a particular branch of the Vedas to which a 
family belonged. 



Umdsttihkitd 


1499 


dissolution when all living beings are destroyed. 

40. The garden of a food-giver acquires the fruits of 
his cherished desire as the brahmins do in the highest 
heaven. 

41. O sage, O great sage, listen to the divine regions 
which are created in the heaven by the gifts of food, for 
the givor of food. 

42. The abodes of those noble souls in the heaven 
shine in various shapes and arc equipped with every desirable 
object. 

43. The trees bear the fruits of all desires. The golden 
lakes in the mansions, the auspicious wells and tanks are all 
excellent. 

44. The auspicious drinks of various varieties are 
proclaimed. There are huge mountains of food-stuffs, gar¬ 
ments and ornaments. 

45. Milk flows in rivers there. There are huge 
mountains of ghee. The palaces are white in colour. Beds 
are brilliant like gold. 

46. The giver of food goes to these regions. One 
should be a giver of food if one wishes for one’s own good 
in this or in the other world. 

47. These regions of the meritorious givers of food are 
very brilliant. Hence food shall be given as gift by the 
people. 

48. Food is Brahma himself. Food is Vi§nu himself. 
Food is l§iva. There has never been nor will there ever be 
a gift on a par with that of food 

49. Even after committing a great sin if a man gives 
food to the needy he becomes rid of all sins. He goes to 
heaven. 

50. The eight gifts are honoured most in the land of 
the dead viz food, drink, horse, cow, garments, bed, umbrella 
and seat. 

51. If a man wishes to go to the city of Yama in the 
aerial chariot, he shall necessarily make these special gifts. 

52. This sacred narrative gives instances of the virtue 
of gifts of foodstuflTs; whoever reads this or teaches this to 
others flourishes indeed. 



1500 Swapurd^a 

53. O great sage, if a person listens to this or nar¬ 
rates this at the performance of Sraddha to brahmins, it 
results in a never-ending gift of food to the Pitri. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

{TTu glory oj penance) 

Sanatkumara said :— 

1. The gift of drink is the greatest and the most 
excellent of all gifts. Water the enlivencr is the most satisfying 
to all living beings. 

2. Hence one should make gifts of drinking water¬ 
sheds lovingly and unrestrictedly. Making of water bases, 
tanks etc. is the cause of great bliss. 

3. It is truthful, really truthful. There is no doubt 
in this, here and hereafter. Men'should cause tanks, wells 
and lakes to be dug therefore. 

4. A well that abounds in water removes half of the 
sin of the man who causes it to be dug. 

5. If cows drink and good men and brahmins make 
use of the water in a water-base dug by a man, the whole 
family is redeemed. 

6. If there is plenty of water in the water-base dug 
by a man, during summer, he never suffers distress or mis¬ 
haps at any time. 

7* I shall mention the benefits of lakes dug by men. 
He who has a lake to his credit is honoured in ail the 
three worlds. 

8. Or the digging of lakes is conducive to the advent 
of fame and attainment of friendship in the abode of the 
sun but without distressing heat. 

9. He who dig^ a lake attains an endless merit. The 
wise say that it is the fruit of virtue, wealth and love. 

10. The lake is the greatest resort of the four classes 
of living beings. The construction of the lake etc. indicates 
excellent glory. 



UmisiuhJdUl l50t 

11. The gods, human beings, Gandharvas, Pitfs, ser¬ 
pents, Rak^asas and the immobile beings depend upon 
water bases. 

12. Brahma says that the benefit of the sacred rite 
Agnihotra is derived by a man in the lake dug by whom 
there is plenty of water in the rainy season. 

13. There is no doubt at all in this that the benefit 
of gifting away a thousand cows is derived by a man, in the 
lake dug by whom there is plenty of water in the Autumn. 

14. If there is plenty of water in the lake dug during 
the seasons of early winter and late winter, he derives the 
benefit of that sacrifice in which plenty of gold is given 
as a sacrificial gift. 

15. If there is plenty of water in the lake dug during 
the seasons of Spring and Summer, the wise say that he 
derives the benefit of the holy rites of Atiratra+ and Alva- 
medha* sacrifices. 

16. O sage Vyasa, the merit accruing from the dig¬ 
ging of water bases, excellent and pleasing to all living 
beings, has been narrated to you. Now listen to the merits 
of planting trees. 

17. If a man plants trees in the forests, he enables 
his ancestors and the successors of his family, to gain 
redemption. Hence one should plant trees. 

18. There is no doubt that these trees become his 
sons. When he goes to the oihcr world he attains the un¬ 
dying regions. 

19. Trees honour and worship the gods through flowers, 
the Pitfs through fruits, and the guests through shade. 

20. The Kinnaras, the serpents, the Raksasas, the gods, 
the Gandharvas, the human beings and the sages depend 
upon trees. 

21. While in bloom or when they bear fruits, the 
trees delight human beings. They are as sons by way of 
virtue in this world and hereafter. 

22. These people never fail to attain heaven—viz. the 
digger of lakes, the planter of trees, the brahmin who 
performs sacrifices and those who speak truth. 

Ii is .*1 part of tlu'Jyoti.s^oin.i ^aclllic«•. 

♦ See P. 1506 note. 



23. Truth alone is the great Brahman, the greatest 
penance, the greatest sacriSce and the greatest learning. 

24. When others sleep, truth is wakeful. Truth is 
the greatest base, it is truth alone by which the* earth is 
sustained, everything is founded in truth. 

25. Penance, sacrifice, merit, the worship of the gods, 
sages and the Pitys, the Waters, theVidyas—all these things 
are established in truth. 

26. Truth is sacrifice, penance, charitable gift, man¬ 
tras, goddess Sarasvatl, celibacy and Orhkara. These arc 
really tru*'" 

27. It is truth whereby the wind blows, the sun 
blazes, the fire burns and the heaven is upheld. 

28. By upholding truth the people can attain the 
benefits of keeping up the traditions of all the Vedas 
and taking the ceremonial ablutions in all holy centres. 

29. When weighed against truth in a balance, a thou¬ 
sand hdrse-sacrifices and a hundred thousand other sacrifices 
do not equal it. Truth alone excels. 

30. The gods, the Pitrs, the human beings, the serpents, 
the Rak^asas and the worlds including the mobile and 
immobile beings are delighted by Truth. 

31. They say that Truth is the greatest virtue, the 
greatest region, the greatest Brahman; hence one shall tell 
the Truth always. 

32. After performing very difficult penance, it is by 
depending solely on Truth, by maintaining truthful virtue 
that the sages have attained Siddhis and reached heaven. 

33. The sages have attained heaven travelling in aerial 
chariots along with the celestial damsels. Truth shall be 
ever spoken, for there is nothing greater than Truth. 

34. In the deep, extensive and pure eddy, the holy 
centre of Truth, one shall mentally take one*s ceremonial 
ablution. That i$ said to be the highest bliss. 

35. Men who never utter a lie whether for their own 
sake, or for other’s sake, or even for their own son’s sake, do 
go to heaven. 

36. The Veda's, the sacrifices and the Mantras exist in 



UmdsaMid 


1503 


brahmins for ever. They are never visible to the untruthful. 
Hence one shall always speak truth. 

Vydsa said :— 

37. O ascetic, please explain again with special em¬ 
phasis on the fruit of penance for the brahmins as well as 
other castes. 

Sanatkumara said :— 

38. I shall explain the section on penance which 
is the means of achieving all the objects of desire, very 
difficult to be performed even by brahmins. Please listen even 
as I explain. 

39. Penance is the greatest rite. Fruits are achieved 
by penance. Those who are engaged in penance incessantly 
rejoice along with the gods. 

40. Heaven, fame and love arc achieved through 
penance. Penance is the means of achievement for all 
objects. 

41. One achieves great things through penance. One 
attains salvation, knowledge, perfect wisdom, good fortune 
and beauty by penance. 

42. Man obtains different things through penance; he 
gets everything, whatever he wishes in his mind through 
penance. 

43. Those who have never performed penance do not 
attain Brahmaloka; lord iSiva is not accessible to those who 
have never performed penance. 

44. After deciding on a particular thing, if a man 
performs penance he attains it here as well as hereafter. 

45. The wine-addict, the defiler of other women, the 
brahmin-slayer, the defiler of teacher’s bed overcome all 
sins through penance and get rid of them. 

46-47. iSiva, the lord of all, the eternal Vifi^u, 
Brahmfi, fire god, Indra and others are endowed with 
penance. The eighty-eight thousand sages of sublimated 
semen rejoice in heaven through penance, along with the gods. 

48. Kingdoms are achieved through penance. Indra, 



1504 Swapurd^ 

the lord of gods and the slayer of Vftra, protects everything 
day by day through penance. 

49. Due to penance, the lords Sun and the Mqoh 
are engageJ in the welfare of the worlds. The StarBand the 
planets too shine by virtue of their penance. 

50. There is no happiness in the world that can be 
gained without penance. The knowers of the Vedas under¬ 
stand that all happiness is attained through penance alone. 

51. Knowledge, perfect wisdom, health, beauty, good 
fortune and perpetual happiness are the offshoots of penance. 

52. It is by penance that Brahma creates the universe; 
Visnu protects it without any strain; Siva annihilates and 
Se^a upholds the entire earth. 

53. O great sage, the Ksatriya king Visvamitra,*®* the 
son of Gadhi, became a brahmin through penance. This is 
well known in the three worlds. 

54. O intelligent one, thus the excellent glory of 
penance has been mentioned to you. Now listen to the glory 
of the study of the Vedas which is far more excellent than 
penance itself. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

( The glory of the Purdfias) 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

1. O sage, the fruit is the same whether one per¬ 
forms penance in a forest restricting his diet to roots and 
fruits there or studies a single Vedic verse. 


238. The sage V'Uvamitra vvas the son of Gathln or G&dhi of the 
Kusika race descended from Kusika. He is called G^dhi'ja and Oidhi- 
nandana. He was born a ksatriya but by intense austerities raised him¬ 
self to the Bruhniai^a caste and became one of the seven great sages. 



UmdsmhhiUl 


1505 


2. By teaching the Veda, an excellent brahmin attains 
twice the merit that he attains by studying it. 

3. The universe will go without light if the moon 
and the sun were not present. The same will happen if the 
Purai^as too, O sage, were not. 

4. A Puranist enlightens the people through iSastras, the 
people who are in distress in the hell due to ignorance. 
Hence he shall be worshipped. 

5. Among all the deserving men the knower of Purana 
is the most excellent. He is considered worthy because he 
saves people from fall 

6. Never shall a Puranist be considered an ordinary 
man. A preceptor proficient in Purana is omniscient. He 
is Brahma, Vi$nu and Siva. 

7. For the welfare here and hereafter, wealth food- 
grain, gold, different clothes etc. shall be given to a Puranist as 
gift. 

8. The good man who out of pleasure gives auspicious 
things to a Purai;iist who is a deserving person, attains the 
greatest salvation. 

9. Listen to the merit that a person derives from lands, 
cows, chariots, elephants and good horses to a deserving 
person. 

10. That man derives the fruit of horse-sacrifice, and 
realises all his cherished desires without wastage, both here 
and hereafter. 

11. He who gives him a good fertile and well ploughed 
land facilitates the redemption of the members of his family 
upto ten generations before him and after him. 

12. After enjoying all the pleasures here, he becomes 
endowed with a divine body on death and goes to iSivaloka, 
by a divine aerial chariot. 

13. The gods are not satisfied so much with sacrifices, 
Prok^a^akas (immolations of animals at the sacrifices), 
oblations and floral worships as with the recitation of 
book^. 

14. Listen to the meritorious benefits of that man who 



1506 Sivapwi^ 

makes arrangement for the Sacred Text book in the temple 
of Siva, Vi^nu, the Sun or any one else. 

15. The man derives the benefit of Rajasuyae®** and 
A^vamedhas. Piercing through the sun’s sphere he goes to 
to the Brahmaloka 

16. After remaining there for hundreds of Kalpas he 
becomes a king on the earth. He enjoys the pleasures 
without pinpricks. No hesitation need be entertained in this 
regard. 

17. He who performs Japas in front of the deity 
obtains that benefit which is mentioned as the fruit of a 
thousand horse-sacrifices. 

18. Nothing else is delightful to Siva and the heaven- 
dwellers more than the recitation of Itihasas and Puranas in 
the auspicious temples of Siva. 

19. Hence arrangements shall be assiduously made for 
the reciting of the book. Listening to it with devotion and 
love yields the fruit of all cherished desires. 

20. Man becomes free from sins on listening to Siva- 
purana. After enjoying immense pleasures he attains the 
world of Siva. 

21. Merely by listening to the story of Siva one derives 
the merit similar to that resulting from Rajasuya and a 
hundred Agni^toma rites. 

22. O sage, by listening to the story of Siva one 
derives the benefit and merit derived from ablution in the 
sacred rivers and from gifting away a crore of cows. 

23. Those who constantly listen to Siva’s story that 
sanctifies the worlds are not mere human beings, they are 
Rudras. There is no doubt in this. 

24. Sages consider the dust in the lotus-feet of those 

i<3g. Rajasuya is a great sacrifice celabrated in the SrautasGtras. It 
was performed at the coronation of a king. 

The sacrifice of a horse (aww) was performed by Kinfpi. It 
was an exercise for attaining sovereignty of the world. The horse was let 
loose to wander at will for a year. The king or his representative 
followed the horse with an army. When the horse entered a foreign cou¬ 
ntry, the ruler of that country was bound either to fight or sulnnit. 



tftnisnhkttd 


1507 


who listen to the holy glory of Siva and those who constantly 
glorify it, to be as holy as the holy centres. 

23. Let those embodied beings who desire to attain 
salvation listen always the Puranic story of Siva with 
devotion. 

26. If any one is unable to listen to the Puranic story 
let him listen at least for a Muhurta every day with pure mind. 

27. O sage, if any man, is unable to listen to the 
story of Siva every day let him listen to it in the course of 
holy months, days etc. 

28. O great sage, he who regularly listens to Siva*s 
story crosses the ocean of worldly existence after burning 
away the great forest of Karman. 

29. No mishap befalls those men who listen to Siva*s 
story even for a Muhurta, or half that time or even for a 
moment with devotion. 

30. O sage, certainly the fruit derived from listening 
to Sivapurana is the same as that derived from making all 
charitable gifts or from performing all sacrifices. 

31. O Vyasa, especially in the age of Kali there is 
no greater virtue aimed at salvation and meditation than 
listening to the Puranas. 

32. There is no doubt that the listening to Siva- 
Pura^a and the holy recital of his names yield fruits readil/ 
like the Kalpa tree to human being^. 

33. Siva has created the nectarine juice in the form of 
Pur&^a for the benefit of men of poor intellect in the 
Kali age who have eschewed virtue and good conduct. 

34. Only one person becomes free from old age and 
death by drinking the nectar Amfta. But by drinking the 
nectarine story of Siva the entire family becomes free from 
death and old age. 

35. O dear, one instantaneously attains by listening to 
the Puriii^as that salvation which mentonoua ascetics and 
performers of sacrifices derive. 

36. As long as perfect knowledge is not attained, 
Yoga^stras shall be learnt assiduously and the Puranic text 
be listened to. 

37. By listening to the Puranas, sin is reduced and 



eliminated; virtue is enhanced; and the wise man does not 
re-enter worldly life. 

38. Hence indeed, the Puranas shall be assiduously 
listened to for the achievement of virtue, wealth, love and 
salvation. 

39. Man attains, thanks to listening to the Puranas, 
that benefit which is attained by sacrifices, charitable gifts, 
penances and pilgrimages. 

40. If there be no purana showing the path of 
Dharma, there will be no person observing Vrata or interested 
in the life hereafter. 

41. He who listens to at least one among the thirty 
six Puranas^*® or reads it with devotion is liberated. There is 
no doubt in this. 

42. No other path so pleasing is there. The path of the 
Puranas is the most excellent. Nothing ,in the world shines 
without the l^astra as the worlds of living beings without 
the sun. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

{General charitable gifts) 

Sanatkumara said :— 

1. Ten charitable gifts are called great gifts and are 
praiseworthy. They shall be given to deserving persons 
every day. They enable the soul to cross the ocean of worldly 
existence. 

2. The charitable gifts of gold, cow and land, O 
excellent brahmin, arc very holy. Those who make them 
redeem themselves. 

3. There arc gifts of gold, cows and land, by making 
these excellent gifts one is liberated from sins. 

4. Tuladanas are highly praised like the gifts of cows. 

240. The printed Sanskrit text is defective. Substitute 

for for the number of the I'urSi.ias and UpapurSiias tOf{c-thei 

is thiriysix and not tweniysix- 



(/mStofhhitd 


I50d 

Gifts of lands and of speech are of equal potency and deserve 
praise. But gifts of speech shall be greater. 

5. These things shall be given everyday to those who 
beg for them—viz. oxen, cows, umbrella, cloth, pairs of shoes, 
drink and food. 

6. An object which is given to brahmins, suppliants 
and distressed people after performing the Sariikalpa rites 
enables the donee to become greatly intelligent. 

7. There are ten great gifts—viz. gold, gingelly seeds, 
elephants, virgins, servant-maid, house, chariot, jewels, the 
tawny coloured cow and ordinary cows. 

8. After taking all these a brahmin of great wisdom 
enables the donee to cross the ocean of worldly existence as 
well as himself. 

9. If men make gifts of gold with pious mind, the gods 
bestow the same on him. Thus I have heard. 

10. Gold is fire. Indeed fire represents all gods. Hence 
by making the gift of gold one makes the gift of all gods. 

11. Gift of lands is very excellent and it yields the 
fruits of-all desires. The gift of gold is also excellent and it 
was made by king Pfthu formerly. 

12. If plots of lands are given along with gold it is 
praiseworthy. They become liberated from all sins and 
attain the greatest goal. 

13. O sage, I shall mention another gift which is the 
most excellent and whereby people do not see the forest of 
Yama, the cause of many miseries. 

14. One shall make the charitable gift of forest with 
due observance of rules and pious mind. The wealth shall be 
earned by justiciable means. The donee shall be devoid of 
stinginess associated with affluence. 

15-19. With a Prastha measure of gingelly seeds an 
image of a cow endowed with all qualities shall be made. The 
calf shall be made of gold. It shall be divine in shape and 
it shall possess all characteristics. The mystic diagram of the 
eight-petalled lotus shall be made with auspicious Vermillion 
and raw rice grains. The devotee shall worship Hudra an d 
all other gods there with great devotion. After the worship 
the cow and the calf shall be given to a brahmin along with 



1510 


gems and gold according to ability and bedecked too in all 
ornaments. The devotee shall take food only in the night. 
He shall then make elaborate gifts of lamps. This shall be 
done on the full moon day in the month of Karttika Strenuo¬ 
usly. He who does thus according to his ability but strictly 
observing the rules does not see the terrible hell or the path 
of Yama. 

20. O Vyasa, even after committing sins, the man 
enjoys in the heaven along with his kinsmen and friends as 
long as fourteen Indras rule over it 

21. The gift of the cow duly performed is the most 
excellent. O Vyasa, no other gift is glorified so much as 
this. 

22-23. If any one makes the gift of a tawny cow along 
with its calf adorning the horns with gold, the hoofs with 
silver and endowed with other characteristics and also gives 
a bell metal vessel, that cow returns to him in the form of 
the wish-yielding celestial cow. O Vyasa, the donee is thus 
blessed both here and hereafer. 

24. One shall make gifts of such things to a man of 
g^ood qualities, such thing as he likes most in the world, as 
are very dear to him in the house and as are wished for by 
him to be his permanent possessions. 

25. Gift" of anything equal in weight to the giver is 
the most excellent of all gifts. If he wishes for his prosperity 
he shall ascend the weighing balance. 

26. The weighing balance is highly meritorious. It 
eliminates all sins. On making the gift of it one gets rid of 
sins arising from slaughter and captivity. 

27. Even after committing sins if a man makes the 
gi)‘t of weighing balance he becomes free from all sins and 
goes to heaven. 

28-30. (The following shall be recited before making 
the gift). **May the presiding deity of the weighing balance 
remove the sin committed by me physically, mentally or 
verbally during the day. night, the twilights, midday, the 
close of the night or in any of the three times. May the 
presiding deity of the balance, lord Siva, enemy of the cupid, 
remove all the sins done by me, whether as a boy or a 



Vmdseahhitlt 


1511 


youth, or an old man wakefully and consciously. Wealth has 
been consigned by me to a deserving person. It has been 
deposited in the balance according to my weight. May merit 
accrue to me along with this.** 

31. The presiding deity shall be made after reciting 
the above formula It shall not be given to a single person. 
There is no benefit in it. It shall be distributed among many 
brahmins. 

32. O Vyasa, he who makes this excellent gift of the 
presiding deity of the balance destroys his sins and attains 
heaven He stays there as long as the fourteen Indras rule 
over ii. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

{Description of the Nether worlds) 

VySsa said :— 

1. For the benefit of human beings tell me that which 
when given as gift makes it possible to derive the benefit of 
all gifts. 

SanathmUtra said :— 

2. Listen. I shall mention that gift on giving which, 
at the proper time, men obtain the benefit of all the gifts 

3. This is the most excellent of all gifts. The whole 
universe shall be given as gift by those who desire salvation 
for crossing the ocean of worldly existence. 

4. A man becomes the lord of the seven worlds, with 
a fraction of the benefit that he obtains when the whole uni¬ 
verse is given as a gift. 

5. The man who gifts away the universe sports in the 
abode of the gods along with his kinsmen as long as the 
moon and the sun are in the sky or the earth is steady 
or every one in the abode of the heaven-dwellers is favourable. 
Afterwards, for rejoicing, he attains the region of Vif^u 
which is difficult of access even to the gods. 



fydsa said :— 

6. O holy lord, please explain the universe, its extent, 

its main soul, its support and its structure so that I can have 
a full idea. • 

Sanalkumdra said :— 

7. O sage, listen. 1 shall explain how high and. .fapw 
extensive is the universe. On hearing it succinctly one gets 
rid of sins. 

8. That which is the unmanifest ultimate cause be> 
comes manifest as Siva, free from ailment. When that 
becomes dichotomised, Brahma is born of that in due course. 

9. Brahma creates the universe consisting of the four> 
teen**^ worlds. O dear, I shall succinctly explain that in 
proper order. Listen to it assiduously. 

10. The nether worlds are seven only. The upper 
worlds are also seven. The height of the universe is twice 
as such and it stands in the middle of water. 

11. Its support is the serpent !§e$a. He is glorified 
as Visnu. At the instance of Brahma he supports all this. 

12. Even the gods and the Asuras are incompetent to 
describe the attributes of Sesa who is worshipped by the 
gods, sages and the Ganas and who is called as Ananib by 
the Siddhas. 

13. He has a thousand hoods. By means of the 
thousand jewels on his hoods, he illuminates all the quarters. 
He has the brilliant ornament Svastika. 

14. He has only a single ear>ring. He has a crown 
and wears garlands. His eyes are rolling due to inebriation. 
He shines like a white fiery mountain. 

15. He is like a Kailasa mountain which shines white 
due to the flow of the Ganga. But he wears a blue cloth 
and is inebriated. 

16-17. He is worshipped by the gold-complexioned 


241. The universe is comprised of fourteen worlds, seven rising above 
the earth and seven lying below. The seven upper regions are 
STJT:, gr®f'., and and the seven lower are 81 ^ 1 ^, 



UmdsattMtd 


1513 


Nagavirgins in this aspect—viz. the tips of his hands arc in 
contact with the ploughshare. He is bearing an excellent 
threshing rod. He is Rudra in the form of Sahkar^ana. 
He is brilliant with the flame of the poisonous fire. At the 
end of the Kalpa, flames of fire come out of his mouths. 
After consuming the three worlds they subside. 

18. Holding the sphere ol' the earth on his back, Se^a, 
the lord of Bhutas stands at the root of Pa tala. He is wor¬ 
shipped for his endless attributes. 

19. The power of his virility cannot be adequately 
described even by the ambitious gods nor can his form 
be known. 

20. Who will adequately express his prowess ? The 
series of his hoods, pink with the jewels go round the entire 
earth like a garland of flowers. 

21. With his eyes rolling due to inebriation when 
Sesa stretches himself, the earth quakes along with all its 
mountains, oceans and forests. 

22-23. O excellent sage, each of the nether worlds 
extends to ten thousand Yojanas. The seven nether worlds 
are Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Rasatala, Tala, Talatala and the 
Patala. The seven worlds are beneath the earth. So say 
the learned people. 

24. The height of each of these is twice its extent. 
The surfaces of all are grounds of gems. The palaces are 
full of gems and their terraces are made of gold. 

25. Danavas, Daiteyas, Serpents, and Rak$asas of the 
Daitya origin reside there. 

26. Narada who came to heaven from the nether 
region announced in the middle of the celestial assembly 
that the nether worlds are more beautiful than heaven. 

27. There, in all sorts of ornaments, lustrous jewels 
are present. They are white and delightful. What is there 
equal to it ? 

28. The nether r^on is here and there brightened 
up by the daughters of Daityas and Danavas. Even to the 
liberated soul, the nether region is pleasing. Which liberated 
soul does not like it ? 

29. There during the daytime there are no sun’s 



1514 


Si9afmfd^9 


rays, nor the moon’s rays during the night. There is neither 
chillness nor bright sunlight. There is only the lustre of 
the jcwelr. • 

30. O excellent sage, all sorts of foodstuffs and drinks 
are consumed there by extremely joyous persons. The time 
that passes by is not known there at all. 

31. The cooings of the male cuckoo are there. Lotuses 
are there. There are lotus-ponds. There are rivers and 
lakes. Each of them is more excellent than the other. 

32. There the ornaments are very brilliant. The un¬ 
guents are sweet-smelling. O brahmin, the sound of Vinas, 
flutes and Mrdahgas can be heard there. There arc scmg^ 
everywhere. 

33. There the Daityas and serpents rejoice and enjoy 
pleasures. It is by performing penances that Danavas and 
Siddha beings attain the same. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

{Uplift from the hell) 


SanaUcumdra said :— 

1. O excellent sage, above the nether regions, are the 
hells where the sinners are scorched. Listen to their descrip¬ 
tion from me. 

2. They are—Raurava, Sukara, Radha, Tala, Vivas- 
vat, Mahajvala, Taptakumbha, Lavana, Vilohita. 

3. The river Vaitara^i consists of putrid stuff flow¬ 
ing in it, Kpnipa. Kpnibhojana, Asipatravana and 
Lalabhakfa are the terrible hells ; 

4. Puyavaha has usually flames of fire outside and is 
topsyturvy. Sandaih^a, Kalasutra, Tamas, Avicirodhana 

5. Svabhojana, Ru^t^f Maharaurava and iSfilmali—these 
and other bells are there; all of these are very grievous. 



Umdsatfikitd 


1515 


6. Men who are indulgent in sins are scorched there. 
O Vyasa, I shall mention them in order. Listen attentively. 

7. He who commits peijury except for the brahmins, 
gods and cows and he who utters a lie always goes to Raurava. 

8-10. The following sinners viz :—the destroyer of the 
child in the womb, the stealer of gold, of cows, one who 
commits the breach of trust, the wine-addict, the brahmin 
slayer, the stealer of other’s wealth and he who associates 
with these—go to the hell Kumbha, O Vyasa. He who 
kills his preceptor, sister, mother, daughter or a cow too 
goes there. He who Sells his chaste wife, he who is 
addicted to usury, he who sells tresses of hair and he who 
forsakes a devotee—all these are scorched in redhot iron. 

11-13. He who insults preceptors, he who dismisses 
visitors and then dines, he who commits blasphemy, he who 
sells idols and he who cohabits with forbidden women—all 
these, O brahmin, go to Saptabala hell. A thief, a slayer of 
cows, a fallen man, a defiler of boundaries, the hater of gods, 
brahmins and Pitrs and the defiler of gems go to Krmibhak^a 
hell. They eat worms and other displeasing things. 

14-16. The base man who eats before Pitfs, deities 
and gods and he who ignorantly or deceitfully misquotes 
sacred texts—these go to Lalabhak$a hell. The brahmin who 
associates with evil men and is surrounded by outcastes, the 
brahmin who officiates as priest in the sacrifice of undeserving 
persons, and eats forbidden food, and he who sells Soma 
juice—these fall into Rudhiraugha hell. He who spoils honey 
and creates disturbances in the village falls in the ruthless 
river Vaitara^i. 

17. Those who are arrogant in the freshness of youth, 
who transgress the bounds of decency, who are unclean and 
who maintain themselves on the earnings of unchaste women 
go to Kymya hell. 

18. He who cues off trees without purpose goes to 
Asipatravana hell. Those who hunt deer with Kfuraprakas 
(arrows with horse-shoe-shaped heads) fall into Vahnijvala 
hell. 

19. O brahmin, the brahmin, the K^atriya or the 



1516 


Sioa^itrt^ 


Vailya who swerves from the path of good conduct ultimately 
fall into the hell prescribed for dog-cooking canc^alas. 

20. Those who drop sacred rites in the middle and 
those who are fallen off from their duties in accordance with 
the stages of their life fall into the hell Sandam^a where the 
tortures are very terrible. 

21. The students who are guilty of nocturnal emission 
of their semen and the fathers who do not properly educate 
their sons fall into the Svabhojana hell. 

22. There are hundreds and thousands of these and 
other hells where thousands of sinners undergo tortures and 
are scorched. 

23. These,sins and others are thousands in number 
similarly, which the beings in the hells experience and try 
to wipe off. 

24. Those who perpetrate misdeeds contrary to the 
injunctions of caste and stages of life whether physically, 
mentally or verbally fall into hell. 

25. The beings in the hells are seen standing upside 
down by the gods in the heaven. These beings see the gods 
also similarly with heads down, beneath them. 

26-27. Immovable beings—plants etc. and movable 
beings worms, insects, birds, beasts, righteous men, gods and 
liberated beings, all these are equal in number in heaven as 
also in hell. A sinner who is averse to the performance of 
expiatory rites goes to hell. 

28. Svayambhuva Manu has ordained expiatory rites 
for great sins and small expiatory rites for small sins in the 
Kali age 

29. Of the many rites mentioned by way of expiation 
the remembrance of iSiva is the greatest. 

30. If a person commits a sin but repents after com¬ 
mitting it, it is also an expiation. There also the remem¬ 
brance of Siva is the greatest expiation. 

31. A man remembering lord Siva in the midday or 
other occasions attains lord Siva. By remembering the lord 
in the morning, night or dusk, he gets his sins eliminated. 



UmisaihkitS 


1S17 


32. It is only by remembering l^iva, the lord of Umi 
that a man attains salvation, the annihilation of all pains or 
heaven. 

33. O leading brahmin, Japas, Homas, worship etc. 
are obstacles in the path of sins. O excellent sage, they do 
not occur anywhere in the three worlds. 

34. The attainment of the status of Indra, lord of the 
gods, is the fruit of the merit attained in Japa, Homa, wor¬ 
ship etc- performed by the man whose mind is in lord Siva. 

35. O sage, he who devoutly remembers Siva day 
and night never goes to hell since his sins are eliminated 
without any vestige. 

36. O excellent brahmin, sin and merit indicate hell 
and heaven. One is conducive to misery and the other to 
pleasure and rebirth. 

37. That at the outset is conducive to happiness but 
later brings in misery. Hence ultimately everything is of the 
nature of misery. There is nothing in fact of an invariably 
pleasurable nature. 

38. Happiness and misery constitute only a temporary 
transformation of the mind. But knowledge is the greatest 
Brahman. Knowledge is conducive to the understanding of 
reality. 

39. The entire universe consisting of the mobile and 
immobile beings has knowledge as its soul. O sage, there is 
nothing greater than the perfect knowledge of the greatest 
being. 

40. Thus the entire sphere of the hell has been ex¬ 
plained by me. Hereafter I shall explain the sphere of the 
earth. 



1518 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

{Description of the Jambndvipa) 


Sanatkumdra said: — 

1. O son of Parasara, listen succinctly to what I ex¬ 
plain, the sphere of the earth consisting of seven Dvipas 
(continents). 

2. The seven*** continents are Jambu, Plaksa, Salmali, 
Ku^a, KrauAca, §aka, Pu$kara. These seven are sur¬ 
rounded by seven oceans. 

3. The seven oceans are salt sea, sugarcane juice 
sea, wine sea, ghee sea, curd sea, milk sea and pure 
water sea. Jambu Dvipa is situated in the middle of all 
these. 

4-6. In the middle of it is the golden mountain Meru, 
O Kaleya. It extends below to sixteen Yojanas and its height 
is eightyfour Yojanas. Its expanse on the top is thirtytwo 
Yojanas. This mountain is situated on the back of the earth 
and expands on all sides. It is sixteen thousand Yojanas 
at the base. It has the shape of a pericarp. The mountains 
Himavat,*** Hemakuta*** and Nisadha**® are to its south. 

7. The Varsa mountains in the north are Nila, Sveta 
and Srhgin.*** The extent of these is ten thousand Yojanas. 
They are full of gems and have pinky lustre. 

242. $P. mentions seven continents. Their indentihcation is uncer¬ 

tain. Scholars hold difTercnt views : See Geography of the Purftpas 
Gh. II. Each of the continents is surrounded by one of the seven seas 
and divided into several Varyas. For instance, Jambu comprises nine 
Varyas of which Bharata is the one. The continents comprise mountains 
variously classed as Jef, and ^sf. These give 

rise to innumerable streams and rivers that flow in the lands and fall 
into the sea. 

243. This most celebrated mountain forms the northern boundary 

of Bh&rata, extending from the eastern to the western sea. 

244. It is held to be identical with the KailSsa, a sacred hill 
situated to the north of Ni&nasarovara. 

245. iSP. places it to the south of the Mens, along with the 
Himavat and HemakGta. 

246. Nila, Sveta and Sp&gin stand to the north of the Meru. Cp Sk. 
P. 1 . II. 37. 4?. 



UmSsdfhhitd 


1519 


8. Their height is a thousand Yojanas and their width 
too is the same. Bharata is the first sub-continent. Then 
there is the Kimpuru^a. 

9. Hari Var$a is another which, O sage, is to the 
south of Meru. Ramyaka is on the northern side. In its part 
is Hira^maya Varsa. 

10. In the north are the Kurus as well. O excellent 
sage, the extent of each of these, as in the case of Bharata, is 
nine thousand Yojanas. 

11. Ilavrta Var^a is in its middle and Meru rises up 
in its middle. In all the four quarters, peaks nine thousand 
Yojanas in height rise up. 

12. O excellent sage, such is Ilav^ta and there are four 
mountains here which appear as supporting beams to Meru, 
which are joined to it and rise above. 

13. Mandara**^ is in the east. Gandhamadana**’ is in 
the south. Vipula**’ is in the western portion and Supar^va 
is situated in the north. 

14. Trees acting as the flagstaff of the mountain are 
Kadamba, Jambu, Pippala and Vata. Their height b eleven 
hundred Yojanas. 

15. O great sage, listen to the* origin of the name 
Jambud^pa. There are great trees shining here. I shall 
explain their nature to you. 

16. Fruits of the Jambu tree are of the size of a huge 
elephant. They fall on the top of the mountain and become 
shattered and scattered everywhere. 

17. The famous river Jambu*** is made up of the juice 
of Jambu fruits. It flows there and is drunk by the residents 
of the locality. 

18. People staying on its banks do not perspire. They 
do not emit bad odour and they do not want in the exercise 
of their sense-organs. 

19. The mud of the stream dried by blowing with 

247. The mountains Msuidara, Gandhamidana. Vipula and Sup&riva 
are placed to the east, south, west and north of the Meru re^ctively. 

248. Its identification with the Btrram of that name near the mount 
Abu is uncertain.' 



1520 AeApurita 

the mouth transforms itself into golden ornaments for the 
Siddhas. It is called Jambunada. 

20. Bhadra^va Var^a is on the east of Mem. Ketu- 
mala Varya is on the west. Between these two there is 
Illyrta. 

21. The forest in the east is Gaitraratha,^** that in the 
south ii Gandhamadana, that in the west is Vibhraja and 
that in the north is Nandana. 

22. There are four lakes viz. Arunoda,**® Mahabhadra,**® 
Sitoda*®® and Manasa.*®® These four lakes are worthy of being 
enjoyed by all the gods. 

23. The filamenNmountains of Mem on its east are Sata- 
fijana, Kumhga, Kurara and Malyavat. Every one of them 
is important. 

24. The filament-mountains on the south are Trikuta, 
Si^a, Patanga, Rucaka, Niyadha, Kapila and others. 

25. The filament-mountains on the west are Sinivisa, 
Kusumbha, Kapila, N5rada, Naga and other mountains. 

26. The filament-mountains on the north are ^nkha* 
cuda, ^yabha, the mountain named Hamsa, Kdlaftjara and 
others. 

27. l^atakaumbha, the golden dty of Brahma, is on the 
top of Mem and in the middle. It extends to fourteen 
thousand Yojanas. 

28. All round that city are the eight cities of the 
eight guardians of the quarters, which have been assigned 
to them according to their quarters and forms. 

29. Issuing from Viynu's feet, the river Gangl ,falls 
in that city of Brahma flowing through the sphere of the 
moon. 


349* CSaitrsratha forest is placed on the bank of the Accboda lake. 
350 . Anipoda, Mahlbhadra, $Itoda and Mftnasa are the kikes d 
gods near Sumeru. 



UaiSuHhkUd 


1521 


30. Falling in four directions the river Gahga flows into 
four streams viz. Sita,*^^ Alakananda,*** Gakfu^*** and 
Bhadra.*“ 

31. Sita flows to the east of the mountain, Alaka- 
Nanda flows to the south, the Gak9us flows to the west and 
the Bhadra flows to the north. 

32. Thus the holy river Ganga flowing along three 
paths, flows into the great ocean in the four quarters after 
crossing all the mountains. 

33. Meru is situated in the middle of the four 
mountains : Sunila, Ni$adha, Malyavat and Gandhamadana. 
It has the shape of a pericarp of a lotus. 

34. The four Vardas Bharata, Ketumida, Bhadr5fva 
and the Kurus are the petals of the world>lotus. The 
Lokaparvatas constitute the boundary. 

35. The Devakuta^^^ constitutes its belly. Its extent is 
from south to north. Gandhamadana and Kailasa extend 
from east to west. 

36. The Nifadha and the Nila mountains issue> from 
the east and the west of Meru, curl down to south and 
north and terminate within the pericarp. 

37. Tliese Kesara moimtains Sveta and others, consti¬ 
tuting the belly of Meru in twos, are very beautiful. 

38. To the north of the mountains are watertroughs 
resorted to by the Siddhas and Garanas. The forests and 
the cities beside them are very fascinating. 

39. The cities are of the gods, Yak^as, Gandharvas 
and Rak^asas. The gods and the Daityas sport about on 
the mountains day and night. 

231. Sita, one of the seven currents of the Ganm risin|^ from 
Bindusara, a Himalayan lake, flows towards the west. For details see 
Studies in Skandapurina PP. 149. 150, under Sita-Cak^u group. 

253. It flows through Garhwal and Shrinagar, the cafutal of 
Garhwal is situated on it. 

233. Gakfu is on of the seven branches df the Ganges often identi¬ 
fied with Oxus or Amu Darya. 

^54. According to the PurSnas ^Vi^pu. BK II. ch. II) ^ VSmana 
( 3 if 32), Bh&gavata (V. 175)1 Bhadrk branched off from the main stream 
of ^e Ganges when the latter escaped itself from the locks of 3 iva. 

255. Oevak&ta is one of the eight boundary mountains which to¬ 
gether with Jathara stretch across from the north to the south on the 
east side of Meru (Mir. 54. 22-26, 59. 3-4.) 



40. These are the abodes of righteous men.. They are 
glorified as heavens on the earth. Sinners can never go there. 
They cannot be seen in their vicinity. 

41. O great sage, in the eight Vardas beginning with 
the Kimpuru^a etc. there is no sorrow, danger, agony, hunger 
or fear. 

42. The people are healthy, without terror and devoid 
of miseries. They have the longevity of ten to twelve 
thousand years. 

43. Time is calculated there as Kfta, Treta etc. The 
lord does not shower earthly waters there. 

44. In all these seven Vardas, the rivers are well 
arranged. They have sands of gold. There are hundreds of 
small rivers too. Auspicious men sport in them. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

{Seven continents) 


SanatAnmdra said :— 

1-2. I shall explain the Bharatavar$a. South of the 
Himalaya mountain and north of the ocean is the land of 
Bharata. O great sage, its extent is nine thousand Yojanas. 
This is the land of sacred rites for attaining heaven and 
salvation. So say the wise people. 

3. Heaven and hell are attained by men from here 
only. I shall mention nine subdivisions of the Bharata Var^a 
to you. 

4-5. Indradyumna, Kaseru, Tamravarna Gabhastimat, 
Nfigadvipa, Saumya, Gandharva, Varu^a and the ninth is 
the sub-condnent Sagarasambhrta. This sub-continent lies 
North to South extending to a thousand Yojanas. 

6. To the east of Bharata live the Kir&tas,*** to the 
south the Yavanas ; to the west Khafas and to the north 
the ascetics. 

256. KiriU, a Himalayan tribe. Is placed in the east. Yavanas, 
identified with the IndoGreeks, never lived in the south but they are 



UmdsiukkiUl 


1523 


7. In the middle live the Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vailyas 

and iSudras maintaining themselves by sacrifices, battles, 
merchandise and service. 

8. There are seven Kulaparvatas viz Mahendra,**’ 
Malaya,*®® Sahya,*®* Sudama,*®® ^ksaparvata,*®* Vindhya*®* 
and Pariyatra.*®® 

9. O sage, Vedas, Smrtis, Puranas and other things 
issue from Pariyatra. They dispel all sins, it should be known, 
by their very sight or touch. 

10. The great rivers issuing from Vindhya are seven, 
such as Narmada,*®® Surasa*®® etc, and thousands of smaller 
ones are all auspicious. They quell all sins. 

11. Godavari,*®® Bhimarathi,*®* Tapi,*®® and other im¬ 
portant riv.rs issue from the mountain Rksa. They dispel 
fear of sins immediately. 

12. The rivers Kr?na Veni*®* and others issue from Sahya 
Kftamala,**® Tamraparni®^^ and others issue from Malaya. 

placed there. Khasas, identified with the modern Khakkas lived about 
I^shmir which in fact is not exactly to the west of BhSrata. The identi* 
fication of the Tapasas placed in the n )rth is quite uncertain. 

257. See P. 628 note 76. 

258. See P. 164 note 166 ; p 628 note 72. 

259. See P. 164 note 16), p 56 > note 28, p 623 no*e 6j. 

260. Mount SudSman is placed in the Panjab on the Vipa£S(Beas) 
river. R 3 mi. II. 68. 18-19. For details See GAMl p 185-186. 

261. Mount Rk^vat is associated with the central part of the 
Narmada valley of which Mahi^mati (Mandhati in the Nimar district of 
Madhya Pradesh, Maheivara in the former Indor State according to some) 
was the most important city and Da^arna a notable river. See Sircar, 
GAMI P. 49. 

262. See P, 623 note 69. 

263. See P. 629 note 77. 

264. See P. 75 note 55. 

265. The source of the Surasi, a river of the Narmadft group is 
actually the Rkpivat and not the Vindhya, Sircar, Op. cit, P. 47 note 3. 

266. See P. 75 note 56. 

267. It is identical with modern BhImI, a tributary of th river 
Krw 4 . 

268. It is identical with the modem Tapti, the celebrated river 
that flows into the western sea. 

269. Kr^oAvep! is identical with the Kr$p& river. See P. 75 note 57. 

270. It is identical with the modern Vaigai running past Madurai. 

271. It is identical with the modern Timbravari which combines 
its stream with the Chit tar in the Tiruneveli district of Madras. 



1324 


13. Triyama,*^* 9“?*k'*ly**^* others issue from 

Mahendra. j^^ikulya,*^* Kumari*^* and others issue from 
Suktimat.*’* 

14. Many territories, countries are situated in their 
basins. People drink from these rivers as well as from other 
lakes. 

15. O great sage, all the four Yugas Kfta and others 
are followed in Bharata and not in the other Dvipas. 

16. Charitable gifts are offered here by meritorious 
sacrificers. Ascetics perform penances strenuously for the 
attainment of better worlds. 

17. O great sage, it is so because this is the land of 
sacred rites in the Jambudvipa. Here too Bharata is the 
most excellent. The others are lands of pleasure. 

18. O excellent sage, after a thousand births rarely 
does a man get birth as a human being here and that too 
due to hoarded merits. 

19. It is said that the gods sing songs like this:—It is 
only the blessed who are able to live in the land of BhSTata 
which is the pathway leading to heaven and salvation. They 
are born as men there. 

20. After getting human birth once in a way, and 
sporting about in the great soul form of 8iva I shall attain 
the fruits of all sacred rites in that form. 

21. Only blessed human beings derive this pleasure. 
They are happy and their minds are interested in sacred 

272. Triyama or Tris&mi not identified. 

273. still bearing its ancient name flows into the Bay of 
Bengal near Berhampur on the SB Railway in the Ganjam district of 
Orissa. 

274. The other R^ikulyl is identical with the Koal in Chhota 
Nagpur. 

275. Raychaudhuri identifies KumUri with the river of the tame 
name in the MfinbhQm district in south Bihar. The identification is 
quite probable in view of the plausibility of his identification of the Kula 
parvata called Suktimat with the hUls of Eastern India extending from 
Ghhatisgarh to the Santal Parganas. 

276. The name of the 3 uktimat is preserved in that of the 3 akti hills 
in Raigarh, Madhya Pradesh and possibly in that of the Suktel river wUcb 
joins MahInadI river Sonepur in Orissa. The name Suktimat was prob¬ 
ably applied to the chain of hills that extends from 8akti in Raigarh M. P. 
to the Oalma hills in MflnbhQm drained by the Kumflrl and perhaps even 
to the hills in Santal Parganas vrashed by the afflueots of the B&bll. 



UnUtsaMdtd 


1525 


rites. Those who take birth in Bharata have the two gains of 
attaining heaven and salvation. 

22. This Jambudvipa extends to a hundred thousand 
Yojanas including all its internal zones. It is well surrounded 
by the salt ocean.®” 

23. The continent of Plak^a is glorified as surrounding 
the briny sea extending to a hundred thousand Yojanas. O 
brahmin the Dvipa is twice that in extent. 

24. The seven Var§a mountains are Gomanta, Gandra. 
Narada, Dardura, Somaka, Sumanas and Vaibhraja. 

25. On these beautiful Varsa mountains) all the subjects) 
gods, Gandharvas etc. live together for ever. 

26. There the life expectation for men is ten thousand 
years. Neither physical sickness nor worries nor agonies tor** 
ment the people anywhere there. 

27. The seven holy rivers here are Anutaptfi) l^ikhl) 
Papaghni, Tridiva, Krpa, Amrta and Sukrta. 

28. Insignificant rivers and mountains are there in 
thousands. The people in the countries are delighted in 
drinking the waters of these rivers. 

29. In all the seven subdivisions in it there is no 
differentiation among the various Yugas. O great sage, the 
time there is on a par with Treta Yuga for ever. 

30. O excellent sage, there are brahmins, K^atriyas, 
VaiSyas and iSudras there. In its middle there is a big tree 
like the celestial Kalpa tree. 

31. That tree is called Plak$a and hence, O excellent 
brahmin, the continent is called Plak^advipa.*®® Lord Siva, 
the benefactor of the worlds, performs a sacrifice there. 

32. Lord Vi§ 9 U and Brahmfi too perform worships 
here with Vedic mantras aad Tantras. Now listen again 
to the description of iSahnali in brief. 

977. It refers to the silt sea placed in the west of Bhftrata. Sec 
P. iigS note. 

278. It has been identified with the basin of the mediterranean. It 
derives its name from the fig trees growing abundantly on its toil. See 

Geo. of the PurAons Pp. 41-42. 



1526 


33-34. There are seven Up-Varsas (sub-continents) 
there too. Please listen to their names. They are 6veta, 
Harita, Jimuta^ Rohita, Vaikala, Manasa and ^uprabha 
the seventh one. The continent is called Salmali^’* because 
of the Salmala tree. 

35-36. It is always surrounded by the ocean, twice 
extensive as it. The rivers indicate the Vardas significantly. 
Listen to their names. They are 3ukla, Rakia, Hiranyfi, 
Gandra, 6ubhra, Vimocana and the Nivrtti. All these have 
cool sacred waters. 

37. All the seven Var§as contain people of the four 
castes. They worship lord $iva always with various kinds 
of sacrifices. 

38. In this beautiful place the gods are always pre¬ 
sent. This Dvipa is surrounded by the ocean of wine. 

39-40. The ocean of wine is twice as much as the 
6almali Dvipa. Ku^a^^ Dvipa is all round it externally. 
Daityas and Danavas live there along with human beings. 
So also the gods, the Gandharvas, the Yak^as, the Kim- 
puru^as and others too. There abo the castes are devoted 
to their respective duties and conduct. 

41. People in Ku^a Dvipa worship Brahma, Vifnu 
and 3iva, the bestower of the fruits of all desires. 

42. The seven mountains are Ku^eiaya, Hari, Dyuti- 
mat, Pu^pavat, Mapidruma, Hemaiaila and Mandaracala. 

43-44. The rivers are seven. Listen to their names 
factually. Dhutapfipi, Sivfi, the holy Sammid, Vidyfi, 
Dambha, Mah! and Alpa. These quell all sins. There are 
thousands of other rivers of auspicious waters and golden 
sands. 

45. In the Ku^advipa the main plant is the stump of 
Ku£a grass. It is surrounded by the ocean of clarified 
butter. O fortunate one, listen to the description of Kraufica**^ 
Dvipa, the other great continent. 

279. It is identical with the tn^ical part of Africa bordering the 
Indian ocean on the east. Ibid P. 45. 

280. It corre^xmds to Iran, Iraq and the flinging lands of the 
hot desert. Ibid P 40. 

281 It is represented by the basin of the Black tea. Ibid P. 45. 



VmSsaMti 


1527 


46. It is surrounded by the ocean of curds and whey 
twice as large. O intelligent one, listen to the names of 
the Var^a mountains. 

47. They are Kraufica, Vamana, Andhakaraka, Diva- 
vrli, Manas, Pundarika and Dundubhi. 

48. The subjects live on these Varija mountains which 
are very beautiful and golden. Free from terror, they are 
accompanied by their friends and the gods. 

49. Brahmins, K^atriyas, VaUyas and iSudras live 
there in their due order. There are seven great rivers and 
thousands of other small rivers there. 

50. They are Gauri, Kumudvati, Sandhya, RaiSi, Mano* 
java, Santi and Pu^ds^i'ika and they make others drink their 
holy water. 

51-53. The lord in the form of Yogarudra is worship¬ 
ped there. The ocean of curds and whey is surrounded by 
l§akadvipa‘^* twice as large. The mountains are seven. Listen 
to their names from me. In the east is the mountain Udaya- 
giri. In the south is the mountain Jaladhara. The Astagiri 
is in the west and Avike^a in the north. The great tree is 
S^a there, worshipped by Siddhas and Gandharvas. 

54. The countries are very sacred populated by the 
people of all the four castes. The rivers too are very holy, 
dispelling all terror due to sins. 

55. They are Sukumari, Kumari, Nalini, Veouka, 
Ikfu, Re^uka and Gabhasti. 

56. O great sage, there are thousands of small rivers 
there. The mountains too are in hundreds and thousands. 

57. There is no question of loss of virtue in them. 
Men come from heaven to those Vardas on the earth and 
sport about with one another. 

58. In the 5&kadvipa, the sun is lovingly worshipped 
by the people of all countries pious in mind and activities as 
mentioned before. 

59-60. It is surrounded on all sides by the milk-ocean 

aSd. It can be identified with Malaya, Siam, Indo-China and 
Southern CUna. Ibid 31-40. 



1528 


twice as large. O Vyasa, the miIk*ocean is surrounded by 
Puikara**^ continent twice as large. Thrgre at Varfathere is 
famous by the name Manasa. It is five thous and Yojanas 
in height. 

61. There is a great ring round it, five hundred thou« 
sand Yojanas in length. The Pu?kara Dvipa ring divides 
it into two. 

62. The Dvipa and the Varsas are of similar shapes 
namely gyrated. Men live there up to ten thousand years. 

63. They are free from ailment. They are not un- 
happy. They are devoid of passion and hatred. Evil is never 
approved of by them. O sage, nor do they imprison or kill 
anyone. 

64. There is neither truth or lie there. It is always 
night there. Men are of equal dress and features, all being 
gold-complexioned. 

65. This Varsa, O sage, is Bhauma which is like a 
heaven on this earth and the life herein is pleasing to all, 
free from old age and sickness. 

66. O great sage, in the Dhatakikhan^a and the Maha- 
vita in the Puskaradvipa, the holy fig tree is the excellent 
abode of Brahma. 

67. Brahma resides there, worshipped by gods and 
Asuras. Pu^kara is surrounded by the ocean of sweet water. 

68. Thus the seven continents are surrounded by seven 
oceans each twice as large as the one within. 

69. The speciality of the oceans is mentioned thus. 
The water is always equal in quantity. It is never reduced. 

70. O excellent sage, if the water kept in a pot is 
heated it goes up. Similarly when the moon rises the water 
of the ocean rises up. 

71. At the time of rising and setting of the moon 
waters flow and ebb. Hence in the bright and dark halves 
the waters vary in quantity; they increase and decrease. 

•282. It is identical with Japan, Manchuria and the south-eastern 
Siberia. The milky ocean enclosM by this Dvfpa is the Sea of Japan 
ibid. 42-44. 



UmSsiMitS 


1529 


72. O great sage, the increase and decrease of the waters 
of the oceans are seen hundred and thousands of times. This 
has been mentioned to you. 

73-74. All the people in the Puskaradvlpa, O brahmin, 
take as food Sugarcandy which appears there by itself for 
ever. Beyond that there are no living beings. The land is 
golden and devoid of living creatures.**’ 

75. Beyond that is the mountain LokSloka. It is a 
thousand Yojanas in height and an equal number of Yojanas 
in extent. 

76. O great sage, therefore, along with this universe 
the earth is fifty crores of Yojanas in extent inclusive of all 
the continents and mountains. 

77. This world is the support in due course of ail 
living beings. It has more attributes than all other elements 
have. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

{Worlds and Planets) 


Sanatkumara said :— 

1. The extent to which the rays of the sun and the 
moon shine and illuminate is the size of the earth. It is 
called Bhuloka. 

2-3. The sun’s sphere is situated a hundred thousand 
Yojanas from the earth. The moon is situated thousands of 
Yojanas from this earth and a hundred thousand Yojanas 
from the sun. 

4. The spheres of the planets are entirely situated 
above the moon along with the stars about ten thousand 
Yojanas one above the other. 

2183. The Skt. text of the first half of this verse is defective. 



1530 


5. Budha (Mercury); above that is Kavya (Venus): 
above that is the sphere of Bhauma (Mars). Bfhaspati 
(Jupiter) is above that and iSanai^cara (Saturn) is above that. 

6. The sphere of the seven sages (The Ursa Major) 
is situated a hundred thousand Yojanas above it. The 
Pole Star (Dhruva) is situated a hundred thousand Yojanas 
above the sages. 

7. The Pole star is the prop of the circle of luminary 
bodies. The Bhuvarloka and Svarloka are above the earth 
but beneath the Pole star. 

8. A crore Yojanas above the Pole star is the Mahar- 
loka where the seven sons of Brahma are stationed. They 
live even during the time of Kalpa. 

9. The seven sons are—Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana, 
Kapila, Asuri, Vo^hu and PaficaSikha. 

10. Above that is stationed Sukra (Venus) at a dis¬ 
tance of two hundred thousand Yojanas. Two hundred 
thousand Yojanas below it is stationed Budha (Mercury) the 
son of the moon. 

11. O sage, Bhauma (Mars) is stationed two hundred 
thousand Yojanas above it. Bfhaspati (Jupiter) is stationed 
two hundred thousand Yojanas above it. 

12. Two hundred thousand Yojanas above Jupiter, Saturn 
is stationed. These are the seven planets that stay in their 
respective zodiacs. 

13. The seven sages (Ursa Major) are stationed eleven 
hundred thousand Yojanas above the planet Saturn. The 
Dhruva star is said to be stationed fourteen hundred thousand 
Yojanas above the great star. 

14. Sixty-three hundred thousand Yojanas from Jana- 
loka is stationed the Tapoloka where the gods called Vairajas 
stay. They are free from burning sensation. 

15-16. Eighty four thousand Yojanas from Tapoloka 
is stationed the Satyaloka. It is known as Brahmaloka where 
the pure-minded, perfectly wise Brahmacarins engaged in 
truthful virtue stay. Men who go there from the earth also 
stay there. 


984. See P. 88 note. 



UmduahhitA 


1531 


17-18. la the Bhuvarloka, the sages of great Siddhis 
stay in the form of gods. In the Svargaloka, the gods, the 
Adityas, the Maruts, the Vasus, the twin Alvins, Viivedevas, 
Rudras, Sadhyas, Nagas, Khagas etc. stay. Above that 
are the nine planets and above them are the seven sages 
free from sins. 

19. O sage, thus the seven worlds have been mentioned 
to you. The Patalas too are also seven. Thus the universe 
has been explained to you. 

20. As the wood-apple is both above and below the 
earth, so the universe is enveloped by the cauldron of the 
Cosmic Eg^. 

21-23. It is surrounded by water ten times as large 
all round the fire, wind, ether and darkness. It is encom¬ 
passed by the elements and the principle of Mahat, eight 
times as large. There surrounded by the Mahat and Fra- 
dhana is stationed the Purusa. The supreme soul is infinite. 
He is therefore called eternal since he has no limitation. 

24-27. This eternal is the cause of all. O sage, it is 
the great Prakrti. From that infinite of unmanifest origin 
thousands and hundreds of thousands of cosmic eggs are 
born. The self-known great soul contains everything just 
as the wood contains latent fire, the gingelly seed the 
latent oil and the milk the latent ghee. From this primor¬ 
dial seed emerge all those beginning with Mahat and ending 
with Vilena. Then the gods and others are born. Then 
are born birds, their progenies and the seeds of others. 

28-29. When the tree comes out of seed it does not 
suffer any depreciation or diminution. Just as fire appears 
from the solar stone coming in contact of the sun so also the 
creation takes place. I§iva has no desire for it. As a result 
of the contact of Siva with Sakti, the gods and others are 
born naturally. 

30. They spring up through their own action. Siva 
manifests himself as Brann^a, Vif^u and Rudra. 

31. Every thing springs up from him and finally merges 
in him. Siva is sung as the performer of all activities. 

Vydsa saidi“-~ 

32. O sage Sanatkumara, O omniscient, please clear 
my doubts. Are there worlds above this universe ? 



1532 ^wtpurdfa 

SanatkumSra said :— 

33. O great sage, there are worlds above the universe. 
Please listen. I shall explain them clearly but briefly. 

34. The world Vaikuntha is beyond the world of 
Brahma. It is here that Visnu is stationed and it shines 
with great brilliance. 

35. Above it is the extremely wonderful world Kau- 
mara. The general Karttikeya, the brilliant son of ^iva shines 
here. 

36. Beyond that shines the excessively divine world 
of Uma, where l§akti—2§iva, the mother of the three deities 
shines. 

37. She is the Prakrti, greater than the greatest, with 
the attributes of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas. But the goddess 
Siva herself is devoid of attributes, free from aberrations. 

38-39. The eternal Sivaloka is above that. Here lord 
Siva, the great Brahman, shines. He is indestructible, exces¬ 
sively divine and endowed with great brilliance. He is the 
lord of all, greater than the three attributes. He is the proge¬ 
nitor of the three deities. 

40. There are no worlds above it. The Gk>loka is near 
it. Mother cows named Su^ila are there. They are favourites 
of Siva. 

41. The protector of that world is Kr^na. He 
is established there at the behest of Siva by Siva himself 
who moves about as he pleases due to his power. 

42. O Vyasa, Siva*s region is wonderful and beautiful. 

It has no support. It shines with different objects. It can¬ 
not be specifically described. 

43. The presiding deity of that region is Siva. He is 
the crest-jewel of all the gods. He is worthy of being served 
by Vi^nu, Brahmfi and Siva. He is the unsullied great soul. 

44. O dear, thus the situation of the entire universe 
is narrated to you. What more do you wish to hear about 
the position of the worlds. 



UmStivhhiH 


1533 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

{The statement of a special Mantra) 


VySsa said *.— 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumara, O the most excellent 
of the good, explain the acquisition of that by attaining 
which men endowed with devotion to Siva do not return 
again. 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

2. O Vyasa, son of Para^ara, listen with pleasure to 
the auspicious salvation and the holy rite of pious devotees 
and the sacred rite of ascetics. 

3. Those who perform holy rites, who are endowed 
with very pious penance and who always worship Siva 
should be honoured in every way always. 

4. Those who have not performed austerities do not 
go to Siva’s region which is free from ailments. O great 
sage, penance alone leads to Siva’s blessings. 

5. The gods and Ganas rejoice in heaven due to 
penance. So also the sages and the ascetics. Know my 
statement to be true. 

6. Every thing can be achieved through penance, 
whether it is difficult to be sustained, or propitiated or is 
burdensome or difficult to be transgressed. Penance cannot 
be transgressed. 

7. Brahma stays steady in his penance. So aNo Vi|nu 
and Siva. All the gods and the goddesses have attained 
rare benefits through penance. 

8. There is no doubt that in this world the particular 
goal is realised through penance by those who aspire for it. 

9. O Vyasa, penance is the means for achieving 
everything. It is of three kinds viz. Sattvika, Rajasa and 
Tamasa. 

10. The Sattvika penance is performed by the gods 
and the ascetics of sublimated prowess, ,' the Rajasa penance 
is by the Danavas and human beings. 

11-12. Their result too is threefold, achievable by the 



1534 Sioafittri$(i 

sages who have truthful vision. The Sattvika penance consists 
of Japa, meditation and auspicious worship of the deities 
with devotion. It is the means of achieving all benefits and 
all desires here and hereafter. 

13. The Rajasa penance is performed with a specific 
desire as the fruit. Here the body is subjected to tortures 
and unbearable whithering and macerating processes. 

14. That is Tamasa penance which has a passionate 
end in view. 

15-21. The Sattvika penance is the most excellent. It 
makes righteous intellect firm and steady. It has following 
characteristics—performance of ceremonial ablution, worship, 
Japa, sacrifice, scrupulous purity and cleanliness, non-violence, 
sacred rites, observance of fasts, silence, control of the sense- 
organs, pure intelligence, learning, truthfulness, refraining 
from anger, charitable gifts, forgiveness, suppression of the 
sense-organs, mercifulness, digging of wells, tanks and lakes, 
building of mansions for public cause observing Kfcchra, 
Candrayana and other rites, Yajrias, pilgrimages, hermitages, 
holy places and other acts pleasing to sensible persons. O 
Vyasa, good virtue is the cause of Siva’s devotion. Cele¬ 
bration of the day of sun’s transit, the conjunction of equinoxes 
the Nadamukta, Dhyana or meditation shall be in all the 
three occasions. It is the retention of the mind in the bril¬ 
liance. Pranayama is three-fold viz. Recaka, Puraka and 
Kumbhaka. This along with the knowledge of the course of 
the veins, withdrawal or obstruction of senses are the 
means of perfect knowledge and the achievement of the 
eight siddhis, Anima, etc. 

22. In the state of trance there are various stages such 
as the stage of the log of wood, the stage of the dead and 
the stage of Harita. All these are destructive of all sins. 

23. These five are the prosperities of royal glory- 
women, bed, drink, good garments unguents and incense, 
and the chewing of betel leaves. 

24-25. The forms of various pleasures arc—blocks of 
gold, copper, houses, gems, cows, scholarship in the Vedas 
and Sastras, ornaments, ability to sing and dance, conches, 
Vii;>as, Mrdangas, lordly elephants, umbrellas and chowrira. 
Man yearning for these takes delight in these. 



UmSseahhiUl 


1535 


26. O sage, but he does not know that these are only 
reflections in a mirror, not real substances. Just as the gingelly 
seeds are crushed to yield oil he gets himself crushed to 
yield things of pleasure. He madly rushes after them deluded 
by false knowledge. Some one seems to tell him, *‘Go on 
quickly.” 

27. In spite of realising this he moves up and down in 
the world like the water-raising wheel. He takes various 
births in the mobile and immobile forms of life. He is 
distressed throughout. 

28. After the transmigration through various forms of 
life ultimately he attains the rare human birth. 

29. Human birth is attained even out of turn if the 
merit is weighty enough. As a result of the weightiness or 
otherwise of the actions, the goals achieved are of diverse 
nature. 

30. If anyone does not strive for salvation even after 
obtaining human birth which is capable of achieving heaven 
and salvation, surely he bemoans his lot for a long time, 
when dead. 

31. Even to the god and the Asuras the birth as 
human being is very rare to be achieved. After attaining 
the same he should do such things as would prevent his fall 
in the hell. 

32. If there is no endeavour for the acquisition of 
heaven and salvation even after attaining the rare human 
form that birth is to be dubbed as useless. 

33. Human birth is glorified as the root-cause for the 
four aims of life. O Vyasa, after getting it, one shall assi¬ 
duously and virtuously maintain it. 

34. Human birth has virtue as its root. It shall 
achieve all objects. Even if there is no endeavour to achieve 
any special aim after getting human birth at least one should 
preserve the root. 

35. Who can be a more senseless man than one who 
does not strive for the welfare of the soul after attaining the 
rare birth as a brahmin in the course of human birth ? 

36. Of all the continents, this continent is called the 
land of sacred rites. It i.s from here that heaven and 
salvation are attained. 



1536 SitapurS^a 

37. Indeed the soul is deceived by that man who does 
not strive for welfare despite attaining human form in this 
land of Bharata Varfa. 

38. O brahmin, this is the land of sacred riles and 
that is the land of enjoyment. The fruit of the sacred rite 
performed is enjoyed in heaven. 

39. One should continue to perform virtuous rites as 
long as the health and normalcy of the body is maintained. 
A sick man is not eager to perform anything even when urged 
by others. 

40. If anyone does not try to achieve the permanent 
through the non-permanent body, the p>ermanent is lost for 
him and the non-permanent has already perished.^^'^ 

41. Under the pretext of passing days and nights 
pieces of life fall off. Why is it not realised ? 

42. When it is not known who will die and when, 
when the death is so sudden and unexpected who can have 
^elf-confidence ? 

43. It is certain that one will ultimately go away 
leaving off everything. Why then does he not give off in 
charity, all the wealth, so that it can be the packet of food- 
ing on his way to Yama*s abode ? 

44. A man who has taken the packet of fooding with 
him by virtue of giving charitable gifts, goes to Yama’s abode 
without difficulty. Otherwise the creature suffers on the way 
without the packet of food. 

45. O Kaleya, they gain at every step whose merits 
are full and perfect and who go to heaven. 

46. Realising this, man should perform meritorious 
rites and avoid sinful activities. Thanks to the merit one 
attains godhood. A person devoid of merit goes to hell. 

47. They who take .refuge in Siva, lord of the gods, 
even slightly, do not see the terrible Yama nor the terrible 
hell. 

48. But at the behest of Siva, due to sins and great 
delusions, those men stay there for sometime and then go to 
the region of Siva. 

285. The verse with slight variations occurs in Pane. MitraprApti 
(Verse 141). 



t/mSsafh/ntd 


1537 


49. But those who have taken refuge in lord Siva 
wholly are not smeared with sin like the leaf of the lotus 
with water. 

50. O excellent sage, they who repeat the names of 
Siva need not be afraid of hell or Yama. 

51. The two syllables **Siva** constitute the packet of 
fooding for the journey to the other world ; it is the means 
of salvation, free from worries and is the abode of all merits. 

52. It is only the name of Siva that subdues and quells 
the great ailment of worldly existence. Nothing else does the 
same, as I see. 

53. Formerly Pulka^a committed thousands of murders 
of Brahmins but on hearing the sacred name Siva, he 
attained salvation. 

54. Hence a sensible man shall enhance his devotion 
to Siva incessantly. O intelligent one, one attains worldly 
pleasures and salvation due to the devotion to Siva. 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 

{TTte fruits of righteous war) 


Vyasa said :— 

1-2* Brahminhood is difficult to be achieved. Brahmin 
is born of the face of Siva.; K$atra, of the arms; Vai^ya 
of the thighs and Sudra of the feet of the lord—so says the 
Veda.^^* But do people attain salvation from the lower 
position? Please tell me. 

SanatkumSra said :— 

3. O Kaleya, men fall off their status due to evil 
deeds. Hence, after attaining the high status, the learned 
man shall preserve it. 

4. He who forsakes brahmiiihood and is born as a 
K^atriya falls off the status of a brahmin and assumes the 
status of a K 9 atriya. 


286. Cp. Rv. X. QO. I8 



1538 SivapurS$a 

5. Due to his resorting to evil, the foolish fellow goes 

on changing thus. He takes thousands of births and plunges 
himself into gloom. • 

6. Hence after attaining the highest status one should 
not err or destroy it. Even in the face of adversity one 
shall always preserve his status. 

7. After attaining the auspicious brahminhood if a 
person disrespects brahminhood and does not differentiate 
between what could be eaten and what could not be eaten 
he becomes a K^atriya. 

8. I shall explain to you entirely that which gives a 
higher caste whereby an intelligent 8udra becomes a Vai^ya. 

9. Being born a 8udra, one shall take up the duties of 
8udra as ordained, viz, the due service to the people of the 
other three castes. 

iO-15. By doing this regularly and aspiring for Vaisya- 
hood, even a 8udra attains it. A Vaisya who uses his wealth 
for sacred rites, who performs sacrifices duly, who performs 
the Agnihotra and partakes of the remnants of food therefrom, 
is reborn in a Ksatriya family. There is no doubt in this. 
He is born as a Ksatriya by means of consecrated sacrifices 
with proper gifts. A Ksatriya shall do like this. He shall study 
the Vedas desirous of heaven. He shall maintain the three 
sacrificial fires. He shall wash his hands and feet before 
entering shrines. He shall protect the earth virtuously. He shall 
cohabit with his wife during the prescribed period afiier the 
monthly menses. He shall remain devout and pious. He shall 
be hospitable to ail. He shall fight and get killed in battle 
for acquiring facilities to achieve the three aims of life 
(virtue, wealth and love) to all living beings or for the 
sake of cows and brahmins. Thus when his soul is purified 
by fires and mantras he becomes a brahmin. After becoming 
a brahmin, if he follows the rules he becomes a priest in a 
sacrifice. 

16. Strictly observing his rites, speaking truth and 
controlling the sense-organs he derives vast pleasures of 
heaven. He becomes a favourite of the gods. 

17-18. O great sage, brahminhood is very difiicult to 
achieve. It is attained by men who undergo hardships. 



Umisaihhitd 


1539 


Salvation is achieved after attaining brahminhood entirely. 
Hence a brahmin shall be virtuous. With great effort he 
shall preserve his excellent brahminhood which is a good 
means of achieving all the aims of life. 

Vyisa said :— 

19. O excellent sage, you have mentioned about the 
glory. O foremost among the eloquent, I wish to hear this. 
Please men don. 

Sanatkumara said :— 

20<21. Those who know the principles, who understand 
sacrifices and sacred rites say thus—“By performing the 
Agni stoma and other sacrifices with profuse gifts one does 
not attain that benefit which is attained through battle.” 
Hence I shall explain to you the fruit attained by those who 
maintain themselves by means of weapons. 

22-24. The hero who offers battle subduing the army 
of the enemy attains virtue, wealth and fame. He achieves 
the fruit of a sacrifice with due gifts and the three aims 
of life, virtue, wealth and love. He who faces the enemy, 
kills him and gets on to the enemy’s chariot goes to 
Vi^nuloka. He who is not defeated in war, nor killed in it 
attains the fruit of four horse-sacrifices. 

25. He who dies in the war-front without surrender¬ 
ing his weapons attains heaven from which there is no return. 

26. The king, or prince or the general who heroically 
fights and is killed by K^atriya attains everlasting regions. 

27. He attains as many worlds as the number of his 
hairs split by arrows in the battle. All of these will be 
wish-yielding and eternal. 

28. O Vyasa, both here and hereafter he will have 
heroic seat, heroic bed, heroic status and heroic stability 
always. 

29. Those who die for the protection of cows, brah¬ 
mins, status and the master go happily to the other woild 
like virtuous persons.*^ 

2}<7. Cp P.'inca. Mitrabhi.da 3 o 8 , 424. 



1540 iwapmS^o 

30. Even a slayer of a brahmin fighting for his master 

in a battle and dying there attains heaven which becomes 
his permanent abode. • 

31. The goal realised by the person who dies for the 
brahmins, cows and his master, being killed by carnivorous 
beasts or tusked beasts is excellent. It yields him extensive 
and never>ending benefits. 

32. A man may be competent to perform hundreds of 
sacrifices, but it is very difficult to renounce his own body in 
a righteous war. 

33. A righteous war is conducive to the attainment of 
heaven. It is sanctifying. It makes known the multi-faced 
beauty of a man. This is the case with the people of all 
castes,®*® particularly so in the case of a K^atriya. 

34. Now I shall explain clearly the eternal virtue 
concerning war, as to who can be attacked and hit and who 
shall be spared. 

35. Even if a brahmin well-versed in Vedanta doctrine 
were to attack one violently with lethal weapons one can 
fight him in return. He will not become guilty of brahmini- 
cide thereby.®** 

36. Even a murderer shall not be attacked and killed 
if he is thirsty and begs for water. O Vyasa, by killing the 
sick and the distressed even in battle a man becomes 
guilty of brahminicide. 

37. One becomes a murderer of a brahmin by killing 
the sick, the feeble, the child, the hen-pecked, the miserly 
and one whose bow or bowstring is broken. 

38. After considering all this, an intelligent man 
shall strenuously indulge in battles. He will achieve the 
purpose of his life and rejoice here and hereafter. 


288. According to the laws of the caste as laid down in the 
DharmaSistras, the profession of hghting is assigned exclusively to the 
people of K^atriya caste. But 3 P. probably following the contemporary 
practice allows it for all the castes. 

289. Cp. Manu viii, 350, 35*. 



VmSsahhUd 


1941 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 

(The origin and daelopmmi of the body) 

Vydsa said :— 

1. O dear, O great sage, for realizing the worldly 
detachment please mention the detailed mode of the birth 
of living beings and their stay in the womb. 

Sanatkumara said :— 

2. O Vyasa, listen succinctly to the essence of the 
sacred lore. I shall explain the excellent mode of worldly 
detachment which removes the bondage with the world, of 
a man desirous of liberation. 

3-4. When we cook rice the process is as follows. In 
the cooking vessel the rice and water remain separate. Water 
is above fire. The rice is above water. The wind slowly 
blows against the fire beneath the water. The fre kindled 
by the wind makes the water boil. 

5. The rice with hot-boiling water all round it be¬ 
comes cooked. When cooked it becomes separated into 
sediment and juice. 

6. (More or less a similar process takes place in the 
body.) The sediment in the body consists of twelve forms 
of waste matter. These are split and sent out of the body. 
The juice matter circulates in the body. Man gets nourished 
through it. 

7. The ears, the eyes, the nose, the tongue, the teeth, 
the penis, the anus, and the nails are the receptacles of 
dirt secreted by them. The phlegm, the sweat, the fiateces 
and the urine—these together make up the twelve. 

8. All the vessels scattered all over the body are 
joined centrally at the heart. These vessels shall be under¬ 
stood to convey Rasa. O sage, I shall mention their process 
of working. 

9. Pra^a (the vital air) places the subtle lymph at 
the mouths of the vessels, llien it fills the entire vessels 
with the lymph, 

10-11. Thus filled, the vessels circulate all over the 



1542 iwapttriifa 

body. TTicn the lymph inside the vessels gets cooked by the 
fire in the body. There arc two modes of cooking. [Probably 
the separation of sediment and watery part]. The skin is 
covered thereby. [The cells constituting the skin artf genera¬ 
ted], Blood is produced. 

12. The hair of the body and flesh are produced 
from the blood. The hair on the head and the sinews 
arc produced from the flesh. From the sinews the bones 
are produced. The nails and marrow are produced from the 
bones. 

13. An alternative cause of marrow, the semen 
itself becomes progeny. Thus the twelvefold ihetabolism 
of bood is explained. 

14-16. The semen is secreted from the food eaten 
From the semen, the birth of another body is made possible. 
When the semen unalloyed is deposited in the vaginal 
passage during the prescribed period of cohabitation after 
the monthly menses, then the semen blown by the vital 
wind mingles with the blood of the woman. At the time 
when the semen is discharged the individual soul with the 
causal body or unit of sense-organs etc. enters the vaginal 
passage fully covered and urged by its past actions. The 
semen and blood in the unified state become foetus in a 
day. 

17. In five nights the foetus assumes the shape cf 
bubbles and the bubbly mass becomes muscuiar mass in 
seven nights. 

18-19. Within two months the following parts oi 
the body are formulated in order Viz. the neck, the head 
the shoulders, the backbone, the belly, hands and feet, the 
sides the lips etc. Within three months all the joints are 
completed. 

20. Within the fourth month the fingers are duly 
formed. The mouth, nose, and cars are ready within the 
fifth month. 

21. Within six months the row of teeth, the private 
parts and the nails and the orifice of the cars take shape. 

22. The rectum, or the penis of the vaginal passage 
and the navel too arc formulated* Within the seventh 

all liuib-jomts are completed. 



UmisathhUll 


1^3 

23. O excellent sage, thus the complete child with all 
the limbs stays in the womb covered by the embryonic 
skin. 

24. The child increases and develops day by day, 
stealthily taking in the food of the mother, of all the six 
tastes, through the umbilical cord. 

25. Then the soul complete in this body recollects all 
the pleasures and sorrows and every thing done by it former¬ 
ly as if in a dream. 

26. “I am dead and born many times In these 
different births I have seen many types of wombs. 

27. This time when I am born and consecrated 
I shall strive for welfare by means of this body so that I may 
not have to stay in another womb in future. 

28. So thinks the child in the womb “As soon as 1 
am released from this womb I shall seek Siva's perfect 
knowledge that repels all worldly existence.” 

29. Troubled and tormented by the distress in the 
womb as a result of his past actions the individual soul stays 
there pondering over the means of liberation. 

30. Just as a traveller surrounded by huge impassable 
mountains on all sides stands helplessly in his distress, so 
also the creature in the womb enveloped by the embryonic 
skin stays miserably. 

31. Just as a man drowning in the sea is very much 
distressed, so also the child in the womb completely drenched 
by the liquid secretion in the womb is always distressed 
excessively. 

32. Just as a person is cooked and boiled in an iron 
cauldron by means of fire, so also the child hurled into the 
pot of womb is. cooked by the gastric fire, 

33. For him staying inside the womb the misery is 
equal to, nay, more than the misery of a person incessantly 
pierced by means of redhot needles. 

34. There is nowhere a greater misery than staying 
within the womb. To all embodied souls it is full of misery, 
very terrible and grievous. 

35. This type of misery is for the sinners. But those 
of virtuous intellect take birth within seven months. 



1$44 


36. Getting crushed in the vaginal passage as if with¬ 
in a machine is a misery more grievous than the stay within 
the womb. O VySsa, this takes place in regard to dic sinnen 
and not the virtuous. 

37. Just as the sugarcane is crushed in the machine, 
the sinner is crushed and beaten on the head by the ironclub 
of sin. 

38. Just as the gingelly seeds pressed in the oil machine 
become a worthless residue, so also the body becomes a 
waste being crushed by the muscular walls of the vaginal 
passage. 

39-43. This body in the womb is in an unenviable 
position. The hands and legs are like suspended pillars. 
Sinews tie them up in various ways. The whole body is 
smeared with dirty blood and flesh. It is the receptacle of 
faeces and urine. It is covered with hairs and nails. It is 
sickly and an abode of ailments. The only great opening 
is the mouth. It has eight small apertures like windows. 
The two lips are like two doors. The tongue is the bolt 
for them. The body is sick due to its thirst for pleasures. 
It is subservient to passion and hatred and utterly deluded. 
The various limbs overlap one another. It is surrounded 
by the embryonic membrane. With very great pain and 
difficulty it has to come out of the vaginal passage. It is 
drenched with urine, blood and faeces. It comes out as 
from a sheath. It is a mass of skeleton. 

44. The bones are three hundred and sixty in number. 
There are five hundred muscles. The body is covered with 
thirtyfive million hairs. 

45. The hairs are subtle and gross, visible and in¬ 
visible. The veins and vessels within the body too are so 
many in number. 

46. The internal secretions circulate within and go out 
through these vessels. The teeth are thirtytwo in number 
and the nails are twenty. 

47. The measure of bile content in the body is one 
Kudava. (1/4 of Prastha or 12 handfuls). The phlegm is 
one Adhaka (256 fistfbls). The vasS fat weighs 20 palas. 
Half of that is the tawny matter. 





1M5 


48. The weight of solid fat is 2^ Tulas and ten 
INilas. Blood is three palas and it is four times the 
iparrow. 

49. Ihe semen is half a Kudava. The strength of the 
living beings depends on it. A mass of flesh weighs a thou¬ 
sand palas. 

50. O excellent sage, the blood is hundred palas 
according to which the faeces and the urine form four hand¬ 
fuls each. 

51. Such is the transient abode, the body of the 
eternal soul. It is impure while the soul is pure. It is 
generated due to his past actions and their bondage. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 

{The Ascription of infancy and other stages and the impurity of 

the body) 


Sanatkumdra said :— 

1. O Vyasa, O highly intelligent sage, listen to the 
impurity of the body and the greatness of good feelings. I 
shall explain briefly. 

2. The body is considered impure because it is 
produced by the mingling of semen and blood and is always 
full of faeces and urine. 

3. Just as a pot, full of faeces cannot become pure 
even when washed outside, so alsc the body washed outside 
cannot become pure. Hence it is impure. 

4. Even after taking in the sanctifying Paficagavya, 
Havis (Ghee oblation) etc. the body becomes impure the 
next moment. What else is more impure than this body ? 

5. Even after taking in sweet, fragrant and delicious 
foodstuffs and drinks the body becomes impure quickly. What 
else is more impure than this. 

6. O men, don*t you see dirty and foetal matter 
coming out of your bodies day by day. How can the 
recq;>tacle of such matter be pure. ? 



1946 

7. Even if the body is sprinkled with the waters of 
the holy Ku^a grass and smeared with Paflcagavya,***^ it will 
not become free from dirt like charcoal even w^pn it is 
rubbed and polished. 

8. Like the perennial flow' of the springs of a moun¬ 
tain the vessels of the body discharge phlegm, urine, faeces 
and other types of filth. How can that body become clean ? 

9. There is not even a single clean spot on the body 
—the receptacle of all types of filth and a leather bag of 
faeces and urine. 

10. After touching the tips of the vessels of one’s own 
body the hand is washed with sand and water. Still the 
persons who are slaves to this filthy body do not feel. 

11. Inspite of being smeared and sanctified assiduously 
by sweet scents, incense and other things the body does not 
eschew its nature like the curved tail of a dog. 

12. Just as an object, naturally black, cannot become 
white by any means, so also the physical body does not be¬ 
come clean though it is scrubbed and cleaned. 

13. Though he smells his own noxious odour, though 
he sees his own dirt, no man becomes detached and keeps 
his hand on his nose. 

14. Wonderful indeed is this great delusion whereby 
the whole universe is enveloped. He does not observe the 
impurities of his body and become disgusted with it. 

15. If a man is not detached from the world due to 
the foetal smell of his own what other cause of detachment 
can be imparted to him ? 

16. In the midst of the entire universe, the body 
alone is the most unclean. By touching its filthy limbs 
even the pure becomes impure. 

17. The purification of the body is for removing bad 
odour and sliminess. If both are removed there is purity. 
The touch of a pure thing also sanctifies it. 

18. But let him be cleaned with all the waters of 
the Ganga, with heaps of sand resembling a mountain or 
let him observe purificatory rites till death, if a man has 
wicked feelings and emotions he can never be purified. 

QQO. It consists of Uk* five products of tlic cuw : viz. milk, curd, 
butter and the liquid and solid excreta. 



Umdsariikitd 


1547 


19. A vicious soul is not sanctified by the waters in 
the pilgrim spots nor by austerities. Does the canine hide 
become pure when washed in a holy river ? 

20. Neither heaven nor salvation can be attained by a 
man of vicious emotion even if he immolates himself in 
the holy fire. The only result will be that his body is 
entirely burnt off. 

21. We assert that a man of vicious instinct and 
feeling never becomes pure though he may indulge in ablu> 
lions throughout his life with all the waters of the Gahgfi 
and a mountain of sand. 

22. If a man of defiled emotion gets himself burnt 
after entering a huge blazing fire kindled by sprinkling ghee 
and oil and with flames of circular motion he does not 
become pure. 

23. Fishes stay in the holy Ganga and other sacred 
rivers. Flocks of birds stay in the temple. They do not 
attain any special benefit from the ceremonial ablutions and 
charitable gifts since they are devoid of holy feelings. 

24. It is the purity of the feelings that is the criterion 
for the sanctity of rites. The wife is embraced with one 
feeling and the daughter is embraced with another. 

25. Feelings are different in the mind even if the 
objects are not different. The same woman is looked at in 
one way by the son and in another way by the husband. 

26. O observe the great fortune in the difference of 
emotions. The man, though embraced, does not love the 
woman who is devoid of the feelings of love. 

27. If the three emotions, passion etc. were to create 
worries in the mind no one would relish different delicious 
or fragrant stuffs. 

28. Man is caught hold of by emotions and man can 
rid himself of emotions. A man purified by pure emotions 
attains heaven and salvation. 

29. Performing Japas, sacrifices and eulogies after 
purifying the soul with pure emotions a man acquires perfect 
knowledge and after death he attains the worlds of persons 
who perform many sacrifices. 



1S48 


30. The purification and removal of the sliminess and 
bad odour of the faeces and urine of ignorance and passion 
of men is effected by the pure water of knowledge^and the 
clay of detachment from the world. 

31. Thus as the body is naturally unclean it is worth¬ 
less. Like the inner stump of the plantain tree it has only 
the outer $kin as substantial. 

32-33. An intelligent man shall understand that the 
body is defective and faulty. He shall be disinterested in 
such emotions as revolve round the pleasures of the body. 
With the mind in restraint and intellect delighted he sur¬ 
mounts the worldly existence and becomes a living liberated 
soul. He who firmly grasps the inner stump of the plantain 
tree of worldly existence is not liberated. 

34. Thus the misery of life is proclaimed to be grie¬ 
vous and painful to men due to the fault of ignorance and 
the influence of different activities. 

35. I shall explain in half a stanza what is mentioned 
in crores of books. The feeling of “My-ness” is the greatest 
affliction. The feeling of *‘not-my-ness” is the greatest joy. 

36. Hundreds and thousands of mofiarchs who had 
been in bondage had attained the greatest world on reaching 
the Nirmamatva (not-my-ness) state. 

37. What little recollection the child had while within 
the womb perishes when his misery develops further on being 
crushed by the muscular walls of the vaginal passage as if 
within a machine. 

38. A great fever overtakes him as soon as the ex¬ 
ternal air touches him or delusion overwhelms him. 

39. Due to that fever a great fascination overpowers 
him and deludes him. After being deluded he soon suffers 
from the loss of memory. 

40. Loss of memory leads to forgetfulness of all pre¬ 
vious activities. The creature soon begins to love the present 
birth. 

41. The passionate and deluded world does not engage 
in activides beneficial to itself. It does not realise itself nor 
others nor even the deity. 

42. O good sage, though he has ears man does not 



UmdsmhidUl 1549 

listen to what is beneficial Co him. Even when he has 
competent eyes he does not see what is good. 

43. Walking slowly on the level, even path he falters 
at every step. Even when he has intellect, even when he 
is enlightened by scholars he does not understand. 

44. Thereby, urged and prompted by great greed he 
suffers pain and distress in the world. His intellect no 
longer remembers the sins he committed which he remembered 
in the womb. 

45. This great divine Sastra has been narrated by 
Siva in the context of penance as a means to achieving 
heaven and salvation, 

46. Even when the perfect knowledge of Siva that 
leads to the achievement of desire is available, it is really 
a great surprise if people do not strive for its attainment 
in their own interest. 

47. There is again this great misery in infancy because 
the operative power of the sense-organs is not clearly mani¬ 
fest or developed. Even if he wishes he is unable to express 
or take remedial or preventive measures. 

48. There is a great trouble when the child cuts the 
teeth. There is pain due to minor childhood ailments, 
different kinds of children’s diseases and adverse evil planets 
and other evils. 

49. The infant boy may remain somewhere very 
hungry and thirsty, or lying somewhere he may be crying 
or he may be eating or drinking faeces and the urine due 
to delusion. 

50-51. During childhood when the rite of earboring 
is performed or when the parents beat him or when he 
feels difficulty in learning the alphabet it is surprising that 
the stupid fellow does not strive for his welfare, even after 
seeing and somehow surmounting the miseries of boyhood. 

52. Where is happiness during youth, when all the 
sense-oi^ans are developed fully and begin to function, 
and there is an attack from the sickness of lust that remains 
unrealised ever? 

53. Then, he feels misery from malice and rivalry. 



By delusion his eyes become red like those of an infuriated man. 
Its abandonment* is only conducive to misery. 

54. During nights he does not get proper sleep be¬ 
cause he is scorched by the fire of lust. Where is pleasure 
even during the day because he is worried over the ways 
and means of earning wealth? 

55. The drops of semen of a man whose mind is 
dwelling on women do not bring him pleasure. They arc 
like his own sweat drops, mere dirt. 

56. What happens in women is exactly what happens 
to a leprous monkey when it scratches itself on being 
afflicted by worms. 

57. The pleasure in women is similar to the pleasure 
that is felt when the pus comes out of a swollen tumour. 
It is nothing more than that. 

58. The pleasure in women is similar to the pleasure 
one feels when faeces and urine are discharged. But it has 
been considered otherwise by the stupid. 

59. It has been mentioned by Paficacuda that there 
is not even a particle of pleasure in women who are the store¬ 
houses of all blemishes and who are creatures unsubstantial. 

60. Due to honour and disrespect, due to union with 
and separation from the beloved people youth is soon 
devoured by old age. Where is pleasure without torment ? 

61-62. The youth of women and men which had been 
mutually pleasurable formerly is not so now when it is over¬ 
whelmed by old age, when the body is rendered shattered 
and rickety by wrinkles, grey hairs and baldness and when 
the man is incompetent to perform any serious task. 

63. Who can be a more senseless person than the man 
who feels attracted to worldly pleasures even after seeing 
himself completely transformed due to old age as if he were 
a new person not existing before? 

64. A man overwhelmed by old age is tormented by 
daughters, sons and other kinsmen and even by servants who 
cannot be kept under control because they arc not attached 
to him. 

65. A sick and an aged man is incompetent to strive 
for virtue, wealth, love and salvation. Hence a young man 
shall strive for these virtues. 





1551 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 

( fVomen*s nature) 


fydsa saiJ :— 

1. O sage, if you are pleased with me you shall nar« 
rate succinctly what was mentioned by Paficacuda viz., that 
women are despicable. 

SanatkumSra said ’.— 

2. I shall explain the nature of women as it is. O 
dear, listen to it, merely by hearing which excellent detach* 
ment results. 

3. O sage, women are light-minded. They are at the 
root of all troubles. Attachment towards them should not 
be pursued by wakeful persons who desire liberation. 

4. In this respect they quote an ancient tradition, the 
conversation of NSrada with the unchaste woman Paficacud^* 

5. Formerly, while the intelligent celestial sage Nkrada 
was Meandering in the worlds he saw the beautiful celestial 
damsel Paficacud^. 

6. The excellent sage Narada asked the beautiful 
woman, the Apsaras—“O lady of beautiful waist, I have a 
certain doubt. Please explain it to me.” 

7. O brahmin, thus addressed the excellent celestial 
damsel replied—‘*lf you consider me competent and if there 
is a proper subject, I shall explain.” 

Ndrada said :— 

8. O gentle lady, I shall never engage you in a sub¬ 
ject beyond your scope. O lady of slender waist, I wish 
m hear from you the nature of women. 

Sanatkwndra said :— 

9. On hearing these words of that celestial sage the 
excellent Apsaras replied to that lord of sages, Narada the 
excellent sage. 



PaHcacO^a said :— 

10. “O sage listen, being a woman I cannot censure 
women. You already know what women are and what their 
nature is. 

11. O celestial sage, it does not behove you to urge 
me in such a question.’* After saying this the excellent 
Apsaras Paficacu<^a kept quiet. 

12. On hearing her excellent statement the most excel¬ 
lent of the celestial sages replied to her with a desire for the 
benefit of the worlds. 

Ndrada said :— 

13. It may be wrong to make a false statement. There 
is no defect in speaking the truth. Know this, O lady of 
good waist and speak the truth. 

Sanatkumara said :— 

14. Thus prompted, the sweet-smiling lady, resolved 
and immediately began to explain truthfully the permanent 
defects of women. 

PaHcacudd said :— 

15. O Narada, this is the defect in women. Even 
women of noble families, women with husbands and women 
endowed with beauty do not stand within the limits of 
decency. 

16. There is none more sinning and more sinful than 
women. Women are at the root of all sins. This you know 
already. 

17. They might have husbands of good knowledge, of 
ample wealth, of great comeliness and pleasing to them. But 
when they get opportunities for erring, they do not wait. 

18. O holy lord, this is the evil practice of all of us,» 
women, that we resort to sinful men casting off all shame 
and shyness. 

19. Women love only those persons who solicit their 
company, who approach them intimately aud who render 
them a little bit of service.**^ 


391. Paj&ca. Mitrabheda 143. 



UmSstahhUi 


155S 


20. Women usually do not observe the limitations of 
conventional decency. If at all they stand by them with 
their husbands it is because no man makes advances to them 
or because they are afraid of their husbands.*®* 

21. There is no man not worthy of honour to women. 
They are not mindful of the age of the man. They carry 
on their dalliances with any man ugly or beautiful.*®* 

22. It is not due to fear, taunts or affection for their 
husbands or regard for their lineage that women remain loyal 
to their husbands. 

23. Even women of noble families aspire for the life 
of lascivious women who in their prime of youth adorned 
with lovable ornaments and beautiful wearing garments 
move about frivolously. 

24. Even the women who are honoured well, loved 
intimately and looked after with care become attached to 
hunchbacks, blind men, imbeciles and dwarfs. 

25. O celestial sage, they become attached to lame 
and even despicable persons. O great sage, there is none in 
the world who cannot be approached by women with solici¬ 
tations of lust. 

26. O brahmin, if women do not get men for their 
dalliance they begin to indulge in abnormal sexual activity 
with one another. They do not stand by their husbands. 

27. Women become desperate when they do not get 
men, when they are afraid of servants, when they arc 
frightened of being killed or imprisoned. 

28. Because they indulge in sexual intercourse as they 
please they are fickleminded, of evil deeds and emotionally 
incomprehensible even to an intelligent man. 

29. Fire is not satiated with the logs of wood it con¬ 
sumes; the ocean is not satiated with the rivers that flow 
into it. The god of death is not satiated with the living 
beings he kills and women are not satiated with the number 
of men they cohabit with.*** 

ags. Gp. Ibid. Mitrabheda 143. 

393. Gp. Ibid. Mitrabhrda 144. 

394. Gp. Ibid. Mitrabheda 138. 



1554 


30. O excellent sage, there is another secret of all 

women that inunediately on seeing a man their vag^al 
passage begins to exude slimy secretions. ^ 

31. On seeing a man fresh and clean from his bath with 
his body perfumed with sweet scents, the vaginal passage of 
women begins to exude like water dripping from a leather 
bag. 

32. Women do not brook their husbands who may 
give all that they love, who may honour and console them 
and who may look after them well. 

33. Women do not remain satisfied and contented so 
much with simple loves and pleasures and with ornaments 
and money as with illicit love pursued by them with other 
men. 

34. Women can be kept equally balanced against 
all these put together viz., god of death, Yama, Antaka, 
Patala, the submarine fire, the sharp edge of razor, poison, 
serpent and fire. 

35. Ever since the five elements, the world, the men 
and women were created by Brahma, O Narada, the defect 
lies in women always. 

Sanatkumdra said :— 

36. On hearing her words Narada was satisfied in 
his mind. Considering it to be the truth he became dis¬ 
interested in them. 

37. O Vyasa, thus the nature of women as mentioned 
by PafLcacuda has been narrated to you. What other cause 
of detachment do you wish to hear ? 



(fmdsaMld 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 

{Ascertainment of the time of death) 


1555 


Vydsa saidi — 

1. O omniscient Sanatkumira, O sage, the nature of 
women has been heard by me from you. Please narrate the 
knowledge of Kala with pleasure. 

Sanatkumdra said ’.— 

2. Formerly, this very same thing Parvati asked lord 
Siva after hearing various divine stories and delightedly 
bowing to him. 


Parvati said :— 

3. O lord, thanks to your grace, everything has been 
understood by me and pondered over, such as your due 
worship, O lord, and the mantra befitting the same. 

4. But still, O lord, a doubt regarding the wheel of 
time lingers in my mind. What are the signs of death ? 
What is the extent of life ? 

5. O lord, please tell me everything if I am your 

beloved. On being asked thus by the goddess, lord Siva 

reolied. 

« 


Lord Siva sal '":— 

6. O beloved, I shall tell you the truth, the ^astra 
that is the most excellent of all, by which, O goddess, men 
can understand their time of death. 


7. The day, the fortnight, the month, the season, 
the transit of the sun and the year can be known by mear.^; 
of the subtle or gross, external or internal signs. 

8. O Uma, O beautiful lady, I shai! tell that to you 
factually now, for the weFerecf the people a’-d h-’inglng 
about their detachment from the world. 


0 . 


*.,• ^CSjl Am k flO iw ^ 


al! of a :nddcn pale 


and white w'tb red pr.tclics all revnd and above, know that 
death will *zke place ".//ithin six months. 

10. ^here 's par?ly*s'5 ^he face, ears, eye* or 



1556 


in the tongue, O beloved, know that death will take place 
within six months. 

11. O gentle lady, if a man does not hear the sound 
accompanying a shrill cry, immediately, death within six 
months shall be declared by those who understand Kala. 

12. When in contact with the light of the sun, moon 
or fire if a man does not see the brilliant lustre, if he sees 
everything black he will remain alive only for six months 
more. 

13. O beloved, O goddess, if the left hand throbs 
for seven days, there is no doubt that he will live only for 
a month more. 

14. If the limbs unfold and expand, if the palate 
dries up, there is no doubt that he will live only for a 
month more. 

15. When the three humours are disturbed and the 
nose begins to water, his life is only for a fortnight more. 
The mouth and the throat of a man sure to die at the 
end of six months, become parched. 

16. O beautiful lady, if the tongue becomes thick 
and the teeth begin to exude, death takes place within six 
months. The same may be inferred through these signs. 

17-18. If a man does not see himself reflected in 
water, oil, ghee or in the mirror or if he sees with dis¬ 
torted flesh or features he will live only for six months 
more. This shall be declared by the expert. O goddess, 
now listen to other signs whereby death can be inferred. 

19. If a man sees his shadow without the head or if 
he does not see the shadow at all he will not live for one 
full month thereafter. 

20. O Parvati, the signs of death evinced by bodily 
limbs have been explained. O gentle lady, I shall now 
mention the extraneous signs. Listen. 

21. O goddess, if the zone of the sun or the moon 
appears devoid of rays or like the trumpet flower, the man 
dies within half a month. 

22. If a person does not see the star Arundhatil or the 



UnOsath^id 1557 

moon with the black spot, or if any one does not see any 
star he lives only for a month.^**^ 

23. If a person does not see the star Utathya or the 
Polar star or the solar zone or has delusion of quarters on 
seeing the planet he dies within six months. 

24. If a man sees rainbow at night or the fall of the 
meteor at midday or if he is surrounded by vultures and 
crows he lives only for six months more. 

25. If the great Bear and the Milky way are not 
seen in the sky, know him to live for only six months more. 
This shall be declared by the experts. 

26. If any person sees the sun or the moon suddenly 
seized by Rahu, or the wheel of quarters whirling, he dies 
within six months definitely. 

27. If a person is suddenly surrounded by blue 
bees, he will live only a month more. That is true. 

28. Surely the person dies soon within a month if a 
crow or a dove attacks him and settles on his head. 

29. Thus the evil portents of an external nature have 
been explained to you. For the benefit of human beings 1 
shall mention succinctly. 

30. O goddess, one can see Kala within his two 
hands, the left and the right. It has been directly narrated. 

31. O beautiful goddess, in brief there are two fort¬ 
nights. In these one shall take bath and be clear, remember 
the lord with controlled senses. 

32. He shall wash his hands with red lac juice and 
milk. He shall hold scents and fragrant flowers in the hands 
and try to forestall his good or bad luck. 

33-34. O beloved, beginning with the little finger and 
ending with the thumb, one should make the Nyasa (mystical 
placing) of each of the Tithis on each knot. Thus the two 
hands together will cover the mouth Keep the hands in the 
cuplike form and sit facing the east. 

35. The devotee then should repeat the Navatmaka 
mantra one hundred and eight times. Then he shall 
scrutinise every one of the knots in the fingers of both the 
hands. 

895. The Skt. text of the first pSda of this verse is defective. 



1558 


36. O beloved, if the devotee sees a line in the form 
of a bee in a particular knot he shall understand *that the 
death will take place on the Tithi represented by that knot* 

37. Now I shall succinctly mention the time of death. 
O beloved, listen. On the basis of hearing the sound he 
shall know the result. 

38>39. O woman of slender waist, the calculation of 
time is based on the division of it into K^ana, Trufi, Lava, 
Nime$a, Ka^tha, Muhurta, day, night, fortnight, month, 
season, year, Yuga, Kalpa and Mahikalpa. 

40. 8iva calculates time by three paths: Lefl, right 
and middle. 

41. Beginning with the fiflh and ending with the 
twentyfifth are the calculations of sound according to the 
left-hand practices. 

42. O fair lady, Bhutarandhra (?) the quarters and 
the banner are the sounds in the left hand practices. 

43. O fair lady, the attributes and the aberrations of 
the seasons constitute that in the right-hand practices. This 
shall be known by those who understand the motion of 
vital airs. 

44-47. When Ida and other Nadis respire for five days 
consecutively, you shall know that the person will die within 
that year. If these respire for ten days he lives for a year. 
If they respire for fifteen days he will die after a year. If 
for twenty days he lives for six months. If the left 
respires for twenty five days he lives for three months; if 
for twentysix days, two months. 

48. If it respires for twentyseven days incessantly he 
lives for a month. 

49. This shall be knoivn in accordance with the left- 
hand practices. If in the right he lives for four days only. 

50. O goddess, these sixteen are mentioned as stationed 
in four places. I shall now mention their extent factually. 

51. Beginning with six days and calculating duly it 
happens as mentioned in the left path. 

52. If it respires for six days, he lives for two yean 
eight months smd eight days. You shall know that. 



t /m i s mh hi ti 1559 

53. If it respires for seven days he lives for (Mie year 
■even months and six days, to be sure. 

54. If it flows for eight days, he lives for two years 
four months and twenty-four days. 

55. If for nine days, he lives for three months, twice 
two months, and twelve days (i.e. seven months and twelve 
days). 

56. The time of the previous days has been mentioned 
before. But the intervening days of the month may be 
calculated thus. 

57. If for eleven days, he lives for one year nine 
months and eight days. 

58. If for twelve days he lives for one year seven 
months and six days. 

59-61. If for thirteen days he lives for one year four 
months and twentyfour days. When the Praijia flows in the 
left side for fourteen days he lives for one year, six months 
and twentyfour days. 

62. If for fifteen days he lives for nine months and 
twentyfour days. 

63. If for sixteen days he lives for ten months and 
twentyfour days. 

64. If for seventeen days he dies within nine months. 
O fond of devotees, eighteen days too are mentioned here. 

65. O goddess, if for eighteen days he lives for 
eight months and twdve days. 

66-68. If for twentythree days, know for certain that 
he lives for five months i.e. 4 months and 24-f-6 days=5 
months. If for twenty-four days he lives for three months 
and eighteen days. All this I have narrated to you in brief. 

69. This is in accordance with the left hand practices. 
Now listen according to the right hand practices. If the flow 
is for twentyeight days he lives for that much period. 

70. If for ten days, he dies immediately. If for thirty 
days he dies in five days. 

71. O goddess, if it respires incessantly for thirtyone 
days, he lives for three days. 

72. When Ravi Nid> respires thirtytwo breaiths he 
lives for two days; there is no doubt in this. 



1560 


73-74. The right path-practice has been mentioned 
to you. I shall now tell you about the middle one. The 
respiration with frequency on one part of the face makes 
him live for one day. Thus the time for death for a dying 
person has been mentioned by the experts. 

75. O goddess, this Kalacakra pertaining to the dying 
person has been mentioned to you for the benefit of the 
worlds. What more do you wish to hear ? 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 

{The deception or dodging of Kdla) 

The goddess said '.— 

1. O lord, the perfect knowledge of KLala has been 
mentioned by you. Now please mention the dodging of 
Kala by a Yogin, factually. 

2-3. Kala follows upon the track of all creatures. O 
lord, now taking pity on me, please mention how the Kala 
that has come does not deceive. O bestower of happiness, 
please mention it, for the benefit of Yogins. 

Siva said '.— 

4. O Goddess Siva listen. I shall explain briefly what 
I have been asked by you for the benefit of all men. 

5. The body is a conglomeration of earth, water, fire, 
wind and ether. It consists of five elements. 

6. The ether is all-pervasive. The elements merge in 
ether and are reborn therefrom. 

7. When the ether is disintegrated the elements resort 
to their causes. O beautiful woman, there is no stability for 
this conglomeration. 

8. There is no doubt that the wise know all this per¬ 
fectly through the' power of austerity and mantras. 

The goddess said :— 

9. Kfita of terrible fmrm, Ae awful sole lord of the 
gods, perishes while taking them to the Ether^ He was burnt 



UmSsaOihitS 


1561 


by you* When eulogised you were pleased and then you 
revived him to life. 

10. Ktla was addressed by you. ^*In the talk of the 
people you will be moving about in the invisible form.’* He 
of great power was seen by you there. By means of the boon 
granted by you he was reborn. 

11. Hence there is Kala here. Something is killed by 
him. Please mention that to me. You are the foremost 
among Yogins. You are self-controlled lord. O lord l^iva, 
you take up physical bodies for helping others. 

^tva said :— 

12. Kala is not killed by the leading gods, Daityas, 
Yak$as, Rakfasas, serpents and human beings. But those 
embodied beings who are Yogins engrossed in meditation 
can easily kill Kala. 

SanatkumSra said :— 

13. On hearing this from Siva, the preceptor of the 
three worlds, Gauri laughed and said ‘‘Please tell me the truth. 
How is this Kala killed ? By whom is it killed ? Siva 
told her immediately “O moon-faced lady, those who are 
sinless Yogins hurl the serpent Kala entirely. Listen to that 
with concentration.” 

^ioa said :— 

14. O beautiful lady, the physical body consists of 
five elements. It arises from them and merges in them. It is 
always endowed with their attributes. 

15. From the ether the wind is produced. From the 
wind, fire is generated. Water is said to be produced from 
fire and from it the earth comes out. 

16-17. Each of the elements merges into the other in 
order. Earth has five attributes. Water has four. Fire has 
three. Wind has only two. Ether has only one. The 
attributes of the earth and other elements can be mentioned 
thus. 

18. The five attributes are sound, touch, colour, taste 
and smell. When it is relieved of its attributes the element 
perishes. 

19- When it takes up the attributes the element 



1562 

manifests itself. O goddess, know thus all the elements fact¬ 
ually. 

20. Hence O goddess, the partial attributesrfhall be 
thought of by the Yogin as&iduously if he is desirous of 
conquering K51a. 

T/u goddiss said :— 

21. O lord of the knowers of Yoga, how is K&la 
wished to be conquered by the Vogins ? Is it by meditation 
or incantations? Please mention everything to me. 

^iva said :— 

22. O goddess, listen. I shall explain it for the bene¬ 
fit of the Yogins. The perfect knowledge shall not be 
imparted to anyone and everyone. 

23. O fair lady, it is to be imparted to the faithful, to 
the intelligent, to one who is endowed with devotion, to the 
pious who is not an atheist and to oie who is always virtuous. 

24. The knower of Yoga shah practise it taking breath 
normally sitting on a good bed. If he practises in darkness 
he shall not keep any lamp. He shall practise when people 
are asleep. 

25. When the ears are closed with the index finger for 
a short while a kind of sound is heard as that of a blazing 
fire. 

26. The practice of Yoga quells all ailments, fevers 
and many other distressing ills.^* 

27. He who visualises the form of death for two 
Ghatikas conquers death and lust and can roam about as 
he pleases.**’^ 

28-29. He becomes omniscient and omniseer. He 
attains all Siddhis.' If the Yogin hears the sound resembling 
that of the rain-bearing cloud he becomes rid of worldly 
bondage immediately. He then becomes the subtlest of all 
Yogins. 

30. O Goddess^' thus the order and procedure of the 
meditation of Sabdabrahman has been narrated to you. Just 


996. The vrrse does not suit the context. 

997. The Sltt text of the first pida of this verse is defective. 



Umdsa^hUd 


1563 


at the seeker of grains eschews husks, he shall eschew 
bondage. 

31. If after attaining the Sabdabrahman he were to 
aspire for other things he will be hitting the sky with his 
fist, he will be loving hunger and thirst. 

32. After knowing the great Brahman, the cause of 
salvation, the bestower of happiness, the non-external, the 
imperishable, freed from all limitations, nothing else need be 
aspired after. 

33. Sinners of crooked intellect deluded by the noose 
of Kala, fastened into death’s bondage do not realise Sabda- 
brahman. 

34. One remains in the world as long as he has not 
obtained the supreme abode. When the great reality is 
understood he is released from the bondage of life. 

35-36. After conquering sleep and idleness—the great 
enemies and the great obstacles and sitting in a comfortable 
posture one should practise Sabdabrahman for ever. Even if he 
is an old man of hundred years he will gain health and virility 
and the power of stopping the decay of the body and of con¬ 
quering death. He shall then continue the practice as long 
as he is alive. 

37-38. Proof of belief is visible even in an old man. 
Why not then in a youthful man ? O beloved goddess, 

intelligent persons meditate on the great Siva assiduously for¬ 
ever. The Sabdabrahman cannot be uttered, cannot be struck 
at. It is neither Omk5ra nor any mantra nor any Bija nor any 
syllable. 

39. Hence the Sabdas are ninefold as explained by 
those who know the science of breath. I shall explain them 
assiduously in the proper order according to the Siddhi of 
Nada. 

40. They are Gho9a (sound of the soft consonant) 
Kaihsya(sound of bell metal) Srnga (sound of horn) Gha^t^ 
(bell) Vina (lute) Vamlaja (flute) Dundubhi (drum) 
Sankha (conch) and Meghagarjita (the rumbling thunder). 

41. After eschewing all these sounds, one shall practise 
Tumkara ? Meditating thus for ever the Yogin is not affected 
by either virtue or sins. 



1564 


42. O goddess, what others do not hear the Yogin hears 

by the practice of Yoga. While practising, if he dies, he 
may stay in that posture for days and nights. ^ 

43. From him the sound of conquest of death rises up 
in seven days. O goddess, it is of nine varieties. I shall 
mention it factually. 

44. The first sound is Ghosa. It purifies the soul. It 
dispels sickness. It is excellent. It attracts and controls. 

45. The second sound is Kaihsya. It stops the move¬ 
ment of living beings. There is no doubt that it stops the 
effect of poison, evil spirits and evil planets. 

46. The third sound is It is employed in black 

magic for exorcizing enemies and killing them. 

47. The fourth is Ghantanada, so says lord 6iva. It 
is one that attracts the gods even. What then of human beings 
on this earth ? 

48. Attracted by him the virgins of Yak^as and 
Gandharvas give him great Siddhis as desired by him or out 
of their own accord. 

49. Vina is the fifth sound. It is heard by Yogins 
always. O goddess, from it arises the power of vision from 
a great distance. 

50. All principles are understood by one who medit¬ 
ates on Vaih^a Nada. One who meditates on Dundubhi is 
devoid of old age and death. 

51. O goddess, through the conch sound he assumes 
any form as he wishes. By means of Megha Nada the Yogin 
wards off all adversities. 

52-53. O pretty lady, is there anything impossible for 
one who meditates with single-minded devotion the Tumk&ra 
form of Brahman ? He becomes omniscient and visualiser of 
all. He moves about assuming any form he wishes. He is 
not affected by aberrations. He is Siva himself. There is 
no doubt in this. 

54. O goddess, thus the form of Sabdabrahman with 
its nine aspects has been wholly narrated to you. What else 
do yuu wish to hear? 



VmSsaftihUa 


1565 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 

{Escaping death and attainment of Siva) 

The goddess said: — 

1. A Yogin attains the region of wind arising from the 
Yogic Ether. O lord, if you are delighted let me hear from 
you. 

2. Formerly, desirous of the welfare of Yogins I had 
explained everything as to how wind became a symbol for 
the Yogins desirous of conquering Kala. 

3. Knowing the day through that, the Yogin stays 
engaged in Pranayama. O pretty woman, within half a 
month he conquers the Kala that has already come upon 
him. 

4. The wind within the heart kindles the fire. It 
is favourable to the fire. It blows within and without. It 
is all pervasive. It is great and it spreads everywhere. 

5. Knowledge, perfect knowledge, zeal, everything is 
activised by wind. He who has conquered it has conquered 
the universe. 

6. With a desire to prevent old age and death, the 
Yogin engaged in the practice of Yoga, meditation and 
retention shall stay in the state of Dharana. 

7. O sage, the blacksmith blows air into the bellows 
and does his job by means of the wind. The -Yogin shall 
also practise similarly. 

8. The lord of thousands, the lord of thousand eyes, 
hands and feet encompasses the universe and stands ten 
Ahgulas above.2*® 

9. Holding the breath one shall repeat the Gayatri 
Mantra along with his Siras (Oih) and Vyahrtis thrice. 
That is called Pranayama. 

10. Planets like the sun and the moon are evolved 
and dissolved. Bm (hose who are devoted to Yoga and 
meditation do not return still. 

11. O g<iddess, by a single retention of vital airs, a 
brahmin attains the benefit accruing to him by the penance 


X 0*». I 



1566 

performed for a hundred years while sustaining himself on 
the water from the tips of KujSa grass. 

12. The brahmin who gets up at daybreak and 
performs a Pranayama quells his sins and goes to firahma's 
region. 

13. Free from lethargy he who is engaged in PrSna- 
ySma in an isolated place, conquers old age and death, 
masters the vital air and can traverse the sky. 

14. He can assume the form of a Siddha. He gets 
lustre, intelligence, exploits, valour, happiness and the speed 
of the wind. 

15. O goddess, I have thus narrated the Siddhi 
through the wind that the Yogin attains from fire. 

16. The aspirant sits in the comfortable posture in a 
place free from noise. In the middle place he illuminates 
the brilliance accompanied by the lustre of the moon and 
the sun. 

17. The 'Yogin who illuminates the fire existing 
between the eyebrows, alertfully can see in darkness with¬ 
out lamps to be sure. 

18. The Yogin presses the eyes with the fingers a 
little and strives to sec the star and meditate on it for a 
muhurta or half that time with concentration. 

19. Thereafter while meditating in darkness he sees 
the bright lustre of Siva in colours white, red, yellow, black 
and the rainbow colour. 

20. On seeing that brilliance on a par with the rising 
sun stationed in the forehead between the eyebrows, the Yogin 
can assume any form of body he chooses and plays about as 
he wishes. 

21-22. B> rqseated practice the Yogin gains various 
powers—^subduing the senses, entry into other bodies, the 
attainment of eight Siddhis Apima and others, mental vision, 
hearing from far, perfect knowledge, invisibility assuming 
multiibrms, and the ability to walk through the sky. 

23. Persons endowed with Vcdic studies, eiqierts in 
different Sfistras and the perfectly wise too become deluded 
when subservient to the force of the previous Karmans. 



tAhdsafhkita 


1567 


24. They do not sec even when they gaze at it ; even 
while listening they are no better than deaf. Deluded by sins 
they are like blind men in the world. 

25. I know the great Purusa of the colour of the sun 
beyond all darkness. By knowing him alone can one sur¬ 
mount death. There is no other path to go.*** 

26. Thus the excellent mode of Yoga of the fire has 
been explained to you, how the Yogin conquers death and 
attains immoriality. 

27. 1 shall now explain a greater method of Yogic 
practice to ward off death. O goddess, listen with attention 
and concentration. 

28-31. This Yogin, O goddess, forms the fourth one, 
the other three being the Bhutas, the Yogins and the 
meditators. This devotee practising the fourth method sits 
in a comfortable posture in a convenient spot with pure 
mind. He keeps his body straight. His hands are clasped 
together cuplike. He shapes the mouth like a beak and 
drinks in the wind slowly. The water-drops clinging to his 
palate begin to exude. They are life-givers. He inhales 
them through the wind. Drinking this nectarine cool water 
daily he will never be subservient to death. He gels a divine 
body and great brilliance. He becomes free from hunger 
and thirst. 

32. In strength he becomes equal to an elephant ; in 
speed he vies with a horse ; he has the keen sight of Garuda ; 
he can hear from a distance. He has dark curly ringlets 
of hair. His complexion is as fair as that of Gandharvas 
and Vidyadharas. 

33. He lives for a hundred years by the calculation 
of the time of gods. He attains equality with Bfhaspati. 
By practising this Yoga he can traverse in the sky or any 
where he likes. He can always remain happy. 

34. O fair lady, I shall now explain another mode 
which is strenuously guarded even by gods. Please listen 
to it. 

35. The Yogin shall practise curving the tongue to¬ 
wards the palate. After sometime he can carry it to the 
uvula. 

399. Cp VS. 31. 18. 



1568 Swapwr&^a 

36. When touched it begins to exude cool nectar. 
By drinking in this the Yogin attains immortality. 

37. The tip of the tongue touches the tip»of the 
uvula. The hands are clasped in the form of a white lotus. 
Drawn by him the nectar falls drop by drop. When he 
attains the great region he delights even the deities. This 
is the essential substance enabling one to cross the ocean of 
worldly existence, surmount all sins, cross the Kala along 
with the star. He by whom the limbs have been drenched 
with the nectar never dies. He is devoid of hunger and 
thirst. 

38. O daughter of the mountain, the earth possessing 
these four types of Yogins can bestow happiness on the 
entire universe. What a man creates in dream the Yogin 
is competent to create in heaven. This is only a part of what 
the four can do. 

39. Hence the earth united with mantras, penances, 
Vratas, restraints, medicinal herbs and Yogic practice becomes 
lovable to men endowed with humility, polity and sacred 
virtues. The primordial lord of all living beings does not 
become shaken when associating with the four Yogins. I 
shall now explain in accordance with the injunctions the 
Chayapurusa (the shadowy person) who is called iSiva. 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 

The Ch&ydpurufa 

The goddess said :— 

1-2. O great lord of the gods, the way of dodging 
K&la has been narrated ; the form of l§abdabrahman and 
the excellent characteristics of Yoga have been mentioned. 
The reference to the shadow-person has been made by you 
in brief. Please explain in detail with a desire for the 
welfare of Yogins. 



UwiSsariJuUt 1569 

Siva said :— 

3. O goddess, listen. I shall explain the characteri¬ 
stics of the Chayapurusa, on knowing which man becomes 
released from all sins. 

4-5. The aspirant wears garlands and white cloth. He 
makes himself fragrant white scents, incense and other things. 
O fair lady, he then sits with his back to the sun or the 
moon remembering the great mantra that bestows the bene¬ 
fits of all desires and that consists of the nine units 
solidified into one. He then glances at his own shadow. 

6-7. If he can see the shadow in the sky in a white- 
coloured form and begins to meditate on Siva, the great 
cause with single-minded attention, he attains Brahman then. 
This has been mentioned by the experts. In this state he is 
rid of Brahminicide and other sins. 

8. If he finds the shadow-person headless, the entire 
power of oral expression of practising Yogin becomes elimi¬ 
nated within six months. 

9. If the shadow is white, know that it is an indi¬ 
cation of virtue ; if it is black, it indicates sin ; if it is red, 
it indicates bondage and if it is yellow it indicates an enemy. 

10. If the shadow is devoid of arms it indicates death 
or ruin of kinsmen ; if it is without snout it indicates the 
fear of hunger ; if it is devoid of hips, wife dies ; if it is 
devoid of calves it indicates wealth. 

11. If there is no foot, exile to a foreign country 
takes place. This has been mentioned by me. O great 
goddess, this shall be carefully considered by the people. 

12. (Practising still further and) seeing the shadow- 
person perfectly and keeping it within the Atman through 
the Atman, O goddess, the aspirant shall repeat the nine- 
syllabled Mantra in the heart. 

13. If a year passes by there will be nothing that the 
repeater of the mantra cannot achieve. He attains the eight 
Siddhis, Anima and others and the ability to walk through 
the sky. 

14. I shall mention another power which is inscrutable 
but is known to those passessed of perfect knowledge. 

15-16. An unknowable figure in the form of a curling 



1570 


serpent is drawn and that figure placed in the vehicle, 
nowhere msntioned, is 'seen there. That which stands upper¬ 
most in the universe and that which is eulogised by the 
Vedas for ever is sung as a secret Vidya and is the mother of 
all Vidyas. 

17. It is the lore of traversing the sky. It is stationed 
in all living beings. It is visible and invisible. It is immov¬ 
able, eternal, manifest and unmanifest. It is permanent. 

18. It is devoid of colour yet it possesses colour. It is 
called Bindumalini. The Yogin who sees it always remains 
contented. 

19. On seeing Malini one attains the fruit of all sacri¬ 
fices, the benefit of charitable gifts and the ceremonial 
ablutions in all holy centres. 

20-21. There is no doubt in this. I mention the 
truth to you. The man attains the fruit derivable from all 
sacrifices, O goddess, as well as the benefit of making chari¬ 
table gifts and taking the ceremonial ablutions in all the 
holy centres. O goddess, of what avail is speaking much ? 
He attains all cherished desires. 

22. Hence a sensible person shall cultivate this know¬ 
ledge as well as Yoga. Siddhi is attained by practice. Yoga 
is enhanced by practice. 

23. Perfect realization is attained by practice. Libe¬ 
ration is attained by practice. An intelligent man shall 
always maintain practice. Practice is the cause of salvation. 

24. O goddess, I have mentioned that all which 
bestows the benefit’of worldly pleasures and salvation. What 
other tenet do you propose ? Tell me, I shall tell you the 
truth. 

Suta said :— 

25. O great sagu, on hearing these words of Sanat- 
kumara, son of Brahma, the words bestowing the knowledge 
of truth, Vyasa, son of Par5Sara, was much delighted. 

26. Tlie extremely delighted Vy&sa, bowed again smd 
again to the omniscient son of Brahm&, Sanatkumara, the 
storehouse of mercy. 

27. O sages, then the great sage Vyasa, eulogised 



UtnSsaitihitd 1571 

Sanatkumara, the ocean of the perfect knowledge of the 
deities. 

Vydsa said '.— 

28. O great sage, I am satisfied. The position of 
Brahma has been assigned to me. Obeisance be to you. 
You are blessed. You are the most excellent of all knowers 
of Brahman. 

S&ta said :— 

29. After eulogising the great sage the son of Brahma, 
Vyasa, the grandson of Brahma, kept silent. He was extremely 
delighted. He was Ailed with great bliss. 

30. O l^aunaka, Sanatkumara, son of Brahma, took 
leave of him. Worshipped by Vyasa he returned to his 
abode. Vy^a too left for his abode with his mind full 
of delight. 

31. O brahmins, thus I have described to you the 
conversation between Sanatkumara and Vyasa, It deals 
with truth. It is pleasing. It enhances knowledge. 









