








































>:?. * 


i ? 






T 




I 





ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION 8c MYTHOLOGY 


Translated by 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


Edited by 

Dr. G.P. BHATT 


Volume 67 




ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND 
MYTHOLOGY SERIES 

[PURANAS IN TRANSLATION] 


Volumes Released 

SIVA 1-4 
LINGA5-6 
BHAGAVATA7-11 
GARUDA12-14 
NARADA15-19 
KURMA 20-21 
BRAHMANDA 22-26 
AGNI27-30 
VARAHA 31-32 
BRAHMA 33-36 
VAYU 37-38 
PADMA 39-48 

SKANDA, PARTS I-XIX, 49-67 


Volumes Under Preparation 

SKANDA, PARTS XX-XXIV 
BHAVISYA 
BRAH MAVAJVARTA 

devibhAgavata 

kAlikA 

mArkandeya 

MATSYA 

vAmana 

VISNU 

V1SNUDHARMOTTARA 






THE 

skanda-purAna 


Translated and Annotated by 

Dr. G.V. TAGARE 


PART XIX 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 


First Edition: Delhi, 2003 


© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 
All Rights Reserved. 


ISBN: 81-208-1984-5 


Also available at: 

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026 
236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011 
120 Royapeltah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS—Indian Series 
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Scries of the 
UNESCO Collection of Representative Works, jointly sponsored 
by the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) and the Government of India. 


Printed in India 

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRIJAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028 
AND PUBLISHED BYNARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 










PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in the 
depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the 
rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies concealed in the language 
which with the passage of time has become obsolete. Man has 
to learn that language before he discovers that truth. 

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of Ancient 
Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation. Our goal 
is to universalize knowledge through the most popular international 
medium of expression. The publication of the Puranas in English 
Translation is a step towards that goal. 

Acknowledgements 

It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks, to 
Dr. R.N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their kind 
encouragement and valuable help in the publication of the volumes 
in this series. 




S' 






CONTENTS 


PUBLISHER’S NOTE 
ABBREVIATIONS 

skanda-purAna 

Book VII: PRABHASA KHANDA 
Section I: PRABHASA-KSETRA-MAHATMYA 


v 

xi 


Chapters 

1. Queries of Sages 

2. Merit in Gifting Purana Texts 

3. Queries Made by Devi 

4. The Extent of Prabhasa Ksetra 

5. Sages and Devas Residing in Prabhasa Ksetra 

6. Greatness of Somesvara 

7. The Appearance (Origin) of Somanatha 

8. The Glory of Somesvara 

9. The Garland of Skulls and Tattvas 

10. Supreme Excellence of Prabhasa 

11. Origin of Rajabhattaraka 

12. Creation of Yamesvara 

13. Origin of Arkasthala 

14. Creation of Siddhesvara 

15. Origin of Papanasana 

16. Origin of Sunanda and Other Mother Goddesses 

17. Procedure of Worship 

18. The Birth of Moon-God 

19. Incarnations of Sri Visnu 

20. Creation of the Moon 

21. Advice to Propitiate Siva 

22. Soma Gets a Boon 

23. Installation of Somesvara 

24. Importance of SomavaraVrata 

25. Description of Somavara Vrata 

26. Greatness of Gandharvesvara 

27. Greatness of Gandharvasenesvara 


1 

5 

14 

27 

37 

40 

44 

53 

55 

60 

64 

83 

84 
87 
90 
90 
92 

109 

111 

119 

124 

130 

138 

148 

163 

168 

168 


viii 


SkandaPurana 

28. 

Procedure of the Pilgrimage 

169 

29. 

Reason why Sea Water Is not Fit for Drinking 

180 

30. 

Efficacy of the Worship of Somesvara 

187 

31. 

The Origin of the Submarine Fire: Devas Deposit 


Weapons at the Hermitage of Sage Dadhlci 

189 

32. 

Vadavanala Outwitted 

191 

33. 

The Story of Sarasvati 

200 

34. 

The Descent of Sarasvati 

209 

35. 

Greatness of Agni TIrtha 

212 

36. 

Greatness of PracI Sarasvati 

222 

37. 

Importance of Offering a Bracelet 

226 

38. 

Kapardi-Vinayaka 

229 

39. 

Kedaresvara Liiiga 

234 

40. 

Bhlmesvara 

239 

41. 

Bhairavesvara 

240 

42. 

Candlsa 

241 

43. 

Adityesvara 

242 

44. 

Somesvara 

243 

45. 

Arigaresvara 

244 

46. 

Budhesvara 

245 

47. 

Brhaspatlsvara 

245 

48. 

Sukresvara 

246 

49. 

Sanaiscaresvara 

247 

50.. 

Greatness of Rahvlsvara 

253 

51. 

Greatness of Ketvlsvra 

253 

52. 

Greatness of Siddhesvara 

255 

53. 

Greatness of Rapilesvara 

255 

54. 

Greatness of Gandharvesvara 

256 

55. 

Greatness of Vimalesvara 

257 

56. 

Greatness of Dhanadesvara 

257 

57. 

Greatness of Vararoha 

258 

58. 

Greatness of Ajapalesvarl 

260 

59. 

Greatness of AjadevI 

264 

60. 

Greatness of Maiigala 

266 

61. 

Greatness of LalitomavisalaksI 

267 

62. 

Greatness of CatvaradevI 

268 

63. 

Greatness of Bhairavesvara 

269 

64. 

Greatness of Laksmlsvara 

269 

65. 

Greatness of Vadavesvara 

270 

66. 

Greatness of Arghyesvara 

270 




Contents 

ix 

67. 

Greatness of Kamesvara 

271 

68. 

Greatness of Gaurl-Tapovana 

271 

69. 

Greatness of Gaurisvara 

274 

70. 

Greatness of Varunesvara 

275 

71. 

Greatness of Usesvara 

276 

72. 

Greatness ofJalavasaganapati 

276 

73. 

Greatness of Kumaresvara 

277 

74. 

Greatness of Sakalyesvara 

277 

75. 

Greatness of Kalakalesvara 

279 

76. 

Importance of the Pair of Lakullsa Lirigas 

281 

77. 

Greatness of Uttarikesvara 

282 

78. 

Greatness of Vaisvanaresvara 

282 

79. 

Greatness of Lakullsvara 

283 

80. 

Greatness of Gautamesvara 

284 

81. 

Greatness of Sri Daityasudana 

284 

82. 

Origin of Cakratlrtha 

288 

83. 

Greatness of Yogesvarl 

290 

84. 

Greatness of Adinarayana 

295 

85. 

Greatness of Sannihita 

298 

86. 

Greatness of Pandavesvara 

300 

87. 

Greatness of Bhutesvara 

300 

88. 

Greatness of Nllarudra 

302 

89. 

Greatness of Kapallsvara 

303 

90. 

Greatness of Vrsavahanesvara 

304 

91. 

Greatness of Tryambakesvara 

307 

92. 

Greatness of Aghoresvara 

308 

93. 

Greatness of Mahakalesvara 

309 

94. 

Greatness of Bhairavesvara 

310 

95. 

Greatness of Mrtyunjaya 

311 

96. 

Greatness of Kamesvara 

312 

97. 

Greatness of Yogesvara 

314 

98. 

Greatness of Prthvisvara 

315 

99. 

Greatness of Dandapani-Cakradhara 

317 

100. 

Durvasas Curses Samba 

321 

101. 

Greatness of Sambaditya 

323 

102. 

Greatness of KantakasodhinI 

329 

103. 

Greatness of Kapalesvara 

329 

104. 

Greatness of Kotlsvara 

332 

105. 

Greatness of Brahma 

333 

106. 

Glorification of Brahmanas 

339 




SkandaPurana 


107. Procedure of the Worship of Brahma 

108. Greatness of Pratyusesvara 

109. Greatness of Anilesvara 

110. Greatness of Prabhasesvara 

111. Greatness of Ramesvara Ksetra 

112. Greatness of Laksmanesvara 

113. Greatness of Janaklsvara 

114. Greatness of Vamanasvami 

115 Greatness of Puskaresvara 

116. Greatness of Sankhodakakundesvari Gaun 

117. Greatness of Bhutanathesvara 

118. Greatness of Gopyaditya 

119. Greatness of Balatibaladaityaghni 

120. Greatness of Gopisvara 


345 

355 

356 

357 

358 
362 

362 

363 

364 

365 

365 

366 
369 
375 



ABBREVIATIONS 


Common and self-evident abbreviations such as Ch (s)—Chapter(s), 
p—page, pp—pages, v—verse, w—verses, Ftn—Footnote, Hist. Ind. 
Philo.—History of Indian Philosophy are not included in this list. 


AGP 

AIHT 

AITM 

AP 

AV 

Bdp 

BG 

BhP 

Br 

BsP 

BVP 

CC 

CVS 

DB 

De or 

GDAMI 

DhS 

GP 

GS 

1-ID 

JP 

KA 

KP 

LP 


S.M. Ali’s The Geography of Puranas, PPH, New Delhi, 
1973 

Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, F.E. Pargiter, Motilal 
Banarsidass (MLBD), Delhi 

Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series, MLBD, 
Delhi 

AgniPurana, GuruMandalEdition (GM),Calcutta, 1957 
Alharva Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh 
Brahmanda Parana, MLBD, Delhi, 1973 
Bhagavadgita 

Bhagavata Parana, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad 

Bralimana (preceded by name such as Satapatha) 

Bhavisya Purdna, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai 

Brahma Vaivarta Purdna, GM, 1955-57 

Caturvarga Cintamani by Hemadri 

Carana Vyuha Sutra by Saunaka, Com. by Mahldasa 

Devi Bhagavata, GM, 1960-61 

The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Medieval 

India, N.L. De/Dey, Oriental Reprint, Delhi, 1971 

Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author's name such as 

Gautama) 

Garuda Purdna, ed. R.S. Bhattacharya, Chowkhamba, 
Varanasi, 1964 

Grhya Sutra (preceded by the name of the author such 
as Apastamba) 

History of Dharma Sdstra, P.V. Kane, G.O.S. 

Purdna (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust), Varanasi 
Kautilya Arthasastra 

Kurma Purdna, Venkatesvara Press Edn., Bombay; also 

Kashiraj Trust Edn., Varanasi, 1971 

Lihga Purdna, GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi, 1981 


SkandaPurana 


xu 


Manu 

Mbh 

MkP 

MN 

MtP 

MW 

NP 

PdP 

PE 

PR or 

PRHRC 

£V 

Sat Br 

SC or SMC 

SkP 

SP 

VaP 

VR 

VdP 

VmP 

VP 

VrP 


Manusmrti 

Mahdbhdrata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, VS 2014 

Marhandeya Purana _ 

Mahdbhdrata Ndmanukramani, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, 

VS 2016 


Matsya Purana, GM, 1954 ... dh 

M. Monier-Williams’ Sanskrit-English Dictionary, MLBD 


Delhi, 1976 , _ _ 

Naradlya or Narada Purana, Venkatesvara Press, Bom¬ 
bay 

Padma Parana, GM, 1957-59 

Puranic Encyclopaedia, V. Mani, English Version, MLBD, 


Delhi, 1975 

Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, 

R.C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948 

Rg Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh 

Satapatha Brahmana 

Smrti Candrikd by Devanna Bhatta 


Skanda Purana 
Siva Purana 
Vayu Purana 
Valmiki Ramayana 
Visnudharmottara Purana 
Vamana Purana 
Visnu Purana 
Varaha Purana 


SKANDA PURANA 
Book VII: PRABHASA KHANDA * 1 
Section I: PRABHASA-KSETRA-MAHATMYA 


CHAPTER ONE 
Queries of Sages 
Obeisance to Sri Ganesa 

Now begins the Prabhasa Khanda. The first section is called: 

PRABHASA-KSETRA-MAHATMYA (The greatness of the sacred 
place called Prabhasa) 

Om. Obeisance to the Supreme Soul (Paramatman), the 
highest and the most excellent Purusa. 

Om. Obeisance to the gods Hari, Hara and Hiranyagarbha 
(Brahma). 

Obeisance to (Sages) Vyasa, Valmlki, Suka and Parasara. 

1. The Lord (Siva) is proclaimed and eulogized everywhere, 
the primordial PURUSA and the eternal ancient being. The 
devotees of Siva by whom the Lord of Uma, accompanied by 
Suras has been viewed on the earth by their own eyes, cross 


1. This last Khanda of the Skanda Purana (SkP) called Prabhasa consists of 
four sections: 

(i) Prabhasa-Ksetra-Mahatmya of 365 chapters 

(ii) Vastrapatha-Ksetra-Mahatmya of 19 chapters 

(iii) Arbuda-Khanda of 63 chapters 

(iv) Dvaraka-Mahatmya of 44 chapters 

Prabhasa is famous on two counts: 

(i) It is the sacred place famous for the Jyotirliriga called Somanatha. 

(ii) It was the scene of the fratricidal battle among Yadavas and the spot 
of Krsna’s death which took place here in B.C. 3102 according to the 
consensus of Brahmanical Puranas. The advent of Kali took place 
on that very day when Krsna passed away (BhP XII. 2. 33) Also vide 
VaP 49.428-429: MtP 273.49, Visnu P.III. 74.241. Hindu calendars- 
(Pahcahgas) give this date as the Yugadi (beginning of Kaliyuga). 




2 


Shanda Purdna 


the extensive terrible ocean of worldly existence and become 
embellished with prosperity just as Yajvans (performers of sacrifices) 
proceed to heaven (Svarga) through excellent aerial chanots 
on account of those well-performed Yajnas. 

2. Obeisance to the Supreme Being, the embodiment of 
pure consciousness and knowledge. His body is constituted of 
thirty-six categories' (from Parama Siva down to the element 
earth). His soul is (consists of) pure, immortal nectan He is 
the expanding Nada (vibrating spiritual sound) and Binduj. 

3. Despite the presence of Amrta within the belly, all t e 
Devas die. But despite the presence of poison (Halahala) in 
his throat, Lord Siva continued to be alive. May that Lord Siva 

protect you all. . 

4. At the conclusion of the Satra (Sacrifice of a long du¬ 
ration) the great sages of Naimisa forest asked the blemish-free 
Suta Romaharsana about the meritorious Purana Samhita: 

5 “O highly intelligent Suta, holy Lord Vyasa, the foie- 
most among the knowers of Brahman, has been perfectly served 
and propitiated by you for the sake of acquiring the Ilihasa 
and the Puranas. 

6. Due to the exalted majesty and dignity of Dvaipayana, 
and on account of his words all your hairs stood on ends through 
delight and you became known as Romaharsana. 

7. It was to you that the Lord of the sages himself pro¬ 
pounded the ancient legend, the Puranasamhita. 

8. When the Yajna pertaining to Svayambhu (Brahma) was 
being elaborately performed, on the Sulyaha(the day when Soma 
Juice is extracted), Hari, the Supreme person manifested him¬ 
self by a part of himself in your form, for propounding the 
Puranasamhita. 


1. According to Saivism there arc 36 Tattvas, viz. Siva, Sakti, Sadasiva, Isvara, 
Suddha Vidya, Maya, Kala. Vidya, Raga, Kala, Niyati, Purusa, Prakni, Buddhi 
(Intelligence), Ahamkara (Ego), Manas (Mind), ears (power of hearing), 
also powers of touch, of taste, of vision, of smelling, of speech, feet 
(power of locomotion), hands, anus, penis, five objects of senses and five 
elements, viz. earth, water, fire, wind and ether or firmament. 

The order varies with different texts. Vaisnavism has accepted a simi¬ 
lar list of 35 Tattvas. It is noteworthy that both -isms have accepted the 
Tattvas of the Sankhya system in toto. 

2. According to Saivism it is not the Big Bang which created the world. They 
say a subtle vibrating sound (Nada) manifested a Bindu which expanded 
into this universe. 






VII.1.1.9-18 


3 


r -7u hC ® rahmi ( re Iigious pilgrimage pertaining to 
Brahma) has already been heard by us, in the context ofPrabhLa- 
Ksetra-Mahatmya (the greatness of the sacred place called 
Prabhasa ) in the Purana propounded by Skanda. 

10. Now, O holy Sir, O Purana specialist, it behoves you 

to expound the Yatra pertaining to Visnu and Rudra along 
with all the themes thereof." S 

11. On hearing the words of the sages, Suta, the most 
excellent one among those conversant with Puranas,-bowed 
down his head to Vyasa, the son of Satyavatl and said: 


Romaharsana said: 

12-16. After bowing down to the Supreme Soul, the 

mighty Lord, I shall propound the story with two Vidhas 
(modes of narration) and two Sariras (bodies, i.e. units). Srivatsa 
marks his chest. He is the source of origin of the worlds. He 
is I-Iari with OM as his form. He is incomprehensible and 
unmeasurable. He is the Lord-preceptor. He is free from impurities 
I-Iis resort is free from impurities. He is Harhsa (pure spiritual 
being), Sucisad (abiding in the purest essence). He pervades 
the entire firmament. He is Siva, the bestower of all things, 
Udasina (indifferent), free from worldly ties and physical ex¬ 
tension. He is unsullied. He is the vacuity ( Sunya). He is of 
the form of Bindu (point whence the universe evolves). He is 
worthy of being meditated upon. He is one without (beyond) 
meditation. They say that he is and he is not, that he is far- 
off and also very close. He is the greatest refulgence worthy 
of being comprehended through the mind. He is called Purusa 
who is identical with Jagat (Universe). He is seated in the lotus 
of the heart. He is in the form of fiery splendour. He is devoid 
of Indriyas (sense-organs). 

17. The story is couched in the celestial language. It has 
the Veda for its basis. It has five Sandhis (divisions, joints such 
as Mukha, Pratimukha etc.). It is embellished with six orna¬ 
ments (figures of speech). 

18. It possesses seven Sadhanas (means of achieving objec¬ 
tives). It is coloured (brightened) with the eight Rasas and 


1. Tljis Probably refers to some other Purana like Narada. 




4 


Skcinda Purana 


Qunus. Further, the nine Gunas can be seen spread over throughout. 

It is free from ten defects. . . c . . 

19. It is embellished with Vibhasas (alternatives). Simi¬ 
larly it is completely converging into a single purpose It is 
pleasing to the mind. It has the five Karanas purposes). It is 
approved by the four Karanas (means of achieving objects). 

20. It is further divided into two aspects. It bestows suc¬ 
cessive waves of knowledge (consciousness). Listen ye all to the 
meritorious story narrated by Vyasa. It is destructive of all sins. 

21 On hearing it even a man of evil actions attains the 
greatest goal. He will be relieved of the three types of miseries. 

He shall be freed from all distressing worries.. 

22. Never should one narrate this meritorious story to a 
Ndslika (atheist). It should be propounded to a twice-born one 


who is quiescent and faithful. 

23. It should be known that only he is entitled to heai (or 
read) this scripture and none else, for whom the consecratory 
rites beginning with Niseka (impregnation by dropping the semen 
within the womb) and ending with obsequial rites at the cre¬ 
mation ground, are enjoined with relevant Mantras 

24. The purity of a Brahmana is the purity in all the tour 
sides (his father and mother, wife's father and mother). To 
this scripture approved by the Vedas, all men of good conduct 

are entitled. . 

25-26. Just as Mahesvara, the Lord of Devas, is the most 

excellent one among Suras, just as Ganga is the greatest of all 
rivers, just as Brahmana is the greatest of all castes, just as 
Orhkara is the foremost among all Aksaras (syllables), just as 
mother is the greatest among those worthy of adoration, just 
as father is the greatest (most respectable) of all elders, so also 
the Purana narrated by Skanda is the most important of all 
scriptural texts. 

27. ' The Skanda Purana was formerly narrated by the Pmaka- 
bearing Lord (Siva) in front of Parvatl, in the presence of 
Brahma and others on a peak of Kailasa. 

28. It was then narrated by Parvatl to Sanmukha (Skanda), 
by him to the Gana Nandin and to Kumara by Nandin and by 
him to the intelligent Vyasa. 


1. Verses 27-29 relate the transmission of this Purana from Siva to Romaharsana, 
the Suta. 



VII.I.l.29-30—2.1-7 


5 


29. It was narrated to me by Vyasa and I shall propound 
it to you all. 

30. You are all endowed with good mental attitude. You 
are all great sages. Hence I am sincerely eager to propound 
the Skanda Samhita to you. 


CHAPTER TWO 

Merit in Gifting Purana Texts' 

The sages said: 

1. Describe the characteristic features of Katha (story) and 
its good merits and demerits in detail. How should one assess 
the disticnctive characteristics of.the composition of sages and 
those of ordinary persons? How should it be understood, O 
highly intelligent one? We wish to hear. 

Siita said : 

2. Now I shall succinctly describe the due order of the 
Puranas, their characteristic features, number and the differ¬ 
ences mentioned. 

3. Formerly the Grandfather of Amaras (Devas) performed 
a severe penance. Then the Vedas along with the six Arigas, 
Padas (words) and Kramas (special manners in the recitation 
of Vedic passages) manifested themselves. 

4-5a. Then the entire range of the Puranas containing all 
the sacred texts and extending to a hundred crores (of verses) 
manifested themselves. The Purana constituted of eternal sounds 
and words is meritorious. They (the Puranas) came out of the 
mouth of Brahma. 

5b-7. 1 2 They are: (1) Brahmapurana, (2) Visnu Purana, 


1. This religious incentive to gift Purana manuscripts has resulted in the 
preservation and spread of these ancient texts. 

2. This list of Mahapuranas includes both Siva and Vayu Puranas which are 
otherwise disjunctively mentioned. The inclusion of both led to the exclusion 
of Padma Purana which is always included as a Mahapurana elsewhere. 




6 


Skanda Purana 


(3) Siva Purana, (4) Bhagavata Purana, (5) Bhavisya Purana, 
(6) Naradiya Purana, (7) Markandeya Purana, (8) Agneya Purana, 
(9) Brahmavaivarta Purana, (10) Linga Purana, (11) Varaha 
Purana, (12) Skanda Purana, (13) Vamana Purana, (14) Kurma 
Purana, (15) Matsya Purana, (16) Garuda Purana, (17) Vayavlya 
Purana, and then (Padma Purana) is called the eighteenth 
Purana that is destructive of all sins. 

8-9. Formerly there was only one Brahmanda (PPurana) 
consisting of a hundred crores (of verses). In every Yuga, Vedavyasa, 
the direct partial incarnation of Narayana, divides it into eigh¬ 
teen Puranas and propounds it to the world. 

10. Others, Upapuranas 1 2 , also were narrated by that sage. 

I shall mention them briefly to you. May they be listened to 
and understood. 

[List of Upapuranas] 

11-15. The first one is that narrated by Sanatkumdra. Thereafter 
is the Narasirhha. The third one is indicated as Skanda (or 
Nanda) which is recounted by Kumara (Skanda). The fourth 
one is called Sivadharma directly proclaimed by Nandisa. Then 
the wonderful one narrated by Durvasas. Thereafter what is 
narrated by Narada . Then Kapila a’nd Manava. Then what is 
narrated by Usanas. Then Brahmanda The next one is Varuna. 
Then the other one called Kalilid. Then Mahesvara, Samba-a nd 
Saura having the collection of all topics. What is narrated by 
Parasara is great. Then Marica. Then what is called Bhargava. 
These are the Upapuranas mentioned, O excellent Brahmanas. 

The sages said: 

16. O Suta, kindly mention the number of the Puranas in 
detail and due order, O Suta, O knower of distinct features of 
Dana and Dharma. 

1. Traditionally 18 Upapuranas arc mentioned and their relation with a 
particular Mahapurana is (many times wrongly) presumed. The lists of 
Upapuranas in Dcvlbhagavata, Kurma Purana etc. differ inter se. Hazra 
records a list of 100 Upapuranas (Studies in Upapuranas). Some Mahapuriinas 
e.g. Matsya (53.59-62,) mention Upapuranas like Narasirhha, Nandi, Aditya 
and Samba. Some Upapuranas have.the same names as the Mahiipuranas 
as found in the list here in this text. 

It is a complex problem as many of the Upapuranas arc unpublished. 

2. This is different from the Mahapurana called Brahmanda. 





VII.I.2.17-27 


7 


Suta said : 

17. That immanent soul of the universe narrated to Manu 
this alone. The ancient Purusa mentioned this in this Purana. 
Understand what he said: 

18. Brahmanda Purana is the most ancient of all scriptural 
texts. Thereafter the Vedas came out of his mouth. 

19. There was only one Purana in that Kalpantara. It was 
the means of achieving the three aims (i.e. Virtue, Wealth and 
Love). It is meritorious and extended to a hundred crore (of 
verses). 

20-23. When all the worlds were completely burned, at the 
time of Pralaya, Krsna, in the form of the infinite one, col¬ 
lected together the four Vedas along with their Aiigas, the 
Puranas, the detailed texts of Nyaya, MImamsas and Dharmasastra 
and retained them within himself. At the beginning of the 
next Kalpa, he, assuming the form of a fish in the vast ocean, 
told the entire tract of lores to Brahma, endowed with divine 
vision. Brahma endowed with the knowledge and vision of the 
three divisions of time (past, present and future) narrated it 
to all sages. Thereafter, all the scriptures and Puranas became 
current. 

24. Then in due course, Hari in the form of Vyasa, will 
summarize and propagate the eighteen Puranas. 

25. Always in every Dvapara Yuga, the Puranas extended to 
four hundred thousand (verses). Krsna expounds them in eighteen 
different forms (texts) on the earth. 

26. Even today, in the celestial world, it extends to a hun¬ 
dred crores (of verses). The essence thereof is summarized 
into four hundred thousand (verses) (in this world). 

[Mahapuranas: Extent , Contents] 

27. Now these are the eighteen Puranas, O excellent sages. 
I shall mention their names and the number (of verses) 1 too. 


1. P.V. Kane in HD,V.ii. pp.831-832 gives a comparative Table of number 
of verses in each Purana as stated in Mahapuranas.The tabular statement 
shows that there is no consensus in this matter.Thus according to MtP 
and VaP and SkP here Brahma Purana has 10,000 verses, also according 
to Narada P. 92.31, Agni P. 272.1 gives 25,000 as the number of verses 
in Brahma P. Presumably the authors of these Puranas had different 
versions of Brahma P. before them. 





8 


Slianda Purana 


28. The entire thing mentioned earlier to Marici by Brahma 
is called Brahma Purana. It contains ten thousand (verses). 

29. He who copies it in writing and makes a gift of it along 
with Jaladhenu on the Full-Moon day in the month of Vaisakha 
is honoured in the world of Brahma. 

30. When this universe was a golden lotus, the incidents 
therein were collected together and that Purana is called Padvia 
Purana by learned men. 

31. The Padma Purana contains fifty-five thousand verses. 
He who makes a gift of it along with a golden lotus and gingelly 
seeds in the month of Jyestha, obtains the merit of a horse- 
sacrifice. 

32. Based on the incidents of the Varahakalpa', the Lord, 
greater than the greatest, recounted all the virtues and holy 
rites. They know that Purana as Vaisnava (Visnu) Purana. 

33. This Purana is beautified through the activities of Visnu. 
This is proclaimed as the Purana consisting of twenty-three 
thousand verses. 

34. He who makes a gift of it along with Glirtadhenu on the 
bright full-moon day in Asadha attains the region off Visnu. 

35. Vayu recounted the holy rites and virtues in lihe con¬ 
text of Srutakalpa as the background. This Purana is Vayavlya 
Purana. It contains Rudramdhatmya also. 

36. It consists of twenty-four thousand verses and many 
events are recounted in it. Virtue, wealth, love and salvation 
are dealt with along with the good conduct of the well- 
behaved. 

37. He who makes a gift of it on the Full-Moon day in the 
month of Sravana along with Guiladhenu and curd to a Brahmana 
burdened with a large family, shall become a purified soul and 
he will live in Sivaloka for the period of a Kalpa. 

38. He is reborn as a man once again. He will be a Brahmana, 
the most excellent one among those conversant with the Vedas. 
He will be an expert in the Vedic lore and the principles and 


1. This Purana indicates that different Mahapuranas describe events that 
took place in different Kalpas. Thus Vaisnava or Visnu Purana refers to 
Varaha Kalpa, Vayu P. to Sruta Kalpa, Bhdgavata P. to Sarasvata Kalpa. 



VII.I.2.39-48 


9 


meanings thereof and be the foremost among scholars of the 
themes and principles of writing glosses. 

39. That Purana is called Bhagavata where Dharma is de¬ 
scribed on the basis of Gayatrl. 1 The killing of the demon Vrtra 
is also contained in it. 

40. It also contains the events about men and Deva$ who 
live in the Sarasvata Kalpa. It is holy and there is meritorious 
description of marriages too. 

41. He who copies it and makes a gift of it on the Full- 
Moon day in the month of Bhadrapada along with a gold replica 
of a lion attains the greatest gpal. 

42. It is glorified as a Purana containing eighteen thou¬ 
sand verses. 

43. That is Naradtya Purana in which Narada expounds 
Dharma as current in Brhatkalpa. It consists of twenty-five thousand 
verses. 

44. 1-Ie who copies it and makes a gift of it on the Full- 
Moon day in the month of Asvina along with a cow attains the 
highest Siddhi in this world and in the next. He obtains all his 
cherished desires. No doubt need be entertained in this 
respect. 

45. That which contains discussion about Dharma and 
Adharma with reference to (and in consultation with) birds 2 
is called the Markandeya Purana. It contains nine thousand 
verses. 

46. He who copies it and makes a gift of it along with a 
gold replica of an elephant on the full-moon day of the month 
of Karttika, attains the merit of the Paundarlka Yajna. 

47. What is narrated to Vasistha by Agni taking into 
account (and with reference to) the events of Isanakalpa 
is called Agneya Purana. 

48. He who copeis it and makes a gift of it along with a 
golden lotus and Tiladhenu (cow made of gingelly seeds) in the 


1. Ii appears that the author of this Purana has not seen or read the Bhagavata 
P. or had a very different version containing no reference to Krsna's 
lifc.The ruse of claiming Sarasvata Kalpa for such glaring differences 
comes in handy to the author. 

2. This reference to birds is given in the Narada Purana which also gives 
the list of contents of this Purana. 




10 


Shanda Parana 


month of Margasirsa in accordance with the injunctions, 
obtains the merit of all Kralus. It (the Purana) contains six¬ 
teen thousand verses. 

49-50. In the context of the events of Aghorakalpa, the 
Four-faced Lord of the universe explained to Manu the char¬ 
acteristics of all the Bhutas (living beings, elements, spirits) on 
the basis of the greatness of Aditya. It is called Bhavisya Parana 
because mostly future events are described. It contains four¬ 
teen thousand five hundred verses. 

51. He who is free from jealousy and makes a gift of the 
Purana on the full-moon day in the month of Pausa along with 
a pot of jaggery, shall obtain the merit of Agnistoma. 

52-53. With reference to the events of the Rathantara Ivalpa, 
the story of Brahma-Varaha along with the greatness of Krsna 
was narrated by Savarni to Narada. It is called Brahmavaivarta 
Purana. It contains eighteen thousand verses. He who makes 
a gift of Brahmavaivarta Purana to an excellent Brahmana on 
the full-moon day in the month of Magha, is honoured in the 
world of Brahma. 

54-55. Lord Mahesvara staying in the middle of a. fiery 
Lihga expounds (the Purusarthas) Virtue, Wealth, Love and 
Salvation in the context of Agneya Kalpa. It is called Lihga 
Purana by Brahma himself. 

56. It contains eleven thousand verses. Fie who makes a 
gift of it on the full-moon day in the month of Phalguna along 
with Tiladhenu attains identity with Siva. 

57. With reference to the greatness of Mahavaraha Visnu 
expounds (virtue etc.) to the Earth. It is called Varaliapurana. 

58. O excellent sages, it is in the context of Dhanya (a 
blessed one), the son of Manu. That Purana contains twenty- 
five thousand verses. 

59. A devotee should make a gold replica of Garuda and 
give it along with Tiladhenu to a Brahmana of a large family. 
He attains the region of Visnu with the favour of Varaha. 

60-61. It is with reference to the religious practices of (the 
followers) of Mahesvara and with special reference to the Six¬ 
faced Lord. It describes in details the events which happened 
in Tatpurusa Kalpa. That Purana called Skanda is said to con¬ 
sist of eighty-one thousand one hundred verses. It is thus recited 
among mortals (people). 



VII.1.2.62-75 


11 


62. He who copies it and makes a gift of it along with a 
trident made of gold when the Sun enters Capricorn, attains 
the region of Siva. 

63. With reference to the greatness of Trivikrama as the 
basis, the Four-faced Lord expounds the three aims of life. It 
is glorified as Vamana Purdna. 

64. This Purana contains ten thousand verses. It is a Saiva 
Purana consisting of (the events of) Kaurmakalpa. 

65. He who makes a gift of it on the autumnal equinox 
along with gold and garments, covered with a silk 'cloth and 
accompanied by a cow, attains the region of Visnu. 

66-68. In Rasatala, in the presence of Indra and sages, 
Janardana, in the form of a Tortoise expounded the greatness 
of (the Purusarthas, viz.) Virtue, Wealth, Love and Liberation, 
in the Laksmikalpa in the context of the interlude of Indradyumna. 
It ( Kurma Purdna) consists of seventeen thousand verses. He 
who makes the gift of the Kurma Purdna along with a gold 
replica of tortoise, shall obtain the merit of gifting a thousandcows. 

69-70. For the propagation of the Vedas at the beginning 
of a Kalpa, Janardana assumed the form of a Fish and ex¬ 
pounded to Manu the events of seven Kalpas in the course of 
the description of Narasirhha. O sage of holy rites, know this 
as the Matsya Purdna. It contains fourteen thousand verses. 

71. If anyone makes the gift (of this Purdna) covered with 
a silk cloth on the day of equinox along with a gold replica 
of a Fish and a cow, it is as though the entire earth has'been 
gifted by him. 

72. In Garuda Kalpa, Garuda came out of Visvanda (Cos¬ 
mic Egg). Krsna expounded this Purana on that as the basis. 
It is called Garuda Purdna. 

73. It is recited in (i.e. consists of) nineteen thousand verses. 
He who makes a gift of it along with a gold replica of a swan 
in the latter Ayana (i.e. Southern transit) [If pare is taken to 
mean “the great”, then the Ayana will be the Northern] one 
achieves the principal Siddhi and a stay in Siva Loka. 

74. Brahma again expounded the greatness of the Cosmic 
Egg. That is Brahmanda Purdna containing twelve thousand two 
hundred verses. 

75. A detailed description of the future Kalpas is found 
therein. That Brahmanda Purana is narrated by Brahma. 



12 


Skanda Purana 


76-77a. A man who makes the gift of that Purana along 
with two woollen cloths, attains the merit of a thousand Rajasuyas. 
If the gift is accompanied by a gold replica of a cow, it bestows 
the region of Brahma. 

77b-78. Thus (the whole range of Puranas) was spoken by 
Vyasa of miraculous deeds in four hundred thousand verses 
briefly in Dvapara, O Brahmanas, for the sake of the benefit 
of all the worlds. 

79. The same tract of literature called Purana among the 
celestial beings extends to a hundred crores. 

[Upapuranas: Extent and Contents] 

Now I shall narrate the different Upapuranas that have been 
established in the world. 

80. The description of Narasirhha has been included in 
Padma Purana. It contains eighteen thousand verses. It is called 
Ndrasimha (Upa) Purana. 

81. (The text) wherein the greatness (of the Lord) has 
been described by Karttikeya to Nandin has become well-known 
in the world as Nandi Purana, O excellent Brahmanas. 

82. O Brahmanas of holy Vratas, that Upapurana of Samba 
is famous in the world and the story therein pertains to Samba. 

83. Thus the Aditya Upapurana is mentioned there itself. 
It is seen as separate from the eighteen Upapuranas, O excel¬ 
lent Brahmanas, know that it has been taken out of these. 

84. There are five Ahgas (limbs or sections) of the Purana. 
They are: Sarga (creation), Pratisarga (subsidiary creation), Vamsa 
(the royal lineage), Manvantaras (the periods of the rule of 
Manus), Vamsanuvaihsa Carita (the description of the dynasties 
of Sages etc.). Thus a Purana has five characteristics. 

85. Another interpretation : the five characteristics are the 
description of the greatness of Brahma, Visnu, Arka (the Sun 
god) and Rudra and the annihilation of the universe. All these 
five are seen in a Purana. 

86. In all the Puranas virtue, wealth, love and salvation as 
well as the benefit contained in them have been explained. 

87. In the Sattvika Kalpas the greatness of Hari is supreme. 
They know that the greatness of Brahma reigns supreme in the 
Rajasa Kalpas. 

88. Similarly the greatness of Siva is to be found in the 





VII.1.2.89-101 


13 


Tamasa Kalpas. In a Purana of a mixed nature, the greatness 
of Sarasvatl and Pitrs is narrated. 

89. Among the eighteen Puranas, Lord Visnu is extolled in 
four (Puranas), Brahma and Ravi each in two and Lord Siva 
in the remaining ones. 

90. O excellent Brahmanas, I think that Purana is steady 
(unchangeable) like the Vedas. All the Vedas are established 
in the Puranas. There is no doubt about it. 

91. The Veda is afraid of the men of insufficient knowl¬ 
edge of the lore and feels: “Oh! This man will move and dis¬ 
lodge me.” It (Veda) has been rendered firm and steady for¬ 
merly by means of Itihasas and Puranas. 

92. What is not seen in the Vedas, O Brahmanas, what is 
not seen in the Smrtis and what is not seen in both of them 
is being sung about in the Puranas. 

93. A Brahmana who knows all the four Vedas along with 
their Angas and the Upanisads, but who does not know the 
Purana is not learned. 

94. After composing the eighteen Puranas, the son of SatyavatT 
(Vyasa) wrote the narrative (epic) of Bharata rendering it 
strengthened through the topics of the Vedas. 

95-97. It was propounded by the noble soul by means a 
hundred thousand verses at the end of Dvapara. 

Brahma composed the story of Rama in a hundred crores 
of verses. He spoke (transmitted) it unto Narada and through 
him to Valmiki and Valmiki narrated the excellent story of 
Rama that enables one to achieve virtue, wealth and love in 
this world in one-fourth of a Laksa of verses i.e. in twenty- five 
thousand verses. 

98. Thus these twenty-five thousand verses are glorified as 
meritorious. Learned men understood everything about the 
ancient Kalpas from the Purana. 

99-100. In accordance with the demands of the age (Kala) 
the Itihasas and Puranas differ, O leading Brahmanas. Differ¬ 
ent versions of the Puranas, Skanda, Brahmanda and Linga are 
current in the Varaha Kalpa. Indeed Brahmanda is different 
in eighteen ways. 

101. Therefore, the Puranas came to be eighteen in the 
world. The splendid Linga Purana was divided into eleven different 
sections in Dvapara. 


14 


Skanda Purdna 


[Khandas of the Skanda Purdna] 

102. The intelligent Vedavyasa has divided the Skanda Purdna 
into seven Khandas. The number of verses in the Skanda is 
eighty-one thousand one hundred. 

103. The first Book or Khanda is called Mahesvara Khanda. 
It contains the greatness of Skanda. The second one is remem¬ 
bered as Vaistiava Khanda. 

104. The third one is mentioned as Brahma Khanda. It 
briefly expounds the creation (of the universe). The fourth 
one is cited as one containing the greatness of Kasi ( Kasi Khanda). 

105. The fifth one is glorified as describing the greatness 
of Reva along with that of Ujjayini. The sixth one is Ndgara 
Kalpa (Khanda). It indicates the greatness of the Tirthas. 

106. O Brahmanas, this seventh book is remembered as 
Prdbhasika (Khanda). Each of these Books is glorified as con¬ 
taining twelve thousand verses (approximately). 

107. In this Prdbhasika Khanda all the details of holy spots, 
greatness of the Tirthas and greatness of Sankara are explained. 

108. Of course the greatness of the other Dcvas too is 
mentioned. 

Thus, O Brahmanas, the different Puranas are succinctly 
told. 

109. One who reads this enumeration of the eighteen Puranas 
at the time of the offering of Havyas and Kavyas goes to the 
abode of Hari. 

110. This is indeed the storehouse of renown. This is a 
favourite of the Pitrs. This gives satisfaction to the Devas 
always, like nectar. This destroys great sins of men. 


CHAPTER THREE 

Queries Made by Devi 


The sages said: 

1-3. The regular creation and the counter-creation (or 
subsidiary creation) have been mentioned by Your Holiness. 
So also the story of the main dynasties and races (of sages) 
(Genealogies of kings and sages), the order or sequence of the 


VII.I.3.4-15 


15 


Puranas, the extent of Manvantaras, the magnitude of the cosmic 
egg and the nature of the circle of the luminaries have been 
described factually. 

Now we wish to hear from you the details of the Tirthas. O 
Sutaja, It behoves you to describe entirely and factually all the 
auspicious and evil-destroying Tirthas on the earth. 


Sul a said: 


4-5. This same question was formerly asked by the God¬ 
dess on the excellent peak of Kailasa that possesses different 
kinds of gems. It is variegated due to various kinds of minerals. 
It is full of all types of trees and creepers. It shines with all 
sorts of flowers. Yaksas, Vidyadharas and groups of celestial 
damsels frequent it. 

6-9. There were present there the following: Brahma, Visnu, 
Skanda, Nandin, the leading Ganas, the Moon, the Sun along 
with the Planets, the Galaxies of Stars, the group of Stars round 
the Pole-star, Vayu, Varuna, Kubera the bestower of wealth, 
Tsana, Agni, Indra, Yama, Nirrti, the Rivers, all the Oceans, 
Mountains, Serpents, Brahml and other Mothers, sages, ascet¬ 
ics, the Tirthas in their personified forms, the holy places and 
shrines as well as Danavas, Asuras, Daityas, Pisacas, Bhutas (evil 
spirits) and Raksasas. 

10. There was a divine throne there, a hundred Yojanas (a 
Yojana=12 Kms) in extent. Its refulgence was like that of ten 
million Suns. It was adorned with jewels and pearls. 

11. It was decorated with lotuses and lilies. It was resorted 


to by Siddhas and Kinnaras. By means of millions of its white 
umbrellas, it covered up all the regions and quarters. 

12. In the center thereof, there was a Satvalobhadva (temple¬ 
like structure with doors on all sides) with ornamental gates. 
It was surrounded by thousands, ten thousands, hundred thou¬ 
sands and millions of Rudras. 

13. It was covered with peaks and ramparts shining with 
crystal-clear pearls. There were sentries like Nandlsvara, Mahakala 

and others. , . 

14 It was adorned with excellent banners producing ieso- 

nant sounds with tiny tinkling bells. There were awnings and 
pieces of umbrella-like stretches with pearl strings hanging down 

15 Its beauty was enhanced by means of mirrors having 


16 


Skanda Puranci 


the lustre of hanging bells and chowries. Big pots had been 
placed at the entrances and were decorated with tender sprouts 
and jewels. 

16. Experts in the science of ornamental decorations had 
embellished it with shining powders of jewels. There were Svastika- 
shaped fittings embellished with creeper-like designs above the 
Linga-like fittings. 

17. In the assembly hall there were hundreds of thrones 
and refulgent altars. Groups of Rudras and Rudra-girls were 
seated there. 

18. It was adorned with white lotuses with hundred thou¬ 
sands of petals. Flowers had been scattered all round and the 
Apsaras had occupied all those places. 

19-20. Saffron waters were sprinkled. The place was fumi¬ 
gated with incense sticks. The entire area resounded with the 
sounds of the notes of flutes, lutes, Gomukhas and Mrdanga 
drums, mouth organs, the sounds of conchs and Bherl drums, 
Dundubhi (war drums) etc. The roaring groups of Ganas filled 
the place (as if) with the sounds of rumbling clouds. 

21. There was the sound of the prayers of the Ganas along 
with chanting of Saman. They were handsome to look at and 
their voice was at its highest pitch. Now and then, gruff sounds 
came out of them laconically in the midst of their songs. 

22. All the quarters were filled with sounds of bellowing of 
bulls, neighing and trumpeting of horses and elephants and 
tinkling of girdles and anklets. 

23-24. The palatial abode of Sankara was glorious with all 
rich equipments. It was resonant here and there with the notes 
and sounds of flutes, lutes and Mrdangas. 

In the eastern wing (of the hall) was the personified form 
of Rgveda with the lustre of sapphire embellished with divine 
ornaments and smeared with divine unguents. It was refulgent 
with self-luminosity. 

25. Yajurveda who resembled the lustre of pure crystal was 
present in the northern wing. He had a huge body with large 
arms and he wore divine earrings. 

26. The eternal Samaveda was present in the western wing. 
He was glorious in red robes having the lustre of ruby. 

27-28a. Atharvaveda wore a garland. He appeared with the 
embellishments of Gita (Music) and ornaments. 



VII.I.3.28b-39 


17 


He was as dark-complexioned as collyrium. His eyes were 
reddish-brown and the neck red. The hairs were greenish and 
the body was huge. 

28b-30a. God Brahma was himself present there along with 
these: Itihasas, all the Puranas, the six Angas, Upanisads, Chandas, 
Mimarhsa, Aranyakas, Svahakara, Vasatkaraand the (their) esoteric 
secrets. 

30b-32. Lord Siva shone there with the eternal glorious 
refulgence of ten million moons. In a respectful way, he was 
attended upon by Suras who worship the Mantras in the form 
of Saktis endowed with supreme Yogic powers, by means of 
thousand-petalled lotuses. He was adored by Rudras and Ganas. 
He was respectfully bowed to by Brahma, Visnu and Indra who 
served him with moving of fans and waving of chowries. 

33. His (Siva’s) soul is perfectly contented with nectarine 
(spiritual) knowledge. This excellent Dvija (Twice-born one 
i.e. Parama Hariisa) who shines in the lotus-like hearts of Yogins 
enlightens them with rich Yogic powers and supernatural achieve¬ 
ments. 

34. There stays the Moon-crested Lord, the destroyer of 
the darkness of ignorance, embellished with thirty-six Tattvas, 
giving happiness to all. 

35. The goddess with the refulgence of heated gold is seated 
on his lap. He is adored by the groups of Yoginls and the Suras 
and Kinnaras who are the aspirant devotees. 

36. She is endowed with, all excellent characteristic fea¬ 
tures and embellished with all kinds of ornaments. She is the 
perpetual bestower of Yogic powers and of the worldly pros¬ 
perity and salvation. 

37-38. Parvatl is the root of origin of all spiritual felicity 
with wonder. She looked at the face of the Lord whose eyes 
were bedimmed with tears of joy displaying the state of enjoy¬ 
ment of bliss. Smilingly Goddess Sati of charming eyes, spoke 
these sweet words with the palms joined together in veneration: 

The Devi said: 

39 O Lord of the worlds, you have been sought by me, 
with the anxiousness for living in the course of hundreds and 
thousands of crores of lives. 



18 


Skanda Parana 


40. O Lord of the worlds, though I have occupied half of 
your person with a desire to meditate on your countenance, 
O Lord, I have however not achieved the perfect realization 
of it. 

[Devi’s prayer:] 

41. O Lord of Devas, of infinite forms, obeisance to you. 
Obeisance to you who are the secret of the Vedas, Obeisance 
to one who is eulogized by the Vedas. 

42. Obeisance to you who loves to stay in cremation ground 
perpetually. Obeisance to the Lord moving about in the sky. 
Obeisance to the secret of the Jyestha Saman. Obeisance to the 
Lord fond of Satarudra prayer. 

43. Obeisance to the Lord who adopted bull as his em¬ 
blem, to the Lord who holds the Yajur-veda. Obeisance to the 
Lord wearing the garland wreathed out of crores of Cosmic 
Eggs, to the Lord identical with the sky (or the soul of the sky). 

44. Obeisance to the Lord with the neck appearing varie¬ 
gated with jewels. Obeisance to the one who has achieved all 
objectives. Obeisance to the one who is the real form of the 
Vedas, to the one who likes the spiritual achievement of the 
twice-born. 

45. Obeisance to the one in the form of transformation of 
man and woman. Obeisance to the one wearing the crescent 
moon. Obeisance to Agni with Homa, to Aditya and Varuna. 

46. Obeisance to PrthivI and also to the Space, to the Wind, 
to the Diksita (the initiated one). Obeisance to Saihyoga (Con¬ 
tact) and to Viyoga (Separation), to Dhatr (Creator), Karlr (Doer), 
Apaharin or destroyer. 

47. Obeisance to the Lord with the brilliant trident in the 
hand, to the one who holds the Brahma-Danda (the staff of 
Brahma). Obeisance to the Lord of Lords. Obeisance to the 
Lord of the great. 

48. Obeisance to Kalagnirudra (Rudra, the Fire of destruc¬ 
tion), the inhabitant of the seven worlds. You are the ultimate 
goal of all the living beings. Obeisance to the Lord of goblins. 

49. O holy Lord Rudra, obeisance to you. O holy Lord 
Siva, obeisance to you. Obeisance to you, the greater than the 
greatest. O Lord, O one greater than the greatest, obeisance 
to you. 


VII.I.3.50-62 


19 


50. O Lord, you have been pained by me due to the fick¬ 
leness of my tongue. O Mahesana, that should be pardoned. 
Obeisance to you, O Lord endowed with the divine knowledge. 

Isvara said: 

51. O goddess, you are on my lap. Why should your eyes 
be turbid with tears ? What is it that is yet incomplete in regard 
to you. I shall make it full. 

52. Mention the boon. Welfare unto you. By this prayer (I 
am pleased), O lady of holy vows. I will give you (everything) 
undoubtedly. O Mahesvarl, share off your sorrow. 

53. O goddess, you are one with Kala and one without 
Kala. O goddess of Devas, I do not see anything without you 
in the whole universe consisting of mobile and immobile beings 
whether gross or subtle. 

54. O Gauri, I am abiding in your heart. You are stationed 
in my heart. I am your brother, son, kinsman and husband. 

55. You are my sister, wife, daughter, kinswoman and daughter- 
in-law. I am the performer of Yajna and the Lord of Yajna. You 
are Sraddha (faith) and also the Daksina. 

56. 1 am Orhkara and Vasatkara. I am Saman, Rk and Yajus. 

I am Agni, Hotr and Yajamana. 

57. I am Adhvaryu, Udgatr and Brahma. I am the knower 
of Brahman. O Devi, you are Arani (the stick from which sac¬ 
rificial fire is produced by attrition). You are glorified as Patnl 
(wife of the performer of a sacrifice). 

58. O lady of excellent hips, you are Svaha and Svadha. 
Everything is established in you. I am the desired great Yajna 
duly performed. You are said to be Purvayajna (the earlier 
Yajna). 

59. O fair lady, I am Purusa. You are mentioned as Prakrti. 

I am Visnu of great vigour and exploits. You are LaksmI, the 
promoter of the welfare of the worlds. , 

60. I am the highly refulgent India. You are the great 
goddess PracI (the East). I am stabilized as omniformed through 

the forms of Prajapatis. » 

61. You have become established in the different forms of 
their spouses. O great goddess, I am Divasa (day) and you are 
mentioned as Rajarii (night). 

62. I am Nwnesa (Moment) and Muhurta (period of 


20 


Skanda Purana 


forty-eight minutes). You are Kala and Siddhi (achievement). 
I am the highly refulgent Sun. You are glorified as Sandhya 
(Twilight). 

63. I am the sower of seed, the most excellent one. O lady 
of excellent countenance, you are the Ksetra (field). I am the 
Plaksa tree. You are mentioned as Vanaspati. 

64. O eternal one, I have assumed the form of Sesa, adorned 
with a jewel on the hood. O Visalaksi (goddess of large eyes), 
you are Revatl with the eyes of inebriated graceful charms. 

65. I am salvation, the release from all sorrows. O goddess, 
you are the greatest goal. O fair lady, I am the Lord of Waters. 
O goddess, you are the most excellent one of the rivers. 

66. O fair lady, I am the submarine fire. You are glorified 
as the coruscant splendour. I am Prajapati and the Doer. You 
are Praja (subject) and the Prakrti. 

67. I am the Lord of the serpents staying in the nether 
regions. You are the Nagi and I am the king of Nagas adorned 
with a thousand hoods. 

68. I am the excellent Nisakara (the Moon). You are the 
excellent Rajanlkan (cause of night). I am Kama, the bestower 
of love, O goddess. You are Rati and Smrti (memory). 

69. O fair lady, I am Durvasas. You are Ksama (forgiveness) 
acting impartially. I am Tapas (penance) performed with de¬ 
lusion and covetousness. You are remembered as the thirst 
(desire) overwhelmed by dark traits. 

70. I am Bull with a big hump. You are the saintly Yogamata 
(Mother of Yogic feats). I am the unmanifest Vayu (Wind). 
You are the movement that animates the mind. 

71. I am the releaser in the case of covetousness. O lady 
of renown, you are Nirmama (free from the feelings of mine- 
ness or possession). I am circumspection in regard to all tasks. 
You are the lotus-eyed NTti (Judicious policy). 

72. I am food and its enjoyer. You are mentioned as Osadhl 
(medicinal herb). I am Agni and smoke. You are the heat and 
flame. 

73. I am the Samvartaka (occurring at the time of ultimate 
annihilation) cloud. You are the many-sided downpour. I am 

in the form of the sages. You are glorified as the wives of those 
sages. 

74. O lady of excellent countenance, I am the creator of 


VII.I.3.75-86 


21 


the worldly existence and you are the creation. I am semen, 
bone and hairs. You are marrow and strength. 

75. O highly blessed lady, I am Parjanya (cloud). O great 
goddess, you are Vrsti (downpour of rain). O goddess, I am 
Samvatsara (year). You are glorified as Rtu (season). 

76. O goddess, I am Krtayuga. You are mentioned as Treta. 
I am the glorious Dvapara. O great goddess, you are Kali. 

77. O fair lady, I am Akasa (Sky). You are mentioned as 
Prthvi (Earth). I am one of unmanifest form. You are men¬ 
tioned as one of manifest form. 

78. O beautiful lady, I am the bestower of boons. You are 
mentioned as Mantra. I am the seer and the hearer. You are 
the seen and the act of hearing. 

79. I am the speaker and the Ramayitr (one who delights). 
O great goddess, you are what is spoken. I am the listener and 
the singer. You are the music and song. 

80. I am the Ghratr (one who smells) and the scent. You 
are the act (or organ) of smelling. I am Sparsayitr (one who 
touches) and the creator. You are the Sparsya (that which is 
to be touched) and the Srsta (what is created). 

81. There is no doubt, O goddess, that you and I consti¬ 
tute this visible range of living beings. O goddess of Devas, I 
am your creator. You do create the entire universe. 

82. O goddess of Devas, this universe is woven together in 
every direction (period?) by you and me once, ten dmes, hundred 
times, thousand times. 

83. O large-eyed lady, you and I are always established as 
controllers in all the living beings. We are in close contact with 
all supernatural powers. 

84. O goddess of excellent countenance, I divert myself 
with you in all sports. You are certainly Dhrti (fortitude, that 
which holds), you are LaksmI (glory) that sustains and holds, 
my beloved and my Prakrti. 

85. You are Rati (pleasure), Smrti (mensory), Kdmacdn (moving 
as you like) and one who is always present in my limbs. O 
goddess, why speak much? You are greater than my own vital airs. 

86. O goddess of the Devas, choose your boon, whatever 
is present in your mind. I am pleased and I shall give the same 
to you even if it be very difficult to get. 



22 


Skanda Purana 


The Devi said: 

87. O Lord of the universe, I am blessed. I am one who 
has performed meritorious deeds. Penance has been performed 
by me very well inasmuch as I have been looked upon by you 
with a pleased eye. 

88. O Lord, if you are pleased with me, if you wish to grant 
me a boon, then, O Lord of Devas, tell me now the details of 
all holy spots. 

89. Whatsoever holy spots, conducive to welfare and de¬ 
structive of sins, are spread all over the earth, O Lord of Devas, 
it behoves you to narrate them entirely. 

Isvara said: 

90. O goddess, listen, I shall expound to you the greatness 
of the TTrthas. It is excellent and destructive of all sins of men. 
It is meritorious and honoured by the celestial sages. 

91. O goddess of Suras, visit to a Tirthas is excellent. So 
also is ablution performed therein. Excellent sages always praise 
the listening to (the glory) thereof. 

92. The following are the Tirthas on the earth: Naimisa, 
Puskara in the sky, Kedara, Prayaga, Vipasa (Bias) and Urmila 
(all on the earth), 

93. Karnavena (probably KrsnavenI), MahadevT, Candrabhaga 
(Chinab), Sarasvatl, the confluence of Ganga and the ocean, 
and the splendid Varanasi. 

94. Ardha TIrtha (Semi-Tirtha), Ganga Dvara, the Maha 
TIrtha, is a place of (plenty of) snow and the auspicious Mayapuri 
(Hardwar, U. P. ). 

95. Satabhadra is highly blessed and esteemed. Sindhu is 
a great river. So also is Airavatl (Ravi—De), Kapila (Narmada, 
near its source) and the great Nada i.e. Sona. 

96. KausikI (KosI) is a vast storehouse of waters. Similarly 
Godavari is splendid. Devakhata, Gaya and Dvaravati (Dwarka, 
Gujarat) are splendid. 

97. Prabhasa is a great TIrtha that is destructive of all sins. 

98. If a person visits these and similar other Tirthas that 
abound on the surface of the earth, O goddess of Devas, he 
is never reborn. 

99. There are three and a half crores of Tirthas on the 
earth. They are holy and destructive of all sins. 


VII.1.3.100-109 


23 


100. O great goddess, they should be visited for the pur¬ 
pose of augmenting one s own piety. O goddess of Suras, if it 
is difficult to go to all these auspicious (Tlrthas), they can all 
be resorted to mentally by (devotees) with concentration and 
purity of mind. 

The Devi said: 

101. O holy Lord, all the living beings are overwhelmed by 
all sorts of harassments and tortures. Their span of life is short 
and they are fettered down. They are faced with delusions 
regarding holy shrines. 

102. If this is the case even in Treta as well as Dvapara.then 
it is still more so in the terrible age of Kali. Hence for the sake 
of their welfare, do glorify that (one) Tirtha which accords, 
when visited, the benefit of all the Tirthas. 

103. On being told thus by Parvati, Lord Paramesvara laughed 
joyously and spoke these sweet words : 

Isvara said : 

104. You alone are the moving vital airs of the entire uni¬ 
verse. You are the source of origin of the universe even as the 
Arani (attrition stick) is that of the fire. O goddess, I cannot 
bear to be separated from you even for a Muhurta (short while). 

105. O Parvati, there is no difference between Siva and 
Sakti'. O splendid great goddess, there is nothing that you do 
not know. 

106. I am nowhere without you, O goddess and you with¬ 
out me. Our relation is like that of the Moon and moonlight 
or of fire and warmth. 

107. O beloved one, there is no difference between you 
and me. O goddess of Suras, I shall state everything factually 
as it is (exists). 

108. This is the secret of secrets and it should be guarded 
carefully. It should not be imparted to an atheist nor to one 
engrossed in sinful activities. 

109. It should be imparted to one endowed with devotion, 
one’s own disciple or son. O my beloved, the essence of all 
essences has already been narrated by me. 


1. *sakli-saktimator abhedah’ is the fundamental tenet of Saivism. 





24 


Skanda Purana 


110. The well-known Tlrthopanisads as well as the 
Lihgopanisads and the Yogopanisads have been narrated to 
you before. 

Parvati said: 

111. Those who desire the greatest region do not attain it 
despite all pain and strain. Men of atheistic predilections are 
seen roaming through Yonis (births after births in different wombs). 

112. They resort to TIrthas and observe Vratas but they do 
not have faith and belief. O Sankara, the entire universe has 
already been deluded through false knowledge. 

113. What do you gain, O most excellent one among Suras, 
by creating this universal delusion? 

114. O Lord of Devas, if I be your beloved, do mention to 
me the essence of the essential thing, that which is pleasing 
to your own vital airs. 

115. On being requested thus by the goddess Srlkantha, 
the leader of Suras, laughed loudly and spoke these words of 
profound import: 

Isvara said: 

116. Listen attentively now to what I have been asked in 
regard to its fruitlessness. I shall mention everything as it is 
factually. 

117. O beautiful lady among Suras, earlier three and a half 
crores of TIrthas in the Cosmic Egg consisting of mobile and 
immobile beings, have been described to you. 

118. The well-guarded Prabhasa Tirtha is among them, O 
lady of excellent holy vows. 

119. O great goddess, the excellent holy spot of Prabhasa 
has been thus extolled, but those who are deluded by sins and 
those who are devoid of religious purificators, rites and cul¬ 
tural refinement in Kali Age (do not benefit) even if they visit 
this Ksetra. 

120. They are of Rajasa and Tamasa traits. Their minds 
have been assailed by sins.These men are engrossed in (acquiring) 
wealth and womenfolk of others. They also indulge in injuring 
others. 

121. They undergo great excitement and worry. They be¬ 
come distressed everywhere. They are deluded but they think 


VII.I.3.122-132 


25 


very high of themselves. They are fascinated with improper 
and false knowledge. They are base men who do not hesitate 
to perform rites in the Tirthas even when they are contrary to 
the injunctions regarding the Varnas and the Asramas. 

122. They undertake pilgrimage with hypocrisy and deceit. 
O lady of excellent complexion, they do not get any benefit 
even if they die in a holy Tirtha. 

123. It is for this purpose, O goddess of excellent hips, 
that these diverse Tirthas and Lingas have been concealed and 
guarded by me. O goddess of Devas, they do not bestow Siddhis 
in Kali Age on those, who perform sinful activities. 

124-125. O goddess of great renown, I shall now mention 
for the benefit of those good men among Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, 
Vaisyas and Sudras who have conquered the sense-organs, anger 
and covetousness, who are devoid of hypocrisy and jealousy 
and who are sanctified by devotion to me and who resort to 
the Tirtha and perform holy rites. 

126. The holy spot well-known as Prabhasa is honoured by 
all the three worlds. Those who are deluded by my Maya do 
not know that holy spot (its real nature). 

127. If I, the great Being, have been adored with single- 
minded devotion in the course of many births, those people 
know that great Prabhasa Ksetra that is destructive of sins. 

128. There is no doubt, O goddess, that the holy place of 
Prabhasa has been fully comprehended by those who are sanc¬ 
tified through devotion to me and who resort to holy vows and 
rites pertaining to me. 

129. Those who observe Yamas and Niyamas, those who 
are devoid of egotism (are to be benefitted). For the sake of 
those people, I shall clarify the question to which answer is 
very difficult to get. This ancient truth has been already re¬ 
vealed to Brahma, Visnu, Indra and the Devas by me. 

130-131. Now I shall tell you, O lady of excellent counte¬ 
nance. Pay heed to it. O beautiful lady among Suras, among 
all the Tirthas all over the earth the excellent Prabhasa ksetra 
is the dearest one to me. In that holy spot, I was worshipped 
by Soma (Moon). After granting him all the boons, I stayed 
here always in seclusion. 

132. Therefore, the holy place that was kept secret, O god¬ 
dess, has been revealed to you. There from me engrossed in 
Yoga, the divine Lihga emerged. 




26 


Skanda Purana 


133. It has divine refulgence. It is adorned by a fiery ring 
(around it). It is quiescent and has been there as mere focus 
point of concentration. It is very difficult to be perceived by 
men. 

134. For the purpose of creation of the universe the 
three Saktis viz. Iccha (Volition), Jnana (Knowledge) and 
Kriya (Activity) have originated from that Litiga. 

135. This universe consisting of mobile and immobile be¬ 
ings gets dissolved in that Lihga. Further the whole thing appears 
originating from it. 1 

136. It has originated secretly. No one knows that great 
thing. By practice throughout the different births, it becomes 
known to men on the earth. 

137. The holy place is called Prabhasika. There is no doubt 
about this that I am the Ksetrajna (the Soul, Knower thereof). 
In this holy spot I am named Somesa, O lady of excellent 
countenance. 

138. Those who are born in this holy place are born from 
the parts of mine. This Lihga was known to them even in the 
earlier Kalpa as Bhairava (Lihga). 

139. O goddess, this Lihga is rarely accessible even in the 
other Yugas. In the sinful, terrible Kali Yuga, it is all the moreso. 

140. O ParvatT, I shall give another example in that con¬ 
nection. 

141. In the excessively terrible Kali Yuga, men are prone 
to indulge in arguements and disputation. Those great sinners 
abiding by heresy will all say thus : 

142-143. “All these things have been done falsely. It is glo¬ 
rified by fools. Where is the holy spot? What is its power? 
Where are the deities? Everything is false and glorified by deluded 
ones.” 

144. Thus the foolish ones will say. Others will laugh. The 
non-believers, the people destined to fall into hell, get their 
minds overwhelmed by sins. At the advent of Kali Age, they will 
never gain Siddhi. 

145. Those who habitually censure Siva and die in the 
TIrtha, appear as persons born in all the lower strata of beings. 


1. This is the definition of Linga. The word is derived from ‘,/jf' to dissolve 
and ‘ ,/gam ' to go out, create. 



V1I.I.3.146-150—4.1-6 


27 


146. It is on account of this, O goddess, that there are 
persons in great misery. Due to the great evil power of the 
Yuga, they are seen as persons devoid of truthfulness and purity. 

147. This is the reason why holy spots are kept guarded 
and concealed. Thus everything has been mentioned to you, 
as to how Siddhi has become very difficult to achieve. 

148. O goddess of Suras, Tlrthas are glorified in every age. 
Among them, O goddess, Prabhasa Ksetra alone is very dear 
to me. 

149. Thus, O fair lady, the sin-destroying secret has been 
divulged—the very seed in the form of the holy spot. O great 
goddess, what else do you wish to ask? 

150. Those who listen to the great power of holy spots, the 
narration that destroys great sins, will attain, by my power, the 
heavenly region, the abode of meritorious persons. 


CHAPTER FOUR 

The Extent of Prabhasa Ksetra 


Silt a said: 

1. When the efficaciousness was narrated by Sankara thus, 
O leading sages, goddess Sati kept her palms joined together 
in reverence and asked again: 

The Devi said: 

2-3. O Lord of Devas, O Lord of the worlds, O Lord iden¬ 
tical with the sacred places and holy rivers, do narrate in detail 
to me the greatness of Prabhasa Ksetra. How will you get pleased 
with men of confounded and wicked nature in the holy spot? 
Wherefore do Japa, Dana, Homa, Yajna and Tapas performed 
there become rites of everlasting benefit? 

4. O Sankara, do tell me how the sin accumulated earlier 
in the course of thousands of births gets dissolved. 

5. If Prabhasa is considered the most excellent of all the 
Tlrthas, of what avail are the numerous other Tlrthas? 

6. If the TIrtha is confined to one holy spot the mind will 



*- 8 Skanda Purana 

be free from doubts. When there is the multiplicity of Tlrthas 
the minds of men begin to waver. 

7. Hence, O Lord of Suras, leave aside the entire mess of 
Tirthas, and their details, and mention the greatness of Prabhasa 
alone. 

8. O Lord, it behoves you to narrate everything such as 
the extent of the holy spot, its boundary and its essential features 
etc. My curiousity is intense. 

Isvara said: 

9. O goddess, listen. I shall describe the most excellent 
of all Ksetras. The Prabhasa Ksetra is the dearest Ksetra unto 
me. 

10. The greatest Siddhi is achieved at Prabhasa. One 
attains the greatest goal at Prabhasa. O fair lady, it is the place 
where I am permanently stationed. 

11. I shall mention its extent along with all the bound¬ 
aries. The holy spot comprises three distinct sections which I 
shall mention in due order. 

12. They are the Ksetra, the Pitha and the Garbhagrha (sanctum 
sanctorum) of Prabhasa which I mention. The efficacy of each 
of the three is crore times more than the preceding one. 

13. The Ksetra is mentioned at the outset. It extends to 
twelve Yojanas (1 Yojana =12 Kms.). It is well-known. The Pitha 
of the Ksetra measures five Yojanas. 

14. The Garbhagrha is in the form of a pericarp very dear 
to me. It extends to a Gavyuti (six kms.). I shall tell you about 
the frontiers of the Ksetra in due order. O goddess, listen. 

15. In length and breadth the frontiers are fixed at the 
beginning, middle and end. Taptodakasvami is to the east and 
Madhava is to the west. 

16. The ocean is to the south and the river Bhadra is on 
the north. The Ksetra with these boundaries extends to twelve 
Yojanas. 

17. This is the Prabhasika Ksetra destructive of all sins. 
The Pithika is mentioned as stationed in the middle and it 
extends to five Yojanas. 

18-19. The Pitha is mentioned as extending to five Yojanas 
lengthwise and breadthwise. It is beyond Nyankumanya and to 





VII.1.4.20-31 a 


29 


the east of Vajrini. It is to the south of Mahesvarl and to the 
north of the ocean. Now listen to the description of the Garbhagrha. 

20. Kauravesvari extends from south to north upto the ocean. 
Asvamedhika extends from east to west upto Gomukha. This is 
what is called Garbhagrha and it is dearer to me than Kailasa. 

21-22. Whatever Tirtha is in between these two, O goddess 
of Devas, on the earth all the tanks, wells and lakes and all the 
shrines of the deities, the lakes and the rivers, the puddles and 
the whirlpools all these are holy. All of them are destructive 
of all the sins. 

23. By taking his holy bath anywhere (in the area) a man 
is honoured in the heavenly world. 

The first part of the Ksetra is in the highly sacred Mahesvara 
(pertaining to Siva). 

24. The second part pertains to Visnu and the third one 
is Brahma’s part. A crore Tlrthas are well-established in the 
part pertaining to Brahma. 

25. O lady of excellent complexion, there are a crore Tlrthas 
in the part of Visnu. It is said that there are one and a half 
crores in the middle part pertaining to Rudra. 

26. Thus, O goddess, that holy spot has been described as 
having three divinities. O splendid lady, this holy spot is the 
greatest secret of all secrets and very dear to me. 

27. Thus the assignment of the regions for the three and 
a half crores of Ksetras (Tlrthas) has been explained. 

The Yatra (religious procession) should be understood as 
threefold. Listen to it, O lady of excellent countenance. 

28. The first Yatra is RaudrI (pertaining to Rudra). The 
second one is Vaisnavl (concerning Visnu). The third is reck¬ 
oned as BrahmI. It is destructive of all sins. 

29. It is mentioned, O lady of excellent countenance, that 
the Icchasakli (power of volition) is in the part pertaining to 
Brahma. The Kriyasakti (power of action) is glorified in the 
second part pertaining to Visnu. 

30-31a. O lady of excellent countenance, the Jhanasakti 
(the power of cognition) is in the third part pertaining to 
Rudra. 

Even a sinful man, a rogue or a person of the worst char¬ 
acter shall become rid of all sins if he stays in the middle part. 




30 


Skanda Purana 


31b-33. My great interest centres round Prabhasa after 
leaving aside Himavan, mountain Gandhamadana, Kailasa, Nisadha, 
the lustrous Meruprstha, the charming Trisikhara (three-peaked 
one), the great mountain Manasa, the beautiful parks of the 
Devas, the Nandana garden, the beautiful regions of heaven 
and all the Tirthas and shrines. 

34. O goddess, if a person stays there with restrained soul 
and concentration of mind, he shall be considered on a par 
with the one living with air alone as diet, even if he takes food 
thrice a day. 

35. Despite being shaken by obstacles, if a man does not 
leave Prabhasa, he actually frees himself from old age and 
death and the transient cycle of births and deaths. 

36. O goddess, Yogic power may be obtained perhaps in 
the course of hundreds of births. But salvation cannot be ob¬ 
tained even after a thousand births. 

37. But, O great goddess, those who continue to stay in 
Prabhasa with determination shall undoubtedly attain libera¬ 
tion in the course of a single birth. 

38-39. If the Brahmanas of praise-worthy holy vows perma¬ 
nently residing in Prabhasa perform the Japa of Satarudriya 
together with Mrtyuhjaya Mantra, in the very presence of 
Kalagnirudra and resort to the southern quarter, they will get 
perfect knowledge within six months. 

40. Siva is extolled in the Veda under his name as well as 
synonyms. But the form of his soul is glorified as Satarudriya. 

41. O goddess, Smrtis say that the Vedas and the Mantras 
are repeated in every Kalpa but Satarudriya is not. 

42. Those who resort to Prabhasa Ksetra and worship by 
means of this Mantra me alone who am worthy of being adored, 
are liberated souls. There is no doubt about it. 

43. A man may stay there with or without (the repetition 
of) the Mantras, but the goal that he attains cannot be at¬ 
tained through Yajnas and Danas. 

44. In this holy spot, Mahesvara abides directly as the self- 
born deity. Crores of Rudras are established in Prabhasa. 

45. They are stationed in the south of Somesa, meditating 
on Orhkara. 

46. O lady of excellent holy vows, all the Tirthas, present 


VII.I.4.47-60 


31 


in the Cosmic Egg will flow on to Somesvara on the fourteenth 
day of Vaisakha. 

47. The mind', intellect and ego, Kama and Krodha as well 
as others always guard Somesa, the destroyer of sins. 

48. The goal that has been indicated as accessible in the 
case of men residing in the Prabhasa Ksetra is not (obtained) 
in Kuruksetra, Gahgadvara and Tripuskara. 

49. Animals of lower species also that have their abodes in 
Prabhasa and die in due course (there) attain the greatest 
goal. 

50-53. That Tlrtha of the Lord of Devas is a penance grove 
that (should) be kept as a closely guarded secret. 

There the Devas including Brahma with Narayana as the 
leader, Yogins and Sahkhyas and my devotees adore the eter¬ 
nal Lord having me as the greatest refuge at Prabhasa. 

Recluses of controlled souls have to go about for eight months. 
A few roam about for four months and stay behind for eight 
months. In the case of those who have entered Prabhasa, they 
have no (need of) religious tour (Vihara). Yoga and Moksa 
(salvation) which are rare are attained by men here. 

54. Hence one should not leave Prabhasa and go to an¬ 
other penance grove. Those who do not resort to Prabhasa are 
deluded and overcome by darkness of ignorance. 

55-56. They are repeatedly born amidst faeces, urine and 
semen (i.e. in the wombs of mothers). These ten, viz. Kdma(love ), 
Krodha (anger), Lobha (covetousness), Dambha (hypocrisy), Stambha 
(arrogance), Matsara (rivalry), Nidrd (sleep), Tandra (lethargy), 
Alasya (sloth) and Paisunya (backbiting, depravity), always pro¬ 
tect Somesa, the leader of the TIrthas. 

57. No sinner dying in Prabhasa falls into a hell, if a man 
resolutely stays there as long as he lives (during his life time) 
(He attains this benefit). 

58-59. The great benefit that is obtained by Saivas, Pasupatas 
(devotees of Siva, Pasupati), by Sannyasins known as Tridandins, 
Ekadandins and such other Sannyasins, performers of Fire- 
worship (Agnihotrins), can be attained by means of perfor¬ 
mance of pilgrimage to Sri Somesvara. 

60. He who adores Somesa is on a par with the best among 
those who worship a Linga and who perform a penance. 




32 


Sltanda Purana 


61. Whatever is to be known in Yoga, Sahkhya, Pancaratra 
Siddhanta and other scriptures has been well-established in 
Prabhiisa. 

62. The entire universe consisting of the mobile and im¬ 
mobile beings is stationed in the Linga. Hence the Lord has 
always to be assiduously adored in the Linga. 

63. It is my supreme form that is stationed by the name 
SrTsomesa. Through it alone I am engrossed in propitiating my 
own Atman (soul) through the Atman. 

64. Who roaming through thousands of births is able to 
attain liberation without the adoration of Somesa? 

65. Whatever inauspicious and evil act has been commit¬ 
ted through the petty intellect of a human being shall get 
entirely destroyed through the adoration of Somesvara. 

66. The sin that has been committed by creatures in the 
course of crores of births, gets perished by the adoration of 
Sri Somesvara. 

67. All the Tirthas resorted to by those who get rid of their 
sins, themselves enter Prabhasa for their own purification. 

68. He who is called Kalagnirudra by the expounders of 
the Vedas, has become established in Prabhasa by the name 
Bhairava. 

69. O goddess of Suras, I have assumed the form of Bhairava, 
settled in the centre of the holy spot, and thus destroy the 
entire evil (acts) of the people. 

70. I have wandered all over the world of mobile and im¬ 
mobile beings. Still I am steady and established. Hence I am 
well-established at Prabhasa by the name Bhairava. 

71. In the Meghavahana Kalpa, Agni performed penance 
for a period of four Yugas according to the reckoning of divine 
years. At that place a Linga originated. 

72. O beautiful lady of Suras, he one whose prowess has 
been extolled by the words of the Vedas, agnimlde etc. (I praise 
Agni—RV. L.l-17). The Linga was addressed by all the Devas 
by the name of Kalagnirudra. 

73. O goddess of Devas, Agni, Isana and Kalagnirudra, 
these three names are oft-repeated. O lady of excellent 
countenance, since the Kalpas and Brahmas are innumerable, 
the names (of the Lord) in every Kalpa cannot be mentioned. 



VII.1.4.74-90 


33 


74. Thus it is a very great secret, O lady of excellent coun¬ 
tenance. It has to be kept strictly concealed. But due to your 
great affection for me and the excess of devotion, it has been 
glorified by me to you. 

75-79. The entire universe is established in Karmakanda 
(mass of rituals), which includes Yajna, Dana, Tapas, Homa, 
Self-study of the Vedic texts, offering libations to ancestors, 
fasts, holy vows, the whole range of the hundreds of Candrayanas, 
Sadratras, Triratras, visiting pilgrim centres etc. By means of 
these holy rites, people of the various stages of life such as 
celibate students, householder, Vanaprastha, etc. devoted to 
the holy rites laid down in the Vedas should ordinarily hope 
to earn merits. So also is the case of other people engaged in 
the auspicious rites of the layman. But, O goddess, unless one 
adores Somesa the leader of the Lingas, none can attain that 
great region. They cannot even espy it. It is extremely difficult 
to attain. 

80-83. If the Lord of the universe, Bhairava Somesa is wor¬ 
shipped, all those attain salvation, those who die in Prabhasa, 
O fair lady. They may be animals and birds of the lowest spe¬ 
cies, even ants, worms, insects, locusts etc. under water, the 
mobile and immobile beings, men, beasts, women, boys, girls, 
old men and women, eunuchs, dogs, donkeys, crows, Candalas, 
Sudras, Puskasas, other people of base births, fools, scholars, 
all despicable persons etc. 

84. O auspicious lady, all those creatures that die in Prabhasa 
are burnt by the fire of Kalanala Rudra, by the Kalaraja fire. 

85. O goddess, my holy spot Prabhasa is difficult of access 
to sinners. O lady honoured by people, a sinful soul does not 
get the opportunity to die there. 

86. In the southern side, Vighnesa has been installed by 
me. Dandapani protects this holy spot in the northern side. 

87. Other Lords of Ganas also, subject to my behest, guard 
this holy spot, O goddess of Devas. Listen to their names: 

88-90. Mahabala, Candlsa, Ghantakama, Gomukha, Vinayaka, 
Mahanada, Kakavaktra, Subheksana, Ekaksa, Dundubhi, Canda, 
Talajarigha, Bhumidanda, the fierce Sankukarna, Vaidhrti, 
Talacanda, Mahatejas, Vikatasya, Hayanana, Hastivaktra, Svanavaktra 
and Bidalavadana. There are others with faces resembling those 
of lions, tigers etc. including Virabhadra. 


34 


Skanda Purana 


91. Keeping Vinayaka at their head, they guard the Lord 
of Dcvas, Kapardin. They number eleven crores and thirteen 
million. 

92-93. An Arbuda (one hundred million) of the Ganas have 
occupied the Prabhasa Ksetra. They are very fierce. They stand 
at every door with tridents and Mudgaras in their hands. They 
guard Prabhasa Ksetra, the abode of the Lord of Devas. They 
see to it that no one enters it with evil intention. 

94. The Gana named Attahasa is surrounded by a hundred 
crores of Ganas in the eastern doorway. He protects Prabhasa there. 

95. Kalaksa is terrible and fierce. He is surrounded by eighteen' 
crores of Ganas. The Gana named Ghantakarna has occupied 
the southern gate. 

96. The Gana named Vistara has occupied the western doorway. 
Dandapani is stationed in the northern doorway of the abode 
of the Lord of Devas. 

97. He looks after the Yogaksema (acquisition and preser¬ 
vation i.e. maintenance) of all purified souls in Prabhasa. BhTsanaksa 
is in the north-east and Chagavaktraka is in the south-east. 

98-99. Candanada is in the south-west and Bhairavanana 
is in the north-west. 

Nandin, Mahakala, Dandapani and Vinayaka are the body¬ 
guards stationed in the middle, surrounded by a hundred crore 
Ganas. Thus innumerable leading Ganas guard everywhere. 

100. That holy spot of the Crescent-moon-crested Lord is 
not approachable to those persons whose minds are overwhelmed 
by the outcome of the evils of Kali Age. 

101-102. Prabhasa is resorted to by Gandharvas, Kinnaras, 
Yaksas, Apsaras and serpents and Siddhas who remain invis¬ 
ible. They adore Somesa, the Lord of Devas, the destroyer of 
sins. Siddhas of the seven worlds and those who reside in Patala 
circumambulate Somesa Kalabhairava. 

103-106. All theTIrthas and holy shrines of the earth cir¬ 
cumambulate Lord Somesvara and eulogize the Lihga there. 
The Tirthas are Lakuli, Bhavabhuti, Asadhi, Danda, Puskara, 
Naimisa, Amaresa, another Bhairava, Madhyama, Kala, Kedara, 
Kanavlraka, Haricandra, Sailesa, Vastrantikesvara, Attahasa, 
Mahendra, Srisaila and Gaya. 

107. Brahma, Janardana, and the other Devas stationed in 


VII.1.4.108-121 


35 


the universe come near the Agni Linga at the time of dusk and 
eulogize. 

108. Sixty crores of thousands and sixty crores of hun¬ 
dreds of these go to Somesvara on the fourteenth day in the 
dark half of the month of Magha. 

109-110. At that time a devotee should offer the Ghrtakambala 
to Somesa, i.e. they are to collect together all these: Ghee, 
Rasa (juice), gingelly seeds, milk, water rendered fragrant with 
camphor and Kasmlra (saffron). 

111. This has to be done on the Sivaratri day. This is a 
secret and it is my favourite. It is impossible to reckon the 
merit that accrues when this is done. 

112. If one desires one’s siddhi, O goddess, one should 
adore at the outset Bhutavinayaka himself in the southern 
side. 

113. Of all Usaras (arid regions) the Prabhasa Ksetra is the 
greatest Usara (arid land). It is the most excellent of all PIthas 
and Ksetras. Of all Sandehas this is the greatest of Sandeha (?). 

114. There are hundred crores of Yogins. They have great 
interest only in Prabhasa Ksetra and nowhere else. 

115-116. O beautiful woman of Suras, the splendid Kala 
named Uma, about whom I have already mentioned, is estab¬ 
lished on the north-east of the Linga. O goddess, she is called 
Satl and she was the daughter of Daksa formerly. 

117. Being angry with Daksa, the greatest Kala abandoned 
her body and was reborn in the abode of Himavan. She be¬ 
came well-known by the name Uma. 

118. Therefore, O goddess, they remained there along with 
you. They are remembered as the bestowers of boons. Nine 
crores of Camundas are stationed in that holy spot. 

119. If a devotee adores you there on the eighth day in the 
bright half of the month of Caitra, he will not meet with poverty 
in the course of twenty-one rebirths. 

120. If the Ama (New-Moon) united with Monday is attain¬ 
able at any time, a devotee should visit Somesvara. Thereby he 
attains the benefit of a crore of Yajnas. 

121. This holy spot is something to be treated as a great 
secret. It is destructive of all sins, since it is the place where 
eleven crores of Rudras are collectively present. 



36 


Shanda Purana 


122. Twelve Dinesas (Adityas, Sun-gods) and eight Vasus 
arrive 'iere. There are innumerable prominent Ganas, Gandharvas, 
Yaksas and Raksasas. 

123-126. Uma too who is eulogized by all the Dcvas is present 
very near at the side. There is Nandin, the leader of Ganas of 
the Trident-bearing Lord of Devas. There are other leading 
Ganas who stand by the side of Mahakala. There are the rivers 
Gahga, Yamuna, Sarasvati and other sacred ones, Nadas and 
Hradas. There are oceans, mountains, wells and trees. All the 
mobile and immobile beings have arrived at Prabhasa. Other 
Ganas too are stationed there at Prabhasa. 

127. All have not been mentioned by me. At random I 
have mentioned a few here and there. If one desires the benefit 
of the sacred place, O goddess of Devas, one should worship 
the third Vinayaka there with great devotion. 

128. Thus, O beautiful lady, at the entrance to the Agni 
Tirtha there are stationed twelve, eight and twenty-four crores 
of rivers. 

129. If the (sin of) Nirmalya Langhanci (i.e. over-stepping 
flowers and other leavings of adoration of God) has been committed 
unknowingly, the entire sin is washed off on visiting the Agni 
Tirtha. 

130. Of what avail is talking too much, O goddess? This 
holy spot is highly refulgent. It is impossible to describe it 
adequately to you even in the course of hundreds of crores of 
Kalpas. 

131. Prabhasa Ksetra is the greatest of all the Tlrthas in 
the various quarters and of all the deities in the atmosphere, 
or on the earth. So also, O goddess, Somesvara is the greatest 
deity. 

132. All the types of living beings such as the oviparous, 
viviparous, sweat-born ones and plants (coming out breaking 
through the ground) attain salvation if they meet with death 
at Prabhasa. There is no doubt about it. 

133. Thus the wonderful story of the Lord of Devas has 
been narrated. O goddess, the incomprehensible deeds of Sankara 
have been narrated to you. He who reads, listens to this and 
eulogizes the Lord, all these people will attain salvation, de¬ 
stroying into smitherens the sins of Kali. 


■ 





.»iA.v i mi 






VII.I.5.1-12 


37 


CHAPTER FIVE 

Sages and Devas Residing in Prabhasa Ksetra 


Suta said: 

1. O leading Brahmanas, when this was narrated by the 
noble-souled Sankara, the goddess became extremely delighted 
in her mind and asked again: 

The Devi said: 

2. For the sake of the welfare of all living beings, O Lord 
of Devas, O Lord of the universe, do tell me in detail the 
greatness of the Prabhasa Ksetra. 

Isvara said: 

3. O renowned one, I shall give you another example as 
to why, O great goddess, this holy spot, a favourite of mine, 
has been created. 

4. The great goal (region) that Yogins who are devoid of 
any attachment attain by constant meditation, is attained by 
those who give up their life at that holy place Prabhasa. 

5. Markandeya also, the great ascetic whose span of life 
extends to many Kalpas, always worships Lord Virupaksa at 
Prabhasa. 

6. Though he wanders over all the Tlrthas, he never leaves 
Prabhasa. Durvasas of excessive splendour endeavours to pro¬ 
pitiate the Linga. O goddess, he does not forsake that holy 
place of the Moon-crested Lord even for a moment. 

7-10. Similarly, Bharadvaja, Sage Marici, Uddalaka, Kratu, 
Vasistha, Kasyapa, Bhrgu, Daksa, Savarni, Yama, Angiras, Suka, 
Vibhandaka, Rsyasrhga, Gobhila, Gautama, Rcika, Agastya, the 
great Saunaka, Narada, Jamadagni, Visvamitra, Lomasa and 
many other sages as well as celestial sages never leave the great 
holy spot. They endeavour to propitiate the Linga. 

11. I stay there itself eager (in watching their) propitia¬ 
tion. I never leave that great Ksetra, O lady of excellent coun¬ 
tenance. It is the truth, nothing but the truth. 

12. O goddess of Devas, all the Tlrthas on the earth have 
beejn seen by me. A Ksetra on a par with Prabhasa was neverseen. 


38 


Skanda Purdna 


13. O goddess, sixty thousand devotees with Yajnavalkya at 
the head, stay at Candrabhaga. They perform Japa of the Rudra 
Mantras. 

14. Forty thousand sages of absolute celibacy perform the 
Japa of Satarudriya on the banks of Devika (a local rivulet). 

15-17. Fifty crores of the sages of perfect celibacy have 
resorted to the Umapati Linga stationed there itself. Formerly, 
the Japa of the Rudra Mantras was performed by them a crore 
times there itself. 

A hundred thousand great Siddhas who stay in that holy 
place of mine worship the Moon-crested Lord of Devas. 

18. By visiting Candrabhusana there, one gets entirely that 
benefit which has been mentioned by great sages in the Vedantas. 

19. O splendid lady, more than a crore of sages are staying 
at Agni Tirtha. It is remembered that a hundred thousand 
have settled in Rudresvara. So also in Kapardlsa. 

20. A thousand sages of extraordinary celibacy are stationed 
in Ratnesvara. In the highly meritorious Arkasthala, O splen¬ 
did lady, more than a crore are stationed. 

21. Sixty thousand are stationed there in Siddhesvara. Those 
who are stationed in Markanda number seven thousand. 

22-23. Innumerable sages are remembered as stationed in 
Sarasvatl and Brahma Kunda. Ten thousand Arbudas and three 
crores of sages stay at the place where there is PracI Sarasvatl. 
It Was there that Sankara’s sin of Brahmana-slaughter perished 
in a moment. 

24. His (Sankara's) body became golden and the skull fell 
down from his hand. After knowing this Sankin performed a 
great penance there. 

25. Lord Sri Sankara became pleased and blessed him with 
the boon of staying in the Linga. By having ablution in PracT 
and worshipping the Linga one acquires merit of a crore of 
Yajfias. 

26. If a ball of rice is offered on a New-Moon day, the 
benefit is a hundred times more than that at Gaya. One who 
offers balls of rice there on the Bhuta day (i.e. fourteenth 
lunar day) shall redeem a crore of the members of his family. 

27. If men take a plunge here for quelling the dirt (of 
sins) they will earn the merit of gifting ten cows. 


VII.1.5.28-40 


39 


28-29. The merit of a Sraddha performed in accordance 
with the injunctions of the scriptures will accrue to those also 
who play about in the waters with the feet in water. By viewing 
it too all will attain merit. By touching they get twice the merit. 
The Lirigas beginning with Sulabheda should be considered to 
give the merit of a horse-sacrifice. 

30. Thus the Lord of the universe who is pleased is cer¬ 
tainly stationed in the forests of Pracl. Even those who think 
mentally (of visiting etc. ) are benefited. Still more so in the 
case of those who perform Snana and Dana . 

31. Nilalohita, Sankara, the Lord of the worlds is pleased 
with them. Thirty crores of Ganas guard Pracl all round. 

32. A great sinner, one of evil conduct, a person of great 
misdeeds may by a happy chance meet with death in PracT. He 
will attain Siva. 

33. The offering of Dadhikambala (adoration of Siva with 
cover of curds) should be made there by excellent Brahmanas. 
It is said to certainly suppress sins/It is the most efficacious 
of all essential things. 

34. Now I shall explain the great efficacy of Hiram. The 
Sun-god was installed there and penance was performed by 
Durvasas. 

35-37. There too, there are a crore of sages of perfect 
celibacy. 

O goddess of Devas, the deity who has power more than that 
of twenty-four Tattvas stands there accompanied by a crore of 
Bhrgus. 

If a single person is fed in Brahmasthana, one gets the same 
benefit as by feeding a crore of Brahmanas elsewhere. O great 
goddess, this I am aware of and hence I stay there extremely 
pleased. 

38-39. I am surrounded by a crore of celestial sages and 
Devas. 

In Kali Age, Tirthas stay there latent (merged underneath) 
in the holy spot of great beauty where Somesvara is stationed. 
I have, O goddess, two Ganas there—Vibhrama and Sarhbhrama. 

40. These two make the minds of the people residing in 
the Ksetra excited and deluded due to ignorance. They are 
disunited and are in a dilemma. 


40 


Skanda Purana 


41. There are then the Vinayakas, Upasargas (troubles) and 
ten other defects. They guard the Ksetra from evil-minded 
sinners. 

42. If the residents of the Ksetra visit the deity Dandapani 
with devotion, they are excellent men and they will not meet 
with obstacles. 

43-44. O splendid lady, those who die at Prabhasa, whether 
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, Sudras, or of mixed castes, whether 
they have desires or not, they become identical with Siva. All 
of them will have the crescent-moon for the coronet. They will 
have eyes in the forehead. They will be bull-bannered. Those 
men are born (or become) so in the splendid divine Sivapura 
of mine. 

45. A Brahmana staying there with mental concentration 
and purity, may be taking food thrice a day. But he is on a par 
with one who subsists on air only. 

46-47. O my beloved, the good qualities of Meru can be 
narrated. So also the good qualities of the continents. The 
good qualities of all the oceans can be enumerated. But, O 
goddess of Devas, one cannot enumerate the good qualities of 
the primordial Lord Mahesa, the great Lord, in hundreds of 
crores of years. 


CHAPTER SIX 

Greatness of Somesvara 


The Devi said: 

1-3. The extremely miraculous greatness has been nar¬ 
rated to me. This is unprecedented, O Lord of the chiefs of 
Devas. Never has it been heard by me before. 

Of all the Lingas in the Cosmic Egg which have been ex¬ 
tolled by you to me, how is it that Somesa has become ex¬ 
tremely pre-eminent? 

O great Lord, O Lord of Suras, is it the power of the holy 
place ? Hence, O Lord of Suras, narrate it factually to me. 



VII.I.6.4-16 


41 


Isvara said: 

4. O lady of excellent countenance, hereafter I shall nar¬ 
rate in detail the greatest secret, the greatness of Somesa and 
Prabhasa Ksetra. 

5-6. Of all the Tirthas, it is the greatest Tirtha; of all the 
Vratas it is the greatest V rata; of all the Japyas (Mantras to be 
muttered) it is the greatest Japya; it is the most excellent one 
of all meditations; it is the greatest Yoga among all Yogas; it 
is the greatest secret. I shall expound it to you. O my beloved, 
listen to it with concentrated attention. 

7. Somesa is the. greatest holy shrine. The Linga has five 
faces. I never leave it. It is the truth. The truth has been 
mentioned by me. 

8. Whatever is the greatest, the most permanent, everlast¬ 
ing and immutable, do know it to be Somesa. Do not get 
confused in mind. 

9-10. Know that Linga in Prabhasa as one that is above 
fear, free from impurities, eternal, independent, not having 
(needing) another support, unsullied, devoid of ramifications, 
free from attachment and devoid of torments. It is well-estab¬ 
lished at Prabhasa. It is the final beatitude, incomprehensible, 
pleasing to the mind and devoid of ailments. 

11. That is the eternal, the cause of the universe, the de¬ 
stroyer of (Daksa’s) sacrifice. Lord with faces everywhere (in 
all directions), the auspicious subtle (principle) identical with 
all, the primordial deity. 

12. It is comprehensible only through self-realization. It is 
devoid of mental worries. It is devoid of birth and death. It is 
pure and absolute both within and without. 

13. It is the object of self-realization. It is beyond the ken 
of eulogy. It is partless, the soul devoid of impurities. It is the 
manifest illumination of perfect knowledge. 

14. Know that the Linga at Prabhasa is of such a nature, 
O beautiful goddess. It is devoid of space-Iessness. It is sound 
that is perceptible when all (other worldly) sounds cease. 

15. It is unsullied and free from impurities. It is the Lord, 
the Lord of Devas. It is the soul of Suras. It is beyond reason¬ 
ing. It is beyond the perview of imagination. 

16. It is the object of mental view. It is stationed both 


42 Skanda PuTana 

within and without. Know it to be Pranava in the form of Linga 
at Prabhasa. 

17. The great soul is stable (unmoved by any pulsation or 
variation), beyond all perception of bliss. It is the pure and 
perfect knowledge on the path of survey of the world (?). 

18. It is stationed on the path of special spiritual knowl- 
edge(?). It is designated by its innumerable forms. It can be 
comprehended through the concept of its own existence (?). 
It is beyond existence and characterization. 

19. It is devoid of (beyond) development, display etc. of 
words. It is Siva free from identity with the worldly units. It is 
stationed under the survey of knowledge and the knowable? It 
is devoid of fallacious reasoning. 

20. It is present in the Sabda in the mystic (Yogic) Cakra 
named Anahata. It originates from the groups of Sabda (sound) 
etc(P). Know Somesvara to be thus. It is in the form of a Linga 
in Prabhasa. 

21. It is quiescent. It is present in Sabdabrahman. Its place 
(resort) is beyond the ken of words. It is the object of that 
which surpasses everything. It is present in the path of medi¬ 
tation of all (?). 

22. It is beginningless. It is divine and unswerving. It is the 
object of that which is beyond all valid testimony. It exists both 
above and below. It is stationed in the body and so is called JIva. 

23. (In Yogic meditation) it is stationed at the end of twelve 
Angulas which is the extreme reach of the breadth both within 
(the heart) and outside (when exhaled). It is present at the 
rise (beginning) and end of Prana and Apana (inhalation and 
exhalation). It is identical with the soul (power) of sense- organs 
yet it is imperceptible (beyond the grasp of senses). It is blemishless 
and all-pervading. 

24. It is beyond Svara (vowels) etc. and Vyanjana (conso¬ 
nant). It is beyond letters of alphabet etc. It is not the object 
of oral expression. It is in the form of half of Ahamkara (?). 

25. It is beyond the reach of logical argumentation or imagi¬ 
nation. It cannot be expressed orally. It is devoid of time and 
act of reckoning. It is devoid of sound and movement. It is 
gentle. It is beyond the body, greater than the greatest. 

26. It is beyond the grasp of (five) elements (or living 
beings). It is beyond existence and non-existence. It is extremely 


VH.I.6.27-37 


43 


subtle and incomprehensible. It originates from the five pentads 
etc. 

27. It is immeasurable. It has infinite names (or it is des¬ 
ignated as infinite). It is everlasting. It can assume any form 
it likes. It is the source of origin of all living beings. It origi¬ 
nates like a sprout from seed. 

28. It is pervasive. It has all desired names. It is imper¬ 
ishable and extremely great. It is present in the setup of the 
subtle and the gross. It is both manifest and unmanifest. It 
is eternal. 

29. It is devoid of great periods of time called Kalpa and 
ends of Kalpas. It is great without beginning and end. It is the 
great element. It has a huge body. It is auspicious and 
Nirvanabhairava (terrific though quiescent). 

30. Understand Sadasiva thus in the form of the Linga at 
Prabhasa. He is devoid of yogic activity. He is the conqueror 
of Mrtyu (death) and has no beginning. 

31. He is devoid of all torments. He is Siva who pervades 
everything all round. He is unmanifest and eternal, more than 
the greatest. He is absolutely one without any duality. 

32. It is not overwhelmed by another refulgence for the 
residents of Prabhasa Ksetra. He has excessive self-luminosity 
and refulgence. He is Hara who surpasses the splendour of all. 

33. He is Lord Isana worthy of being the refuge. He is 
Omkara in the form of Siva. He is Mahadeva, the Lord of 
Devas. He is five-faced and bull-emblemed. 

34. He is free from impurities. He is beyond the ken of 
the mind. He can be comprehended through Bhava (emotion, 
devotion). He is incomparable. He is always quiescent. He is 
the trident-armed Virupaksa (Three-eyed Lord) having matted 
hairs. 

35. He is stationed in the middle of the lotus (the Yogic 
plexus) of the heart. He is void-formed and unsullied. Under¬ 
stand Sadasiva thus in the form of the Liiiga at Prabhasa. 

36. That Lord who is greater than the greatest is glorified' 
by the name of Hamsa and by the name of Nada. He is sta¬ 
tioned in this holy spot, O goddess of excellent holy vows. 

37. This primordial form, the divine form of the Atman 
has been comprehended by me through the power of Yoga and 



44 Skanda Purana 

this divine (form of the) soul has been narrated to you, O 
goddess. 

38. He is stationed in the Rgveda in the forenoon. He is 
stationed in the Yajus in the midday. He is stationed in the 
Saman in the afternoon. He is stationed in the Atharvan at the 
beginning of night. 

39. I know this great Purusa of the brilliance of the sun 
beyond darkness. Death will not overtake if one knows it. There 
is no other pathway for the people. 

40. Thus the great power of Somesalinga has been par¬ 
tially narrated to you. The deity cannot be extolled even by 
one endowed with many thousands of mouths in the course of 
many (innumerable) years. 

41. A Brahmana, a Ksatriya, a Vaisya and even a Sudra will 
become rid of all sins if he reads this. He shall attain all desires. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

The Appearance (Origin) of Somanatha 

Suta said: 

1-4. After hearing the excellent greatness there, the god¬ 
dess asked Sankara once again with words coming (profusely) 
through the throat due to eagerness and delight: 


The Devi said: 

O Lord of Devas, O Lord of the worlds, O conferor of blessings 
unto the devotees, obeisance to you, O Mahesvara, richly endowed 
with all knowledge. 

Obeisance to the noble-souled one, to the slayer of the Tripuras, 
to the suppressor of Taraka. Obeisance to you who bestowed 
the ocean of milk on the child (viz. Upamanyu) of the leading 
sage endowed with perfect concentration and mental purity. 

Obeisance to you, the creator of all the worlds. O Lord 
identical with all everywhere! Obeisance, to the creator of all. 
Obeisance to Bhava (the origin of all). Obeisance to Abhava 





VII.I.7.5-14 


45 


(having no birth). Obeisance to you, the eternal 
who are omnipresent. 


one, to you 


Isvara said: 

5. O goddess, what do you ask? Everything has been 
narrated by me. If still you have any doubts, you may ask O 
beautiful lady. 


The Devi said: 

6. When did that name Somesvara come into existence? 
At what time did it take place? What name did it have first? 
What will be the name of the Liiiga now? 

7. O Lord, he whose power is such, has not been described 
by you before. The greatness of the other deities of the Tirtha 
has been described by you. Nothing like the greatness of Srlsomesa 
has been expounded. 

Isvara said: 

8. I was in existence even formerly in the form of Sparsa 
Lihga. O goddess, none of the men here knew me in my real 
form. 

9. In the great Kalpa when the Pratisahcara (re-absorption 
into the origin) of Brahma took place the name of the Lihga 
too originated. This shall be different and occur again and 
again. 

10. Six Brahmas have passed away. The present Prajapati 
who is well-known as Satananda is the seventh one, O goddess. 

11. When this Brahma became eight year old, O goddess 
of Devas, from that time onwards I became well-known as Somesa. 

12. O Parvatl, listen to those names that occurred in the 
periods that elapsed after the sleep and dissolution of Brahmas. 

13. When the first grandfather Brahma called Virinci ex¬ 
isted, the name Mrtyunjaya of Somanatha was glorified in that 
period. 

14. When the second (incumbent) Brahma well-known by 
the name Padmabhu became Brahma, the Lihga (Somanatha) 
was called Kalarudragni, O auspicious lady. 


46 


Skanda Purana 


15. When the third one well-known as Svayambhu became 
Brahma, the name of the Lord was glorified as Amt-tesa. 

16. When the fourth one well-known as Paramesthin be¬ 
came Brahma, O auspicious lady, the name of the Lord was 
remembered as Anamaya. 

17. When the fifth one remembered as Surajyestha became 
Brahma, O Arnbika, the name of the Lord was mentioned as 
Krttivasa. 

18. When the sixth one well-known (by the name) Hemagarbha 
became Brahma, the Lord was glorified as Bhairavanatha. 

19. The present Brahma is remembered as Satananda and 
the name of the Lord now is Somanatha. 

20. Hereafter when the future Brahma will be known as 
Caturvaktra, the name of the Lord shall -be Prananatha. 

21. In the case of Brahma of the past and those of the 
future, the respective name continues till the other one is 
eight years old. With reference to the difference of Sandhya 
and Sandhyamsa (Twilight of Yugas and part of twilight be¬ 
tween Yugas) they are Visnu, Ananta and Sanatana. 

22. Thus the names of the Lord have been described briefly 
by me. They cannot be expounded in detail because of the 
greatness of time (required for it}. 

The Devi said: 

23. Wonderful indeed, O Lord of the chiefs of Devas, is 
what has been said by you. How is it that the names mentioned 
before have escaped my memory? 

24. Mention the reason hereof in detail, O Lord of the 
worlds, with a desire to bless me as well as for the sake of the 
welfare of all living beings. 

Isvara said: 

25. Since, O my beloved, O great goddess, you take incar¬ 
nation in every Kalpa due to the power of Prakrti, you do not 
have the recollection. 

26. In the Avaranas (coverings) constituted by the Tattvas, 
you have been established as the first. O lady of excellent 
countenance, along with me you incarnate in the middle of 
the (Cosmic) Eggs. 



VII.1.7.27-40 


47 


27. You manifest yourself again and again for the sake of 
blessing the worlds. In the first Kalpa (you were) Jaganmata. 
In the second (you were) Jagadyoni. 

28. In the third (Kalpa) you were (known by the) name 
Sambhavl and in the fourth Visvarupinl. In the fifth you were 
named NandinI and in the sixth Ganarhbika. 

29. Vibhuti (is your name) in the seventh Kalpa and Subhuti 
in the eighth. Ananda in the ninth Kalpa and Vamalocana in 
the tenth. 

30. (You were called) Vararoha in the eleventh and Sumarigala 
in the twelfth. You are cited as Mahamaya in the thirteenth 
Kalpa. 

31. You were glorified by the name Ananta in the four¬ 
teenth Kalpa, Bhutamata in the fifteenth and were remem¬ 
bered as Uttama in the sixteenth. 

32. Then in the seventeenth Kalpa (i.e. Pitrkalpa) you be¬ 
came well-known as the highly lustrous daughter of Daksa, 
known by the name Satl. 

33. Due to the insult at the hands of Daksa you forsook 
your body. Formerly you stationed yourself as Uma filling the 
digit of the moon. 

34. Then, when the Varaha Kalpa began, O beautiful lady 
of Suras, you were propitiated by Himavan and made his dau¬ 
ghter. 

35. Then, O goddess, you performed a wonderful penance 
very difficult to be performed and obtained me once again as 
your husband. You are now called Parvatl. 

36. I have my abode in Kailasa, O lady of excellent coun¬ 
tenance. O goddess of Devas, I thus sport with you till the end 
of the Kalpa. 

37. This happens four times. Then for the sake of the 
killing of Mahisa, you were born as Krsnapiiigala (black-and 
tawny-coloured) in Dvapara along with Visnu. 

38. You were born on the earth in nine crores of different 
ways with various names such as KatyayanI, Durga etc. 

39. O beautiful lady, your Kalpa names mentioned before 
have been enumerated by me beyond the thirteenth Kalpa. 

40. O beautiful ladys the past, present and the future 
names— all of them—should be known thus till Brahma Kalpa. 


48 


Skanda Purana 


The Devi said: 

41-44. O Tripurantaka (Destroyer of Tripuras), the name 
Somanatha has been cited by you before. How is it considered 
permanent ? Since the moons are many in view of their names 
and births (that name cannot be steady and permanent). At 
the end of seventy-one Caturyugas when a Manvantara is com¬ 
plete, the Moon, the Sun and the Devas are destroyed again 
and again. So also the seven sages, Suras, Sakra, Manu and the 
kings, his sons. They are simultaneously created and dissolved 
asbefore.Now,OLord,itbehovesyouto clarify thisduly andexactly. 

Isvara said: 

45. A pertinent question has been asked by you, O god¬ 
dess. It is a secret that is destructive of sins. I shall fully explain 
to you what has not been narrated to anyone before. 

46-47. Now there is the Brahma here well-known as Satananda. 
When he is eight years old, the first Manu (is born). He shall 
be the first. In his Manvantara Rohinlpati (i.e. Moon) is born 
at the outset from the bowels of the ocean along with LaksmI, 
Kaustubha etc. 

48. The Linga named Kalabhairava was propitiated by him 
with great penance lasting for fourteen (Catur) Yugas. 

49. On seeing his wonderful penance, O beautiful lady, I 
became pleased. That Nisakara (Moon) was told by me, “Choose 
your boon.” 

50. At that time, O goddess, O auspicious lady, he eulo¬ 
gized with devotion and said: 

Candra said: 

51. O Lord of the Devas, if you are pleased, if-I am eligible 
for a boon, O Lord, let your name be Somanatha throughout 
the life-span of Brahma. 

52. May this deity alone be the family deity for all the other 
SItarasmis (Moons) who, are to be born in the other Manvantaras 
too. 

53. O Lord, may they all be stationed in this holy spot and 
propitiate (You) throughout their life-span. May this continue 
till the dissolution of Brahma. 

54. May your name Somanatha become famous in the 
Brahmanda consisting of mobile and immobile beings. O Lord 


VII.1.7.55-64 


49 


of Devas, O one.of luminous Linga, I pay obeisance to you. 
Isvara said: 

55. After saying “Let this be so” I got merged into the 
Lmga. Thus, Ogoddess, thereason has been explained to you entirely 

56. Since this was asked by you earlier, it has been ex- 
plamed leaving no doubt, though it is brief. Only a sample of 
the qualities of Srisomesa has been narrated to you. The details 
thereof are incomprehensible (innumerable) like jewels in the sea. 

57. It is confounding to those who are not his devotees but 
is conducive to the augmentation of the intellect of his devo¬ 
tees. Deluded persons do not perceive my real form as they are 
confused. 

The Devi said: 

58. O Sankara, O Lord of Suras, the greatness of the 
luminous Linga is of such a nature. Where in that holy spot 
does that Linga stand installed? 

Isvara said: 

59. O goddess, listen with care. Try to comprehend after 
listening. This Prabhasa Ksetra is the greatest holy spot and it 
is my favourite. 

60. It is the place of stay of Devas too. It extends to twelve 
Yojanas (12x12 = 144 Kms. ) The Pitha is glorified as measur¬ 
ing five Yojanas. 

61. My abode is in the middle thereof, O goddess. It ex¬ 
tends to a Gavyuti (3 Kms.), O goddess. That which is called 
Devikamukha is on the north of the ocean. 

62. It is to the east of the VajrinI (a local river) and ex¬ 
tends as far as the river Nyankumatl. The width is four (Yojanas) 
and the length is five Yojanas. 

63. Thus the Ksetrapltha is explained. Hereafter listen to 
the Garbhagrha. It extends from the ocean in the south to 
Kauravl in the north and from Gomukha in the east upto 
Asvamedhaka in the west. 

64. This is my abode, O goddess, which I never forsake. 
The Linga is stationed in its middle as it has already been 
explained to you. 


50 


Skcinda Purana 


65-66. Near the ocean, in the western quarter, three hun¬ 
dred Dhanvantaras (the distance of three hundred Dhanus i.e. 

1200 I-Iastas) to the west of Krlasmara stands the Lihga of great 
prowess. It is the self-manifested Lord Sankara, the Supreme 
Lord who stands installed there. 

67-69. O goddess, in between these, near Somesa, in the 
fourteenth section, two hundred Dhanus (400 Hastas) in ex¬ 
tent is my Karnilia (pericarp) in the form of a circle. It is my 
favourite, O Parvatl, living beings, worms, insects, locusts etc. 
the beings of superior and middling types as well that die in 
due course of time, get rid of their sins and go to my world. 

70. The northern or southern transit of the time of death 
need not be taken into account. In regard to those who die 
in the middle of the Ksetra all the times are auspicious. 

71. For the purpose of the welfare of all living beings, O 
great goddess, the primordial Natha (Lord) Sarva brought the 
Adyatattvas (the primordial principles) and illuminated the Ksetra 
of great refulgence where men can achieve Siddhis. 

72-73. One who is wise, O goddess of Devas, may be as¬ 
sailed by hundreds of obstacles but, O goddess of Suras, he 
shall take a solemn vow (to stay behind) as long as he lives. 
Due to the greatness of that holy spot and of Sthanu of mi¬ 
raculous activities, he goes to the greatest region by reaching 
which one does not feel pain or misery. 

74. Ordinarily one suffers repentance after committing thou¬ 
sands of sins. But he gets relieved from them in Prabhasa. He 
does not go to the city of Antaka (god of death). 

75. After realizing that Kali Age was terrible, cruel and 
insensitive to sufferings of beings, O goddess of Devas, Vighnanayaka 
had been appointed there for the sake of protection. 

76-78. By the side of Kalagnirudra, Vighnanayaka whose 
valour is on a par with that of Rudra, has been engaged for 
the protection (of the holy spot) from sinners like those who 
are inimical to Brahmanas, those who raise futile arguments 
over devotion to Siva, Brahmana-slayers, ungrateful ones, those 
who have no chance of redemption, those hated by the general 
public, those who are hated by the elders, the thorns unto the 
TIrthas and shrines, those who are engaged in all kinds of sins 
and those of contemptible acts. 

79-81. O goddess of Devas, the deity restrains sinners and 


VII.1.7.82-94 


51 


guards the holy spot. If men perpetrate sins in the holy spot and 
kill Brahmanas, O beautiful lady, listen the fate they attain. O 
lotus-eyed one, they are born as sons of whores for ten thousand 
years according to the divine reckoning. At the end thereof, 
they become Brahmaraksasas. Thereafter, when the sins are quelled 
they attain ignominous births. 

82-85. Hence by all means one should avoid committing 
sins there. Sins committed elsewhere become quelled in this 
holy spot. But a sin committed in this Ksetra brings about the 
state of Pisacas and fall into hells. 

O beloved, the Lord is sympathetic to the devotees. He 
bestows the greatest position even on the lower types of crea¬ 
tures but not on those who hate Brahmanas. 

Those who meditate with concentration, those of souls practis¬ 
ing Yogic rites after restraining the sense-organs, who perform 
the Japa of Satarudriya residing in Prabhasa, are undoubtedly 
blessed. 

86. If anyone goes to the excellent Prabhasa Ksetra, he 
should continue to employ such means as will not necessitate 
going out of it. 

87. O beautiful lady, this has to be guarded as a secret. It 
should not be given to anyone and everyone. O my beloved, 
this Sastra has to be guarded well like one’s own life. 

88. He by whom this scriptural text that illuminates the 
Prabhasa Ksetra has been composed should be known as Siva 
himself who has adopted human characteristics (form). 

89. O Parvati, I stand occupying his physical form. He is 
honoured, adored and meditated upon like me. There is no 
doubt about it. 

90. O goddess, in Kali Age the excellent Prabhasa Ksetra 
is very difficult to attain. It is the truth, nothing but the truth. 
Thrice I aver that it is the truth, O beautiful lady of Suras. Out 
of affection for you, now I shall expound something special. 

91. Somesa is my favourite among those Lingas that are in 
Bhurloka. The Gunas (good qualities) present in this Linga 
are known to me. 

92. Only I know. No one else at any rate knows it. I am 
worthy of being adored in other Lingas too by Suras and Asuras. 

93. O goddess, we ourselves adore this Linga. 

94. There is a time when there is neither Brahma, nor the 


52 Skanda Purana 

earth nor the Sun; everything is the Lord of the worlds alone 
At that time, O renowned one, we shall adore it. 

95. After the dissolution of Brahma, this great Linga will 
protect this holy spot by adopting the future role (existence) 

96. Ten crores of Lirigas come from the Garigadvara at 
midday. O lady of excellent countenance, and get merged in 
this Linga. 

97. All the Tirthas all over the earth and those in the sky 
always come (here) for the sake of the ablution of this Linga. 

98. Blessed indeed are those men who have settled in Prabhasa 
and who will visit Somesvara who releases people from the fear 
of worldly existence. 

99. There is no doubt about this that all the sins perish in 
the case of those who remember Somesvara with mental purity. 

100. O goddess, this Ksetra is remembered always as the 
most favourite of mine. It is fascinating even unto the groups 
of sages, and Siddhas. O goddess, all those living beings that 
die in this holy spot, reach a spot beyond heaven. There is no 
doubt. 

101. Even the Devas with Brahma and Visnu as their 
leaders do not know it either through Samkhya or Yoga or the 
Pasupata system. 

102-103. Kaivalya (Salvation) which is devoid of dirt and 
attachment is obtained in this Linga. O renowned one, Devas 
and the others wander over mundance existence as long as 
they do not realize the Three-eyed Lord, Somesvara. The Ksetra 
is mentioned as Prabhasa. .1 am undoubtedly the Ksetrajna. 

104. This great prowess of Somesvara has been mentioned 
to awaken you. Those men who read this will attain that region 
of the Moon-crested Lord. 

105. The men who have sought refuge in Somesvara with 
devotion, never again get involved in the fearful cycle of worldly 
existence of terrible features. 

106. The twice-born ones who have resorted to Daksinamurti 
and perform the Japa of Satarudriya are not reborn in this 
world. They have attained the other shore of this ocean of 
worldly existence. 

107. Only a general outline of Srisomanatha has been 
narrate to you. It is partial. In the course of many years or 
many ugas even, it cannot be told through one mouth. 


VTI.I.8.1-11 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

The Glory of Somesvara 


53 


The Devi said: 

1. Once more, do tell me the greatness of Srisomesvaradeva 
O Lord of Devas, O benefactor of the worlds. It is destructive 
of all sins.Tell me the trinity (Lihga) that has Brahma, Visnu 
or Siva as well as all the three as deities. 

Isvara said: 

2-3. Listen with single-minded attention to my ancient lore 
that should be guarded as a secret. Listen to the great miracle 
that happened in that Lihga. 

Like an oblation ( Ahuti) of clarified butter into sacred fire, 
sixty thousand crores of sages of sublimated sexuality entered 
that Lihga. 

4. These Saktis also originated therefrom: Siddhi (Achieve¬ 
ment), Vrddhi (Enhancement), Tusti (Satisfaction), Rddhi (Pros¬ 
perity), Pusti (Nourishment), the fifth one, Kirti (Reputation), 
Sand (Quiescence) and Laksvii (Fortune). All these rose up 
from that Lihga. 

5-6. Seven crores of Mantras and Siddhis, Divine Yogas 
and Rasas (essences, elixir), divine medicines and potions, 
Bhutatantra pertaining to Garuda, Khecarls (sky-stalkers, evil 
spirits) and Vyantarls (spirits)—all these originated together 
from that Lihga. 

7. The other eight Siddhis (e.g. Anima, Laghima etc.) also 
that have been glorified, rose up from that spot along with the 
Lihga. 

8. O goddess, I shall mention another thing. Those who 
attained Siddhi here and were born as parts of mine were 
merged in this Lihga. 

9-10. I shall mention their exploits in due order. The fol¬ 
lowing seven are remembered as Kutsikas: Purakramas, Grahas, 
Mundas, Gudakas, Hetukas, Vimalas and Dandikas. Through 
my Pasupata yoga, these achieved Siddhi in this Lihga for¬ 
merly. 

11. The following seven are glorified as Gargeyas: Rudra, 


54 


Skanda Purana 


Vipra, Dana, Candra, Mantha, Avalokaka and Suryavaloka. 

12-13. O lady of excellent complexion, they become Siddhas 
in Somesvara at Prabhasa. The following are glorified as Pauruseyas: 
Mukammanya, Siva, Prakasa, Kapila, Satkula and Karnikara. 
Formerly they became Siddhas in Somesvara at Prabhasa that 
is destructive of sins. 

14. In every Yuga formerly there appeared Siddhas in that 
favourite Linga of mine. These and other Brahmanas will be 
born in Kali Yuga. 

15. There they will attain Siddhi that is inaccessible even 
to Devas. Thus that Linga which bestows excellent Siddhis has 
been wholly explained to you. 

16. It is difficult of access to all human beings. It is wfell- 
established in Prabhasa. No one who is engaged in inauspi¬ 
cious activities understands it. 

17-21. All the (following) malefic evil spirits and ailments 
perish when one visits Somesvara Linga, like fuel consigned to 
fire. The malefic spirits etc. are as follows: troubles caused by 
Bhutadosas, Dakinls, Pretas, Vetalas, Raksasas, Graha, Putanas, 
Pisacas, Yatudhanas.mothers called Jataharikas (those who snatch 
away the new-born ones), Balagrahas, and Buddha Grahas. The 
evil spirits of ailments are : Jvarabhutagrahas, Atisaras (diar¬ 
rhoea), Bhagandaras (fistula), Asmari (stones), Mutrakrcchra 
(strangury), and thousands of other ailments such as ulcers, 
leprosy, tuberculosis, rheumatism, gout, piles etc. 

22. All other torments from serpents, scorpions, Ghonapas 
(insects drinking through snouts, i.e. hogs etc.)—all these perish 
by visiting Somesvara. 

23-24. The last Bhairava is remembered by the name 
Somesvara. He is well-known by the synonyms of Kalagni, 
Rudranatha etc. I stand thereon, O goddess of Devas, confer¬ 
ring blessings on devotees. Undoubtedly I devour all the evil 
deeds of men. 

25. The Prana (vital breath) present in the body, that moves 
about in the bodies ofliving beings, is one in the whole of the 
Cosmic Egg and also in diverse forms. 

26-27. All the Vedas and the great sages praise this Lord. 
The form of the great Brahman is attained through that deity 
and that Lord is established in Prabhasa. It is like a well con¬ 
cealed gem in the house which no one knows. 


VII.I.8.28-30—9.1-7 


55 


28. That Linga is stationed in Prabhasa. It is like a gem. In 
the former Kalpa it pierced through the seven Patalas. 

29. It is mentioned as resembling the refulgence of a crore 
of suns and the fire at the time of annihilation. Therefore 
Somesvara is mentioned as Kalagni Rudra. 

30. Thus, O goddess Parvatl, the greatness of Somesvara 
has been briefly described to you. It is destructive of all sins. 


CHAPTER NINE 

The Garland of Skulls and Tattvas 

The Devi said: 

1-3. I bow down to that divine refulgence originating from 
Sankara. It was visible to me as stationed in the middle of 
Kalagni Rudra in the ancient holy spot of Prabhasa. 

I seek refuge in Somesvara, the Lord of Devas, the cause of 
the destruction of sins. It is this deity who is being worshipped 
by sages of hoary antiquities with the collections of the Vedic 
texts and the Yogas mentioned in the Vedas. 

O Lord of Devas, O Lord of the worlds, O Lord and cause 
of the blessings to the devotees! There is a certain doubt in 
my mind. It behoves you to clarify it. 

Isvara said: 

4. O goddess of great renown, what is the doubt that has 
arisen in your mind. Tell me, O lady of great weal, I shall 
expound everything. 

The Devi said: 

5. If you are the great Lord, the creator without begin¬ 
ning and end, the cause of creation and annihilation, how is 
it that a garland of skulls has been worn (by you)? 

6-7. Thereupon, Sankara, the Lord of Devas, laughed and 
spoke these words: “This garland of mine that shines with 
many crores of skulls has been made out of skulls of thousands 
of Narayanas and ten thousand Brahmas. Therefore, it is de¬ 
void of beginning and end. 



56 Sl{ anda Parana 

8. A new Visnu is born in every Kalpa. So also a new Brahma 
In every Kalpa, Visnu and Prajapati are created by me. 

9. In this form, O goddess, I am stationed at the root of 
Kalagni Linga in Prabhasa. I am adorned with the garland of 
skulls. 

10. I am quiescent without beginning, middle and end. I 
hold a rosary. I am seated in the lotus-posture. I am the bestower 
of boons. I resemble (in complexion) snow, a jasmine flower 
and the moon. 

11. Visnu stands to my left and Pitamaha to my right. The 
four Vedas are present in my belly and the eternal Brahman 
in (my) heart. 

12. The fire, the moon and the sun are settled in the eyes. 

13. In this manner, O great goddess, I am stationed at 
Prabhasa that has been brought into being through Apya tattva 
(element called water). Let there be no doubt in you any¬ 
where.” 

14. On being told thus, the goddess became glad. With 
great devotion she eulogized the Lord of the Chiefs of Devas 
in words choked due to delight. 

The Devi said: 

15. Be victorious, O Lord, O great Lord, O Isvara, O cre- 
atoi and sanctifier of all. Obeisance to you, O Lord of Suras, 
Obeisance to the great Isa. 

16. Obeisance to the creator, the beginningless one. Obei¬ 
sance to one occupying everything, stationed in everything, 
Obeisance to you, the abode of refulgence. Obeisance to you. 

17. Obeisance to you of sixfold nature, Obeisance to you, 
Dvddasdnta (One present at the extreme point of exhalation 
in Pranayama). Obeisance to you, O Hamsa (seer of lofty 
principles?); Obeisance to you, O bestower of salvation. 

18. While the Lord was being eulogized by the goddess 
thus, the crescent moon in his crest was moving (expressing 
satisfaction). Then the delighted Lord spoke these words: 

Isvara said: 

19. Well! Well! O highly intelligent lady, I am pleased. May 
a boon be chosen. 



VII.1.9.20-33 


57 


The Devi said: 

20. If you are pleased, O Lord of Devas, if I am eligible 
to receive a boon, once again do expound in detail the great¬ 
ness of Prabhasa Ksetra. 

21. O Lord of goblins. Lord Vispu is the leader of the 
slayers of Daityas, Why then did he leave Dvaraka and resort 
to Prabhasa Ksetra? 

22. There are sixty hundred crore sixty thousand TTrthas 
which exist in the centre of Dvaraka. Why did Hari disrespect 
these? 

23. Dvaraka is a holy city surrounded by Immortals and 
resorted to by meritorious persons. This being so, why has he 
left it and come to Prabhasa? 

24. Hari is the leader of Devas and human beings. He is 
the source of origin of heaven and earth. Why did he abandon 
Dvaraka and meet with his death in Prabhasa? 

25. He is the only one who creates motion (mental activi¬ 
ties) in the discus in the form of minds of men. He is the 
excellent one among the wielders of discus. Why did he meet 
with death at Prabhasa? 

26. How (is it that) Lord Visnu who gives universal protec¬ 
tion all over the worlds resorted to Prabhasaksetra? 

27-29. He is the Lord who at the time of the dissolution 
(Pralaya) of the universe, takes in water and makes all his body 
aqueous and makes the world a vast expanse of water through 
his vision, with his Atman realized. How did he meet with 
death at Prabhasa, O Consort of Parvatl? In days of yore, this 
primordial soul assumed the form of a boar and lifted up 
(from the ocean the sinking) Earth along with mountains and 
forests. Why did he, the destroyer of sins, cast off his body at 
Prabhasa? 

30. How did the Lord of the chiefs of Devas, who adopted 
a leonine form and killed Hiranyakasipu, resort to the holy 
spot of Prabhasa? 

31-33. In every Yuga, the Vedas call him thousand-footed, 
thousand-eyed, thousand-headed and highly lustrous. How did 
that Lord cast off his body in Prabhasa? 

The abode of Pitamaha (god Brahma) arose from the Arani 
in the form of Visnu’s navel. That lotus (Parikaja—mud-born) 
was not born (grown) from mud as the whole world formed 



58 Skanda Purana 

an expanse of water. How is it that Hari who lifted up i n a 
moment such a lotus, resorted to Prabhasa? 

34. He is the slayer of hostile warriors. He adopts the eter¬ 
nal Yoga and lies down in the northern part of the Milk Ocean 
the ocean of nectar. Why did that great Lord abandon his body 
in Prabhasa? 

35. How did the Lord of chiefs of Devas, who made the 
Suras Havyadas (those who partake of Havyas or offerings in 
Yajnas) and the Pitrs Kavyadas (those who partake of Kavya or 
oblations etc.) resort to Prabhasa Ksetra? 

36. How did that Lord who adopts form befitting the Yuga 
for the purpose of the welfare of the worlds and redeems 
Dharma, happen to resort to this Ksetra? 

37. How did the Lord who created the three Varnas, the 
three worlds, the three Vidyas, the three types of Pathakas 
(teachers, readers, reciters), the three divisions of time, the 
three Karmas, the three Devas, and the three Gunas, resort to 
the Ksetra? 

38-39. He is the goal of the righteous but is unattainable 
to sinners. He is the source of the origin of four Varnas and 
is the protector of that system (of castes). He is the knower 
of four lores and abides by four stages of life. Why did such 
(great god) abandon Dvaraka and meet with death at Prabhasa? 

40-42. He is identical with the quarters, sky, earth, water, 
wind, fire, the pair of luminaries i.e. the moon and the sun. 
He is the Lord of the Yugas, his body is like the night in 
complexion. He is reported to be the greatest refulgence. He 
is mentioned in the Sruti as the greatest penance. He is spo¬ 
ken as greater than greatest. He is the greatest Atmavan (pos¬ 
sessor of soul). He is the divine Aditya etc., and is the Lord 

and slayer of Daityas. How did that son of Devaki attain siddhi 
in Prabhasa? 

43-46. He is the annihilator at the conclusion of the Yugas. 
He is the slayer of the destroyers of the worlds. He is the 
bridge for the existence of the worlds. He is the purest unto 
those of pure activities. He is the knower of the scholars of the 
Vedas. He is the Lord of those who exert influence unto the 
living beings. He is like Soma. He is like Agni (Fire-god) unto 
those who follow the path of Agni. He is the mind of Manusyas 
( uman beings). He is the tapas of the Tapasvins (Sages). He 


VTI.I. 9.47-56 


59 


is Vinaya (discipline) among those that become tacticians. He 
is the fiery refulgence of the brilliant ones. He is the Vigraha 
(idols, physical form) of all Vigrahas . He is activity of those who 
are active. How did he forsake Dvaraka and resort to Prabhasa 
Ksetra? 

47. Vayu is born of Akasa (Ether). Hutasana (fire) has 
Vayu as the vital essence. The vital essence of Devas is Fire and 
Madhusudana is the vital essence of fire. He is also the vital 
essence of the Lotus-born (Brahma). Why did he resort to 
Prabhasa Ksetra? 

Sula said: 

48. O excellent Brahmanas, on being asked thus by the god¬ 
dess, Sankara, the benefactor of the worlds, laughingly spoke 
to Parvatl: 

Isvara said: 

49. Listen, O goddess, I shall explain the extent of Prabhasa 
Ksetra. It is a sin-destroying secret. It is difficult of access even 
to Devas. 

50. O goddess, O beautiful lady, there are many TIrthas 
over the earth. There are many Ksetras. The Tirthas are crores 
in number and their power is limited. 

51. Prabhasa is glorified as one of unlimited power. There 
are all the Tattvas therein such as the Brahma Tattva, Visnu 
Tattva and Rudra Tattva. 

52. There, the association is much more, O Parvatl. It is 
rare in the other Tirthas. O goddess of Devas, the three Tattvas 
are present in Prabhasa. 

53. Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, is himself sta¬ 
tioned there in the form of a lad along with the twenty-four 
Tattvas. 

54. The Lord of twenty-five Tattvas, the leader of Devatas, 
the slayer of Daityas is directly stationed there, O auspicious 
one. 

55. O goddess, O highly esteemed one, I reside along with 
you and also the thirty-six Tattvas in Prabhasa that is destruc¬ 
tive of sins. 

56. Understand that Prabhasa alone is the Ksetra full of all 


60 Skanda Purana 

the Tattvas and all the Tlrthas. It is auspicious. Do not enter¬ 
tain any doubt anywhere. 

57. Men and even worms and insects who die there attain 
the greatest region. There should be no doubt in this respect 

58. Women, barbarians, Sudras, beasts, birds and animals 
that die in Prabhasa go to the world of Siva. 

59-61. Those who are bound by lust and anger, those who 
are under the influence of covetousness, those who are as¬ 
sailed by the darkness of ignorance, those who are deeply set 
into the Maya Tattva, those who are bound by the noose of 
Kala, those who are deluded by thirst (covetousness), those 
who are engaged in unrighteousness, those who remain as 
sinners, Brahmana-slayers, ungrateful ones, those who defile 
the beds of their preceptors—all these great sinners attain the 
greatest goal. 

62. A man who kills his mother and a slayer of his father 
all of them attain salvation. Still more so in the case of those 
who are of auspicious rites. 

63. It is because he realized this, O great goddess, that 
Haii, the slayer of Daityas, came to Prabhasaksetra and cast off 
his body. 


CHAPTER TEN 

Supreme Excellence of Prabhasa 


Isvara said: 


1-4 O beautiful lady, I shall tell you another secret. O 
lady of excellent countenance, I am telling you what has never 
been mentioned to anyone else. 

Brahma is stationed in the Pnhvlbhaga (part of the Earth). 
Janardana stays in the aqueous part. Rudra abides in the Tejobhdga 

oarn ^ ^ S , tati ° ned in the V *y“ ***& (^eous 

nart ' 7 preSent in the Ak ^abhaga (etherial 

dve d'j, ™ aS m the res P ective parts belong to the respec- 

r rtr^of. 15 no doubt about u He is - 

5-7. The following eight are located in the Prthvi Tattva: 


VII.L10.8-20 


61 


Chagalanda, Duganda, Makota, Mandalesvara, Kalinjaravana, 
Sarikukarna, Sthalesvara and Sulesvara which is well-known. 

O lady of excellent countenance, these holy eight are sta¬ 
tioned in the aqueous part: Hariscandra, Srlsaila, Jalpesa, 
Annan tikesvara, Mahakala, Madhyama, Kedara and Bhairava. 

8-10. The following group of eight are the Adiguhyastaka 
which is well settled in the Tejas Tattva: Amaresa, Prabhasa, 
Naimisa, Puskara, AsadhI, Dandi, Bharabhuti and Larigala. 

Gaya, Kuruksetra, Tirtha (?), Kanakhala, Vimala, Auahasa, 
Mahendra and a Tirtha called Bhima—these are mentioned as 
Vayvastaka. They are great secret, yet they have been enumer¬ 
ated to you. 

11-12. Vastrapatha, Rudrakoti, Jyesthesvara, Mahalaya, 
Gokarna, Rudrakarna, Varnakhya, Sthapasamjhaka—these con¬ 
stitute the sacred eight stationed in Akasa, O lady of excellent 
countenance. All these Tattva Tirthas (TIrthas based in five 
elements) have been enumerated. 

13. The deity of a Tattva Tirtha shall indicate the great¬ 
ness thereof. The great Tattva of aqueous features is a great 
favourite of Visnu, O my beloved. 

14-15. It is mentioned in the Sruti that Narayana is re¬ 
membered as lying down in water. O goddess of the Devas, the 
Tirthas pertaining to the Apyatattva (water principle) have al¬ 
ready been enumerated to you. Certainly they are dear to Narayana. 
Prabhasika is remembered among the Audaka (Apya i.e. aque¬ 
ous) Tattvas. 

16. There, Lord Hari gets dissolved in every birth. Vasudeva 
is subtle-souled and is stationed in what is greater than the 
greatest (i.e. Brahman). 

17. Siva is the Lord without beginning and end. He is the 
greatest Vyoman (sky). There is none greater than he, as men¬ 
tioned in all the scriptural texts and Agamas. 

18-19. So also (is said) especially in (Saiva) Siddhanta, 
Agamas, Upanisads and the Darsanas (systems of philosophy). 
In all these, Hari is not different from me, O lady of good 
renown. Hari is stationed in that holy spot along with me in 
directly perceptible form. He is connected with four Lingas 
but is not known by anyone. 

20. By visiting Bhalluka Tirtha one obtains that merit which 
is attained by Naisthikas (persons of permanent and* steady 


62 Skanda Purdna 

religious practice) of all castes through Vratas performed for 
the sake of salvation. 

21. That spot measures a Gocarma (i.e. 150 Hastas by 150 
Hastas) all round. O beautiful lady, without the help of scrip¬ 
tural texts no one can know this. 

22. O Parvati, there are five Lingas there. Some of them 
have five faces. Visuva exists there even today among men 
(The equinox is fixed for the purpose of performing rites). 

23. Some of the (faces) are very big, as large as the eggs 
of hen. They are entwined by serpents and marked by tridents. 

24. Merely by visiting them, one gets the merit of the wor¬ 
ship of a crore of Lingas. Hence this great holy spot is always 
resorted to by Brahma and others. 

25. Leading Brahmanas of great renown (well-versed in 
the Vedas) and sages endowed with great Siddhi resort to it 
on the eighth and fourteenth lunar days of every month. 

26. O lady of excellent countenance, the Lingas in Prabhasa 
are adorned then and more so at the times of lunar and solar 
eclipses and on the Karttiki day. 

27-28. Puskara, Naimisa, Prayaga, Samprthudaka and other 
Tlrthas numbering sixty hundred crores and thousands meet 
together at the place of the confluence of Sarasvati and the 
ocean as well as in Sannihati at Kur’uksetra on every MaghI day 
(Full-Moon day in the month of Magha). 

29. O lady of excellent holy rites, people cast off their sins 
by lemembering that Tlrtha or by repeating the names thereof 
at the time of death. 

30-32. O dear one! The name of this Ksetra is different in 
the different Kalpas such as Anartasara, Saumya, Bhuvana, Bhusana, 
Divya, Pancanada, the meritorious Adiguhya, Mahodaya, 
Siddharatnakara, Samudravarana, Dharmakara, Kaladhara, 
Sivagarbhagrha and Sarvadevanivesa that is destructive of all 
sins. 

33-38. O beautiful lady among Suras, know that the lengths 
(and other dimensions) are to be guarded as secret! 

In the first Kalpa, O goddess, this Ksetra was remembered 
as Pramodana. AH round it there was Nandana park. Beyond 
that was Siva. Beyond Siva was Ugra. Further beyond it is Bhadrika. 
Beyond that is Samindhana and beyond that is Kamada. 

Then there are Siddhida, Dharmajna Vaisvarupa which is 



VII.1.10.39-53 


63 


Muktida (bestower of salvation). Then Srlpadmanabha and the 
highly refulgent Srivatsa. Then Papasarhhara and Sarvakamaprada. 
Then, O lady of beautiful features, Moksamarga and Sudarsana. 
This Prabhasa is the centre of all piety (Dharma) and it is 
destructive of sins. Hereafter there shall be Utpalavartikas. In 
the centre of the Ksetra is stationed my Garbhagrha (Sanctum 
Sanctorum). O goddess, its names have been mentioned to you 
in due order. 

39. By listening to all the names and to the greatness of 
the Ksetra people shall undoubtedly attain the desired Siddhi. 

40. To one who glorifies this thrice a day it accords great 
rise in fortune. If it is glorified during dusk, the sin of the 
whole day (i.e. one day and one night) perishes. 

41. Hypocrites, men of poor intellect who reside here, deluded 
Brahmanas solely concerned about their sustenance—all these 
go to heaven when they die. 

42. In the centre of this holy spot within the range of 
twelve Yojanas, O goddess of Devas', there are thousands of 
Upaksetras (subsidiary shrines). 

43. Some of them are in the form of lotuses. Some are 
shaped like barley. Some are hexagonal; some triangular. Some 
are in the shape of sticks. 

44. These have Brahma etc. as the presiding deities.They 
are stationed in the middle of the Isaksetra, some in the shape 
of crescent and some in the shape of squares. 

45. Some of them extend to half a Yojana. Some are one- 
fourth of a Yojana in extent. Some have the dimensions of a 
Nivartana (i.e. twenty rods) and some the measure of a Danda 
(four Hastas). 

46. Some have the measure of a Gocarma (i.e. 150 Hastas 
by 150 hastas). Some have the space of a Dhanus in the middle 
(4 Hastas). There are crores of holy sites of the size of a sacred 
thread. 

47. O lotus-eyed one, there is not even a space of an eighth 
of an Anguli (finger) in the sky where the divine TIrthas are 
not present. 

48-53. Even after Pralaya (ultimate annihilation) all these 
following holy spots resort to Prabhasaksetra and survive: The 
Linga that is at Kedara, O goddess and that which is at Mahalaya, 
that which is at Madhyamesvara, the Pasupatesvara Linga, 


64 Skajida Parana 

Sahkukarnesvara, Bhadresvara, Somesvara, Ekagra, Kalesvara 
Ajesvara, Bhairavesvara, Isana, Kayavarohana, the meritorious 
Capatesvaraka, Badarikasrama, Rudrakoti, Mahakoti, the aus¬ 
picious Sriparvata, Kapalin the Lord of Devas, then KaravTra 
Omkara the highly meritorious, Vasisthasrama where, O god¬ 
dess, there are a crore of Rudras who can assume any form 
they desire. All these and other holy spots and shrines of mine 
all over the earth stay in Prabhasa keeping Prayaga at their 
head. 

54. Raviputrl is in the north. The ocean is remembered in 
the south. This is the south-north extent of this holy spot. 

55. To the east of RukminI and to the west of Taptatoya— 
this is the east-west extent of Prabhasa that is glorified. 

56. Keeping within this limit, O beautiful Sura lady, those 
Tirthas reside in beginning with Patala and ending with Kataha. 

57. O great goddess, after realizing this, Hari who com¬ 
prises withm him all the Devas came to Prabhasaksetra and 
cast off his body. 

58. Those who listen to this divine Carita of Rudra always 
or on Parvan days (festival days) go over, by my grace, to 
heaven, the abode of meritorious persons. 

nw 9 i J hUS .[ he ' V ° nderfu l Carita fuI1 of merit has been com¬ 
pletely described to you, O goddess. If anything else is there 

dear (interesting) to you or conducive to the prosperity of the 
sages, tell me. I shall expound it. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


Origin of Rajabhattaraka 


Sul a said: 

d , on b *n g told thus, the goddess, having 

Mo sold andT I, 5 I 1 "* With ' TO " d en Her eyes beca ml 
a“ked again: b°™Pilation covering her body. She 


The Devi said: 

2-5. I am blessed. I am highly meritorious. Great penance 


VILI.11.6-14 


65 


has been performed by me since this greatness of the holy 
place was heard by me from Mahadeva. 

O Lord Hara, O Lord of the chiefs of Devas, O redeemer 
from the ocean of worldly existence, everything that was asked 
by me earlier has been explained. 

Further, O Lord of the chiefs of Devas, I have been de¬ 
lighted by the nectarine words of yours. O Mahesvara, O Lord 
of Devas, I am not adequately satisfied. 

I am inclined to ask something regarding the details of the 
Prabhasa Ksetra. Hence, O Kamesa, O Lord of the worlds, take 
pity on me and do describe it. 

Isvara said: 

6. What is remembered as Jambudvipa is exactly at the 
centre of the earth. It is divided into nine regions, O beautiful 
woman, known as the different Varsas (regions). 

7. Therein, the first Varsa is Bharata. It is also remem¬ 
bered as being divided into nine parts. From south to north 
it measures nine thousand Yojanas. 

8. The distance from east to west is eighty thousand. Himavan 
is in the north. The Ksiroda (ocean) is in the south. 

9-10a. O goddess, Bharata, the excellent Ksetra, is in between. 
There are four Yugas, viz. Krta, Treta, Dvapara and Tisya (i.e. 
Kali). The division of Yugas exists only here. So also the clas¬ 
sification of the people into four Varnas. 

1 Ob-12. O goddess, the men here live upto four hundred, 
three hundred, two hundred and one hundred years, in the 
Yugas Krta, Treta etc. respectively. I told you about the earth 
likened to a lotus with four petals. The Varsas Bharata etc. are 
the petals in the four quarters, viz. Bharata, Ketumala, Kuru 
and Bhadrasva. 1 

13. The southern-most Varsa that has been mentioned by 
me by the name Bharata has oceans to its south, west and east. 
Himavan is to the north like string unto bow. 

14. This Bharata Varsa is the seed of everything, O lady of 
excellent countenance. It is Karmabhumi. The consequences 
of incurring merit and sins are not obtained elsewhere. 


1. This is ihe earlier Puranic thcory.lt preceded the later theory of seven 
continents of the earth. 




66 


Skanda Purina 


15. O goddess of Devas, even Devas wish. ‘We would rather 
attain human birth in Bharata or in the earth.’ 

] 6. Visnu is stationed in Bhadrasva Varsa as Asvasiras (horse¬ 
headed). In Bharata he is stationed as Kurma (Tortoise); as 
Varaha (Boar) in Ketumala. He is in the form of a fish in the 
northern (Kuru). 

17. In all those four Varsas, the Visayas (regions) are set 
up on the basis of constellations. O great goddess, the Vigraha 
(the physical form) is Navapadaka (nine-limbed). 

18. O great goddess, I shall tell you the distribution of the 
constellations in regard to Bharata which is constituted in the 
form of Kurma (Tortoise). 

19. The holy Lord in the form of a Kurma is stationed 
facing the east. O my beloved, he thus occupies Bharata Varsa 
of nine sectors. 

20. Learn from me the constellation basis of this (Varsa) 
set up in nine sectors. Krttika, Rohini and Saumya (i.e. Mrgasiras) 
the third—these have their positions on the back of the Kurma. 

21-23. Ardra, Punarvasu and Pusya—these three constella¬ 
tions are on the mouth (face). Aslesa, Magha, and Purva PhalgunT— 
these three constellations, O my beloved, have their bases on 
the south-east Pada(sectors), Uttara Phalguni, Hasta and Citra— 
these three constellations are remembered as having bases assigned 
to the right belly (side) of the Kurma. Svati, Visakha and Maitra 
(Anuradha)—these three are in the south- west sector. 

24-26. Aindra (i.e. Jyestha), Mula and Purvasadha are re¬ 
membered as based on the back part. O lady of renown, the 
three constellations Uttarasadha, Sravana and Dhanistha are 
mentioned in the north-west sector. Satabhisak, Purvaprosthapada 
and Uttaraprosthapada—these constellations are stationed in 
the left part of the belly of the Kurma, O my beloved. Revatl, 
AsvinI and Yamya (i.e. BharanT) are assigned to the north-east 
sector. Listen to the auspicious and the inauspicious benefit. 

27. If a planet, the Lord of the constellation of a region 
happens to occupy a low position, it indicates a danger to that 
region, O great goddess. If it is ascendant, it indicates the 
advent of good future. 

28. As has been mentioned by me, this Kurma is the Lord 
in Bharata. It is Narayana, the Supreme Soul, who cannot be 
adequately thought of. Everything is firmly established therein. 




VII.I.l 1-29-42 


67 


29. The zodiacs Mesa and Vrsa (ie Aries and Taurus) are 
in the centre of the heart; Vrsa and Mithuna (Taurus and 
Gemini) in the face.The signs of Cancer and Leo are in the 
south-east Pada (sector). 

30. Three zodiacs are remembered as stationed in the belly, 
Leo, Virgo and Libra. Two zodiacs, Libra and Scorpio are in 
the south-west sector. 

31. Scorpio and Sagittarius are stationed in the tail. The 
three beginning with Sagittarius (i.e. Sagittarius, Capricorn 
and Aquarius) are in the north-west left sector. 

32. Aquarius and Pisces occupy its northern belly, O great 
goddess. Pisces and Aries are stationed in the north-east 
sector. 

33. In these regions, O my beloved, the constellations occupy 
Kurma parts. The zodiacs influence the constellations and the 
planets are influenced by the zodiacs. 

34. One can point out the affliction of the regions based 
on the high and low positions of the planets and the constel¬ 
lations. At that time devotees take holy ablution, make reli¬ 
gious offerings and perform Homa etc. 

35. O goddess, it is the Vaisnava Pada where the Graha 
(planet) is in the centre. It is the Lord of the worlds named 
Narayana, the supreme soul who cannot be adequately thought 
of. 

36. The Lords of the zodiacs Mesa (Aries) etc. are respec¬ 
tively Mars, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars, 
Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn and Jupiter. 

37. O great goddess, Janardana in the form of Kurma is 
of such a nature. The region well-known as Saurastra is in the 
south-west sector. 

38-39. O beautiful lady, based on the difference in the city 
it is of nine types. Its ninth part is near the ocean and well- 
known as Prabhasa. O goddess, it is dear to me always. Its 
overall extent is twelve Yojanas. 

40. The PIthika is said to be five Yojanas in area. It is in 
the centre. My abode is in the middle of it. It is near the 
ocean. 

41. O great goddess, I reside at its centre in the form of 
a Linga. 

42. Three hundred Dhanus (i.e. 300 x 4 Hastas) to the west 


68 Skanda Purdna 

of Krtasmara, I stay along with you (there). O goddess of Devas 
of excellent countenance. 

43. O great goddess, that spot of mine is dearer to me than 

even Kailasa. There too even an area extending to a Gocarma 
(150 Hastas by 150 Hastas) is to be guarded as secret, O Lad 
of excellent countenance. ‘ 

44. Ordinarily it should not be mentioned. But it has been 
revealed (to you) out of love for you. This Prabhasika 1 Ksetra 
is illumined by my refulgence. 

45-47. Therefore, O lady of excellent countenance, it is 
called Prabhasika in the first Kalpa. In the second (Kalpa) my 
Prabha (Bha, refulgence) was obtained (seen) by all the Devas 
including Vasava, O goddess of Devas. Therefore it is remem¬ 
bered as Prabhasika, It is the place where the great Suras are 
Prabhavavantah (influential, powerful). Therefore it is glori¬ 
fied as Prabhasa in the worlds. O goddess, the first among all 
the refulgences i.e. the first TTrtha among all the Tlrthas shines 
Hence it is glorified as Prabhasa. 

48. Or since Bhanu (the Sun) prak r stam bhdsitah i.e.is made 
to shine all the more by Visvakarman and the fierceness of 
brilliance was lessened there, therefore it is Prabhasika. 

, 4 ®' 5 ®; ° r ’ ° S° ddess , Prabha (lustre) was regained there 

by the Moon who had been cursed by Daksa and therefore had 
become lustreless. Therefore, it is remembered as Prabhasika 
Goddess Bharat! lifted up the Vadavagni (submarine fire), 
erefore, O goddess of Devas, it is glorified as Prabhasa. 
lnce the ‘Prakrsta BhdratV (i.e. the most excellent Vedic 
text) is always heard on the pathways, O great goddess, there¬ 
fore it is glorified as Prabhasa. 

wavi Th my belov< ~ d) the ocean always shines there with brilliant 
waves^ Therefore, the name Prabhasa became well-known in all 
the three worlds. 

nerrpm M ^7 " great lustre, there the sun always stands 

P „ ‘ e ' therefore, it gained renown in the earth as Prabhasa. 

th „: T J° l ?° Se Z ° meditate perfectly I grant all desires 

wor ds h ih ’ lhC J Irtha became well-known in all the three 
worlds by the name Prabhasa. 


'■ •«**«*• 



VII.1. U.54-65 


69 


54-55. O my beloved, O beautiful lady of the Suras, the 
names differ due to the difference in the Kalpas as well as due 
to the etymological explanations. There are many reasons thereof. 

But whatever name has to be given is remembered as the 
name Prabhasa. 

O goddess, it is well-established in the aqueous principle, 
the first body of Visnu. Thus, O goddess, the cause of origin 
of the name of the Ksetra has been explained to you suc¬ 
cinctly. 

56. O lady of excellent countenance, I shall explain fur¬ 
ther whatever you ask. Hence, O woman of excellent counte¬ 
nance, tell me quickly whatever is in your mind. 

The Devi said: 

57. O Hara, tell me in detail how the Prabhasika Ksetra 
originated in this Kalpa and the cause of it’s origin. 

Isvara said: 

58. Listen, O goddess, I shall duly explain the origin of the 
holy spot which, if a man listens to with devotion, will rid him 
of all sins. 

59. O beautiful lady, O fair one, I shall narrate the great¬ 
ness of the primordial Ksetra which is to be kept a secret and 
is destructive of sins. Out of love for you I shall narrate. 

60-62. In this Kalpa in the first Manvantara of the Svayarhbhuva 
Manu, when Brahma was engaged in creation earlier, the sun 
was born of his right eye, O my beloved. In due course he had 
two wives. One of them should be known as Dyau (Heaven) the 
Queen. The other is remembered as Niksubha, Earth. On the 
seventh day in the month of Margasirsa, Dyau gets herself 
united with Sun. 

63. On the seventh day in the month of Magha Ravi shall 
be in the company of Earth. Then Bhuh and Aditya have their 
union. 

64. Fresh after her bath in the Rtu (menstrual cycle) Earth 
conceived from Sun. During the rains Dyau gives birth to water 
flowing over Earth. 

65. Then for the sustenance of all the three worlds. Earth 
gives birth to vegetation and food-grains. Brahmanas become 


70 Skanda Purdna 

delighted by making use of the vegetation. They begin to offer 
libation to Fire. 

66-67a. They begin to worship Pitrs and Devas by uttering 
the words Svaha and Svadha (at the time of offering libations) 

67b-68a. I shall narrate to you completely how she became 
a queen, whose daughter she was, and who were her children 
Since Bhuh renders human beings, Pitrs and Devas free from 
hunger through the medicinal herbs from her womb, and nectar 
it is remembered as Niksubha. 

I shall explain fully how Rajni (Queen) became so, how the 
sons were born etc. 

68b. Marici is the son of Brahma and Kasyapa is remem¬ 
bered as Marica (son of Marici). 

69. From him was born Hiranyakasipu. Prahlada was his 
son. The son of Prahlada is remembered by the name Virocana. 

70. Virocana’s sister is the mother of Samjna. She is re¬ 
membered as the granddaughter of Hiranyakasipu, son of Did. 

71. That daughter of Prahlada is mentioned as the wife of 
Visvakarman by learned ones. 

72. - There was a splendid daughter of Marici, Atirupa by 
name. She was the wife of Angiras and the mother of Brhaspati. 

73. Brhaspati’s sister Visruta was an expounder of Brah¬ 
man. She was the wife of Prabhasa, the eighth one among 
Vasus. 

74. She gave birth to Visvakarman, the most excellent one 
among artists and craftsman. By the name of Tvastr, he be¬ 
came the Architect of Devas. 

75. The daughter of the preceptor of Devas is well-known 
..in all the three worlds as Surenu. She became the wife of 
Visvakarman. 

76. The daughter of Prahlada who has been mentioned 
earlier is remembered as the wife of Tvastr. He begot of her 
the daughters (called) Lokamatarah (Mother of the worlds). 

77. She is known as Dyau, Samjna, Rajni, Tvastr! and Prabha. 
Valaya is her shadow. She is noble-minded Niksubha. 

78. She was a chaste divine lady and wife of the noble- 
souled Martanda. She was endowed with beauty and youth. 

. ^9-80- He did not approach her in the form of a man. 
Aditya blazed with his fiery refulgence. That refulgence scorched 
her unrivalled limbs. On being looked at by Ravi, Sarhjna used 


V1I.I.11.81-91 


71 


to close her eyes. Hence Sun got angry and spoke these words 
to Sarhjna: 

Ravi said: 

81. Whenever I am seen, you close your eyes. Hence, O 
foolish woman, you will give birth to Yama, the restrainer of 
the subjects. 

Isvara said: 

82. Thereupon, the terrified lady made her eyes tremu¬ 
lous. On seeing her with tremulous eyes, Ravi said to her again: 

Ravi said: 

83. Since, on seeing me you made your eyes tremulous, 
you will give birth to a daughter, an unsteady river. 

isvara said: 

84. Then, due to the husband’s curse, Yama and the well- 
known great river Yamuna were born of her. She gave birth 
to a third son, the auspicious Manu Sraddhadeva. 

85. Unable to endure red-hot iron-ball like refulgence of 
Ravi, Sarhjna began to think within her mind: 

86. ‘What shall I do? Where shall I go? Where will I get 
relief? How can it be that my husband Arka does not get angry?' 

87. After thinking thus in various ways, the daughter of the 
Patriarch, the highly esteemed lady, approved of the plan of 
resorting to her father. 

88-89. After deciding to go to her father’s house, the lady 
of great renown looked at her own reflection ( Chaya ), which 
appeared to be made similar to her in every limb. Seeing that 
divine being in front of her, her own Chaya, she spoke these 
words: 

Samjna said: 

90. Welfare unto you. I am going to the abode of my father. 
O splendid one, at my bidding you should stay here without 
any change (in behaviour). 

91. These two sons of mine and this girl of excellent 


72 Skanda Purdna 

complexion should be well looked after. This should not be 
mentioned by you to my Lord. 

92. Even when asked, this departure of mine should not 
be divulged by you.If you are to be addressed by my name 
Sarhjha behave accordingly (as if you are Sarhjha) to carry out 
my part. 

Chaya said: 

93. Unless and until I am caught hold of by my tresses, 
until I am cursed, I will not mention your secret.You may go 
wherever you desire. 

Isvara said: 

94. On being told thus, the great lady went to her father’s 
abode. There she saw Tvastr who had washed away all sins by 
means of penance. 

95. For a thousand years she stayed in the abode of her 
father. Due respect was paid by Visvakarman. The uncensured 
lady still continued her stay in the abode of her father. 

96. Not long after that stay, the father said to the lady of 
beautiful limbs. He praised his daughter with affection and 
consideration. 

Visvakarman said: 

97. My dear, on seeing you even many many days appear 
as though half a Muhurta. But thereby there is violation of 
Dharma. 

98. Continued stay with kinsmen is not conducive to the 
reputation of a woman. Her stay in her own husband’s house 
is what is desired by all the relatives of a woman. 

99. You are united in wedlock with your husband Surya, 
the Lord of the three worlds, O my dear daughter, it does not 
behove you to stay in the abode of your father for a long time. 

100. Hence do go to your husband’s place. You have seen 
me and have been duly honoured by me.You should come 
again, O lady of pure smiles, to see me. 

Isvara said: 

101-105. On being told thus by her father, “Do go ! Do go ! 



VII.I.l 1.106-116 


73 


repeatedly, she. duly took leave of her father with due venera¬ 
tion. 

She assumed the form of a mare. There is a Varsa (conti¬ 
nent) to the north of Meru. It has the shape of a bow. O lady 
of renown, it is well-known in the world as Uttara Kuru. 

The chaste lady in the form of a mare, abstained from food 
and performed penance there. 

In the meantime, her Chaya, the divine lady, wished to abide 
by her own promise to Samjna and stayed near Vivasvan (Sun). 

Lord Surya, the Lord of the heaven, became enamoured of 
her exalted beauty. He begot of this second wife two sons and 
a daughter. 

106. Of the two sons, O beautiful lady of Suras, he who was 
born first from Sun became similar to Manu. Therefore, he 
became (known as) Savarni. 

107. The second son who was born became the planet 
Sanaiscara (Saturn). The girl was Tapatt whom King Samvarana 
wooed. 

108. This river named Tapi rose from the foot of Vindhya. 
Her waters are always auspicious for a bath. She flowed into 
the western ocean. 

109-111. This daughter of great refulgence was extraordi¬ 
narily blessed and prosperous. 

The ParthivI (Earthy) Chaya did not show the same affec¬ 
tion as Sarhjna had shown towards her children by means of 
fondling and feeding well. The lady did not behave towards 
the others as she did towards her own children. O Parvatl, the 
future Manu continued to forbear this behaviour of hers. 

112. O lady of excellent countenance, he (Manu) contin¬ 
ues to stay on Meru even today performing penance. He was 
patient with his mother forbearingly but this was not the case 
with Yama. 

113-114. He used to beg for his requirements (of food or 
eatables) many times. Due to his childishness and anger as well 
as due to the inevitability of the destiny, the foot was raised 
by him to kick her but, due to forbearance, he did not place 
his foot on her person. 

115. Yama, the sonofSamjna, threatened Chaya withhisfoot. 

116. The earthy Chaya became excessively angry. With lips 
throbbing slightly and the sprout- like hands moving, she cursed: 




74 


Skanda Purana 


Chdya said: 

117. O Amaryada (one who tiansgresses the bounds of 
propriety), you threaten me, your father’s wife, with your foot. 
Hence this foot of yours will drop down today itself. 

Isvara said: 

118. Tormented much in his mind due to that curse, Yama, 
the righteous Soul, intimated everything to his father along 
with Manu. 

Yama said: 

119. Dear father, this is indeed highly surprising. It has 
never been seen by anyone that a mother gives up her mater¬ 
nal affection and heaps a curse on her son. 

120. Mother does not behave impartially with us. Ignoring 
the seniors, she tends to become more affectionate towards 
the juniors. 

121. Due to childishness, it may be, or due to delusion, I 
lifted up my foot against her, Of course. But it was restrained 
from touching her. You may be pleased to forgive me. 

122. This is clear that I, a son, have been cursed by her 
in anger. Hence, O foremost one among the eloquent ones, 
she is obviously not mother. 

123. A son may be unmannerly but the mother ought not 
to be bereft of consideration for him. How did she manage to 
utter, Son, your foot shall drop down.” 

124. O Lord of rays, O holy Sir, with your favour, let not 
the foot fall down as a result of this curse of my mother. Think 
out means to this effect. 

Ravi said: 

125. Dear son, undoubtedly there must be a strong reason 
in this matter, since you, a noble-souled one conversant with 
Dharma, got enraged. 

126. There is a remedy too in the case of all curses, but 
there is no redemption to those cursed by mother. 

127. It is not proper to make your mother’s words false 
and so ineffective. But out of my filial affection for you, I will 
try to bring about some blessings. 



VII.1.11.128-140 


75 


128. Worms will scrape up some flesh from your leg and 
go down to the earth. Thereby her words will be true and you 
will also be not affected. 

Isvara said: 

129-131. Aditya said to Chaya, “When all the children are 
equal, why should partiality be shown towards one? 

Certainly you are not the mother of these children. That 
Sarhjna has gone away somewhere. Even in the case of her 
defective children, a mother does not utter a curse. 

A son may commit thousands of blunders and misdeeds. He 
may even threaten her life. But the mother should not react 
sinfully. Hence tell me the truth. Do not get cursed (by me).” 

Isvara said: 

132-134. On seeing the Lord of the Day ready to curse the 
Reflection (Shadow) of Samjna, she trembled with fear. She 
narrated what had happened. 

The great chaste fair lady said: “I am the daughter of Tvastr, 
O Vibhavasu (Sun), O Divakara (Sun), I have my husband in 
you.” 

Though Vivasvan (Sun) asked many times, she said only 
thus and not otherwise. He became angry and got ready to 
curse her. 

135. On seeing Sun ready to curse, Chaya told everything 
regarding Sarhjna’s well designed act to Vivasvan. 

136. On hearing it Lord Sun went to the abode of Tvastr. 
He honoured (Sun) who is adored by all the three worlds. 

137. O ParvatT, when the Sun-god came to his house and 
intending to burn down him (Visvakarma) with his dazzling 
refulgence demanded, “Where is Sarhjna” ? He (Visvakarma) 
pacified him and told: 

138-140. “Let my words by heard by you. Indeed she came 
to my abode. Unable to endure this fiery, well-known refill; 
gence of yours, Samjna performs penance roaming about in 
the forest. 

You will see your wife of auspicious activities today itself, 
performing a great penance for the sake of (your) excellent 
form. 



76 


Skanda Purana 


This I became aware through the words of Brahma, O Lord, 
if it is approved of by you, O Lord of heaven, I shall make your 
refulgence attractive.” 

Isvara said: 

141. Since Bhasvan’s earlier form was of the nature of an 
orb, Lord Hari (the Sun-god) said to Tvastr, “So be it”. 

142. On being permitted by Vivasvan, Visvakarman placed 
him on a lathe and prepared to whet his refulgence in Sakadvipa. 

143. While Bhasvan, the Lord of all living beings, began 
to whirl, the oceans along with all the materials within became 
agitated all round. 

144. O highly esteemed goddess of Devas, everything in¬ 
cluding Moon, the planets and the stars was pulled (by Sun) 
who was whirling. They began to fall down and become upset. 

145. The waters in all the rivers were thrown up. The 
mountains split with all their peaks and ridges broken up. 

146. O lady of excellent complexion, all the heavenly abodes 
having the support of Dhruva went down in their thousands 
when the rays that bound them together snapped in the course 
of their whirling. 

147. When the sky and the surface of the earth became 
shaky as Bhasvan whirled the massive clouds became shattered 
producing terribly loud thunders. 

148. Then, O lady of excellent complexion, the whole universe 
became extremely confounded and chaotic. O goddess, as the 
entire range of the three worlds whirled the great sages and 
Devas eulogized Bhasvan along with Brahma. 

Devas said: 

149 -150. You are the primordial Lord of Devas. This 
entire universe was born of you. You stand in three different 
forms at the times of creation, sustenance and annihilation.Hail 
unto you, O Lord of the universe, who are the source of heat, 
rain, shower and cold (i.e. three seasons, Summer, Rains and 
Winter). 

Indra came and eulogized that Lord as he was being whet¬ 
ted: Be victorious, O Lord, O Lord of the universe, be victo¬ 
rious, O master of the universe.” 


VII-LI 1.151-161 


77 


151. Then the seven sages with Vasistha, and Atri as lead¬ 
ers, eulogized with different kinds of prayers. They began to 
say loudly, “Hail! Hail!” Then the Valakhilyas eulogized with 
the excellent words of the Vedas: 

Valakhilyas said: 

152. Obeisance to you in the form of Rks. Obeisance to 
you of the form of Samans. Obeisance to you having the form 
comprising Yajus Mantras. O Dhamaga (one who has occupied 
the abode) of Samans, obeisance to you. 

153. Obeisance to one whose sole form and body is perfect 
knowledge. Obeisance to one who has quelled darkness (or 
ignorance). Obeisance to one whose form is the pure reful¬ 
gence. Obeisance to one who is personified Trinity. Obeisance 
to the Atman free from impurities. 

154. Obeisance to the most excellent one, Obeisance to 
one who is to be considered the most excellent one. Obeisance 
to the Supreme Atman identical with all. Obeisance to one 
whose form pervades the entire universe. Obeisance to one of 
endless forms. 

155. Obeisance to one who has become the cause of all. 
Obeisance to one stationed as knowledge in the minds. Obei¬ 
sance to one in the form of the Sun. Obeisance to one whose 
form is very difficult to look at due to the dazzling brilliance. 

156. Obeisance to you, Bhaskara (Creator of brilliance). 
Obeisance to Dinakrt (the cause of day). Obeisance to the 
entire cause -of all. Obeisance to the creator of twilight and 
moonlight. 

157. O Lord, you are all this universe. When you whirl 
everything in the universe, the entire Cosmic Egg including 
mobile and immobile beings moves. On being touched by your 
rays all this becomes purified. 

158. Through the contact with your rays purification of 

waters etc. is brought about. 

159. O father, as long as this universe does not come into 
contact with your rays, the holy rites of Homa, Dana etc. do 
not come to help (i.e. prove efficacious). 

160. All these Rks, all the Yajus Mantras, and all the Samans 

fall from your person. _ 

161. O Lord of the universe, you are Rnmaya (lull or Kks, 


78 


Skanda Parana 


identical with Rks). You alone are Yajurmaya (full of Yajus, 
identical with Yajus). You are Samamaya and therefore, O Lord, 
you are Traylmaya (identical with the three Vedas). 

162. You alone are the forms of Brahman viz. Para (the 
greatest) and Apara (the least); Murla (embodied), Amurta 
(disembodied), Sthula (gross) and Suksma (subtle). You abide 
in all these forms. 

163. You are identical with the units of time such as Nimesa, 
Kastha etc. You are the forms of Kala such as Krsna etc. Be 
pleased and change your form. Subdue your refulgence will¬ 
ingly. O Lord, for the sake of the worlds, you endure unbear¬ 
able pain. 

164. O Lord, you are salvation unto those yearning for 
salvation. You are the most excellent Dhyeya (object of medi¬ 
tation) of those who regularly meditate. You are the goal of 
all living beings who desist from Karmakanda (rituals). 

165. O Lord of Devas, let there by happiness and prosper¬ 
ity unto the subjects. O Lord of the worlds, let us have hap¬ 
piness and welfare. 

166. You are the creator. You alone create the universe. 
You are the protector ardently engaged in its sustenance. All 
this universe will get dissolved in you at the end. O Tapana 
(Burning One), there is no one other than you who bestows 
everything. 

167. You are Brahma. You are termed Hari and I-Iara. You 
are Indra. You are the Lord of Wealth (Kubera). You are Pitrpati, 
Ambupa (Varuna), Wind-god, Soma (Moon), fire, one having 
the forms of sky, great mountain etc. Are not you the bestower 
of all desires? 

168. Brahmanas assiduously engaged in their respective duties 
eulogize you with diverse kinds of Padas (words, songs, prayers) 
and perform Yajnas everyday. Men engaged in Yogic practice 
meditate on you with humility in their minds and attain the 
greatest goal ( Moksa ). 

169. You scorch and cook the universe, protect it, reduce 
it to ashes and make it manifest. You delight the universe with 
your rays filled with water. You create as the Lotus-born (Brahma). 
You protect with the name Acyuta. At the end of the Yuga, you 
annihilate everything in the sole form of Rudra. 



V1I.I.11.170-177 


79 


Isvara said: 

170. Even as he scraped and whetted Bhanu (Sun) 
Visvakarman, the patriarch, experienced horripilation.. He eulogized 
Vivasvan thus: 

[Visvakrman ’s Prayer:] 

171. Obeisance to Vivasvan who shows mercy on the people 
who bow down. Obeisance to the noble-souled one who has 
seven horses of equal speed. Obeisance to the brilliant one, 
the kinsman of the clusters of lotuses and bees. Obeisance to 
the destroyer of the curtain of darkness. 

172. Obeisance to the Lord who surpasses all in sanctity, 
who has an eye on everyone (is all-seeing); who bestows many 
objects of desire, who has a number of shining rays devoid of 
impurities, and who does everything conducive to the welfare 
of all living beings. 

173. Obeisance to the excellent Lord of rays who is un¬ 
born, who is the conceiver and creator of the three worlds, 
who is the soul of the living beings, who is the most excellent 
of all compassionate ones. Obeisance to Siirya, the source of 
origin and dissolution of all objects. 

174. Obeisance to Vivasvan who possesses perfect knowl¬ 
edge, who is the immanent soul, who is the support of the 
universe, who desires the welfare of the universe, who is self- 
born, who is the eye of the world and free from impurities, 
who is the most excellent of all Suras and whose refulgence 
is unlimited. 

175. In a moment you shine on the top of Udayacala (Mountain 
where the Sun rises) even as the groups of Suras sing about 
you in excellent songs. You are like the Lotus-navelled Lord 
in the world covered with thousands of rays. 

176. O Mihira (Sun), your physical form assumes red hue 
due to the inebriation resulting from the drinking of the li¬ 
quor of darkness. By your refulgence you are intent on sanc¬ 
tifying the three worlds. 

177. You ride on a chariot of symmetrical parts having 
divine shining horses, not at all defective. O Lord, you always 
move among the hordes of enemies because of your interest 
in the welfare of the universe. 



80 Skanda Parana 

178. You propitiate the Pitrs of Devas too with the nectareous 
juice. O destroyer of enemies, therefore,I bow down to 
and whet and scrape your body. 

179. O Ravi fond of the people who bow down, O sancti¬ 
fier of the three worlds, I bow down to you. I am dejected 1 
Make me one with splendid complexion and one rendered 
very holy through the dust from your feet. Oh, protect me 

180. Thus, I bow down to Ravi, the most excellent one 
among Devas. You are Lord of Devas. You are a light unto the 
whole of the world. You are the progenitor of the entire uni¬ 
verse. You are the sole cause of the refulgence that creates the 
three worlds. 

Isvara said: 


181. Those who were expert in the art of music such as 
Gandharvas, Haha and Huhu as well as Narada and Tumburu 
began to sing in praise of Ravi. 

182-188. While Vibhavasu (Sun), the Lord of the worlds, 
was being scraped, the songsters sang elaborately 2 . They were 
experts in the three Grains such as Sadja, Madhyama and Gdndhdra. 
their songs caused pleasure through Murchands and Tanas 
well produced. The seven notes of the gamut evolved them 
and embellished them with the three Yatis (pauses). The seven 
Dhatus, six Jatis and the three Gunas were at the basis. The 
oui types of Gita rose out of the four Varnas. The four Varnas 
{Vargas) were duly repulsed. The seven Alahkaras embellished 
t ie songs. There was the purity of the three Sthdnas. The three 
Kalas were perfectly set up. In every mind and dance item the 
nasas and the Layas were in harmony. 

The most excellent Apsaras such as VisvacI, Ghrtaci, UrvasI, 
i ottama, Menaka, Sahajanya and Rarhbha duly danced the 
four types of Padas with three kinds of Talas and Layas as well 

Th Z e were Alod y as (musical instruments) and the 
Natya was of four types. 

189. These Apsaras were experts in depicting many Bhavas. 
There were sounded hundreds of Devadundubhis (drums) and 
thousand of conchs. 


1. The reading vyalhitam preferred io racilam in the text 

' ditails l se r rS5nW h n° IIOW 'l™ bCCn cx P Iaincd previous Khanda. For 
ciails see Sarngadhara s Sangita-ratnakara. 



VII.U 1.190-202 


81 


190. They sounded without being played and their sounds 
resembled the rumblings of clouds while Gandharvas sang and 
groups of Apsaras danced. 

191. Venus (flutes), Vincis (lutes), Jharjharas (drums and 
cymbals) and various kinds of drums like Panava, Ptiskara, Mrdahga, 
Pataha and Anaka were sounded. 

192. There was a lot of confused sounds from the different 
musical instruments of Turya and Vaditra. 

All the people joined their palms in veneration and bowed 
down humbly due to devotion. 

193. All the Devas had assembled and there was clangor¬ 
ous hubbub. Visvakarman kept Ravi on the lathe for a year. 

194. Even as he was being eulogized by Devas, he contin¬ 
ued the whetting and scraping. Sutrakrt (i.e. Tvastr) made the 
Lord get on to the wheel and whirled him. 

195. This was like the work of a potter with a lump of clay. 
Visvakarman continued to scrape with the sharp edge of his 
chisel even as he eulogized Patanga (Sun), the Lord of heaven. 

196. A sixteenth part of the fieriness of the solar disc was 
scraped off even upto the feet, O lady of excellent counten¬ 
ance. 

197. The part of the fieriness comprising Rks fell over Prabhasa 
Ksetra, O my beloved.O goddess of Devas, heaven was sancti¬ 
fied by the refulgence comprising Yajus Mantras of the great 
Lord. 

198. Svarga was sanctified by the part comprising Saman 
songs. Thus Bhuh, Bhuvali and Svah were set up. Then the 
refulgence was split into sixteen parts. Out of the first fifteen 
parts, the following were made. 

199-201. The discus of Visnu, the highly refulgent huge 
trident of Hara, the Sibika (palanquin) of Kubera, the staff of 
Pretapati (Yama), Sakti of Devasenapati (Karttikeya) and the 
various weapons of the other Devas as well as Yaksas and 
Vidyadharas—all these were made by Visvakarman. Thus Lord 
Ravi now had only a sixteenth of his early brilliance. It is this 
brilliant light that is seen in the sky as of Ravi, O my beloved. 

202. On being whetted thus by his father-in-law with the 
excess of refulgence scraped off, Martanda (Sun) had a very- 
splendid body, as charming as that of the Flower-arrowed One 
(i.e. Kamadeva). 



^ Skonda Puraria 

203. Bhanu (Sun) with a lovely body went to Uttarakuru 
region. Tliere he saw Samjha in the form of a mare. 

204. She was free of sins of all living beings due to her 
penance and restraint. On seeing him coming in the form of 
a horse, she had the suspicion of his being another male and 
so went forward facing him. 

205. Their union thereupon was through die nose (of Samjfia) 
Two sons, Nasatya and Dasra, with horse-faces were born. 

206. At the culmination of the coitus Revanta 1 the son 
appeared with a sword, umbrella and coat of mail. As soon as 
he was born he seized the excellent horse of his father and 
fled. 

207. Once he mounted the horse he never left it.Thereupon 
Dandanayaka and Pihgala were commanded by Arka (Sun): 

208-209. “Both of you, do bring back the horse to me not 
using force but through a loophole (i.e. by cunning device) ” 
Though they stood at his side waiting for the loophole in 
regard to the horse, till today they did not find a loophole in 
regard to the noble-souled one. While Revanta went ahead 
Danda and Pihgala closely followed. 

210. They had speedily come out of Uttarakuru region and 

had come to the south of India where there was the holy spot 
Prabhasa. v 

211. They as well as Revantaka were weary and distressed 
due to the rapidity. Gasping for breath with profuse perspira¬ 
tion all over the body, Revanta stationed himself there. 

212. O goddess, from north to south a distance of a hun¬ 
dred thousand Yojanas was traversed in a Muhurta by the 
noble-souled Revanta. 

213. With profuse perspiration all over the body, O god¬ 
dess, he stationed himself in Prabhasa, riding the horse and 
accompanied by Danda and Pihgala. 

214. He is stationed to the south-west of Savitri not very 

Slied of Mjf ' i >■ ° *«—■ - - 

Rpvam He has , earned fame in the world as Rajabhattaraka. 
Revanta was employed in the post of Guhyabhattaraka(a ven- 
erable perso n as a confidant). 

' ’ ^sUeSTabout hlm hird S ° n RcVamaka is rccorded in lhc P- HI.2.Mbh 



VII.I.l 1.216-225—12.1-2 


83 


216-218. Then Lord Sun, the scorcher of the worlds, 
approached him and said thus: “O dear one, you will also 
become a person worthy of the adoration to all the worlds. 

Whether in a forest or in a great forest-fire or during danger 
aiising from the enemies and robbers, if men remember you 
they will become liberated from the great disaster. 

On being adored by men you will become greatly pleased 
and bestow on them prosperity, welfare, happiness, kingdom, 
health, fame and advancement.” 

219. Asvins were made the physicians of Devas by their 
noble- souled father. Yama had pious and righteous outlook. 
He was impartial towards friends and enemies. 

220. Then the destroyer of darkness employed him like¬ 
wise. He made Yamuna, the river flowing through the Kalinda 
mountainous region (near the source of Yamuna). 

221. Savarni, the highly esteemed son of Chaya Sarhjna, 
shall (in the future) become the eighth Manu, Savarnika. 

222-225. The Lord is performing a terrible penance on the 
top of Meru even today.His brother Sanaiscara became a planet, 
O my beloved. 

After giving them boons thus and also to Revanta, Lord 
Bhaskara further explained his name. The son of Sarhjna, a 
bestower of peace on her, goes like this. He was employed as 
the commander of horses by Bhanu. He who adores him on 
the path, traverses the way safely. O lady of excellent complex¬ 
ion, he can be easily propitiated always by men. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

Creation of Yamesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-2. She who was Sarhjna was remembered as Rajhi and 
she who was Chaya was Niksubha.The root^Rajr (Raj) is re¬ 
membered as meaning Dipti (Shining). Raja is one who shines 
always. He is superior to all living beings. Hence he is called 
Raja. Since she was the wife of a Raja she is glorified as Rajnl. 




84 Chanda Purana 

3. The root 7 Ksubh is used in the sense of agitation. Since 
(the earth) is motionless it is called Niksubha. Or (it may be 
thus) since members of her family shall be devoid of Ksut 
(hunger). 

4-7. Chaya the divine enters it (the earth).Hence it is re¬ 
membered as Niksubha. 

The (Lord) holding conch, discus and club is born in the 
family of (that king) who is the Manu in the world now, O 
highly intelligent one. 

On being cursed by his mother, Yama became deficient of 
foot. He came to Prabhasa Ksetra on the earth and performed 
elaborate penance. O my beloved, he adored the Liiiga for 
more than ten thousand years.Becoming pleased, I granted 
him a hundred (i.e. a number of) boons. O goddess of Devas, 
Yamesvara is well-known there even today. One who visits it on 
the Yamadvitiya day never sees Yama’s world. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

Origin of Arkasthala 


The Devi said: 

1-2. O great Lord, Savitr stationed on the lathe was whet¬ 
ted and sciaped by his father-in-law lovingly. The particles of 
fieriness of the son-in-law fell in Prabhasa profusely. O Lord, 
what was it transformed into at Prabhasa? Do tell me. 

Isvara said: 

3-4. O goddess of great renown, I shall narrate to you the 
ancient ancedote, the physical incarnation of Lord Arkasthala 
in Prabhasa. 

Listen, O goddess, I shall expound the excellent greatness 

of Surya. If a man listens to it with devotion, he is liberated 
from all sins. 

5 6. O gieat goddess, Ravi was fixed on the lathe in Sakadvipa 
for more than a hundred years.While Vibhavasu (Sun-god) was 



VII.1.13.7-20 


85 


being whetted and scraped, O my beloved, particles of his fiery 
splendour fell down in Prabhasa, which took the shape of a 
Sthala (holy ground). 

7. O goddess, earlier it was completely of gold on the 
earth, but due to the (evil) influence of the Kali Age it has 
become a mere rock now. 

8. Actuated by a desire for welfare of all beings on the 
earth, Lord Divakara assumed the form of Arka and mani¬ 
fested himself. 

9. Though actually named Hiranyagarbha he is glorified 
as Surya in Krta age. In Treta his name was Savitr. He is remembered 
as Bhaskara (in Dvapara). 

10. In Kali Age he is glorified in all the three worlds by 
the name Arkasthala. The deity was self-installed soon after the 
incaranation. 

11. O goddess, formerly the second Manu was Svarocisa. 
Lord Divakara took the incarnation at that time. 

12-14. O goddess, the deity is the bestower of worldly pleasures 
and salvation. He is the destroyer of ailments and misery. The 
particles of his fiery splendour spread over in an area of five 
Yojanas from south to north and five Yojanas from east to west. 
It extends to the north of the ocean upto Mahesvarl Nadi 
(river) and to the west of Nyaiikumatl upto Krtasmara, O great 
goddess. This area was completely overspread by the auspi¬ 
cious particles of his fiery splendour. 

15. O great goddess, twelve Yojanas were covered by it. Its 
subtlest refulgence issued forth from the primordial splendour. 

16. To the north is the daughter of Bhaskara (i.e. the local 
river Yamuna). The ocean is to the south. To the east and west 
are the two Rukminls. 

17. Within this area, O goddess, the solar splendour has 
spread. Thereby the holy spot extending to twelve Yojanas, was 
rendered sacred. 

18. The middle of its centre is my abode, O beautiful woman. 
O great goddess, my holy spot exists in the centre of the re¬ 
fulgent solar zone. 

19. O goddess, it is like the pupil in the middle of the eye. 
From the east to the west, O goddess, it extends from Gomukha 
to Asvamedhika. 

20. From the south to the north it extends from the ocean 


86 SkandaPurdna 

to Kauravesvari. In the holy spot in the midst of all these I stay 
as Ksetrajna (Soul), O lady of excellent countenance. 

21. Since that abode of mine is illuminated by the reful¬ 
gence of Arka (Sun), it has become well-known by the name 
Prabhasa in this Kalpa, O my beloved. 

22. An excellent man who sees Surya in the form of Arka 
there, shall be rid of all sins. He is honoured in the world of 
Sun. 

23. It is as though he has had his ablution in all the Tlrthas 
and performed great Makhas (Yajhas). All the Danas have been 
offered by him and the ancestors have been propitiated by 
him. 

24. Since the Sun was born in the world there in the form 
of Arka (the plant Calotropis Cigantea), so in the course of 
taking food there, a leaf of Arka plant should always be avoided. 

25. After a visit to Arkasthala, if a man takes food on Arka 
leaves, it is as though cow’s meat has been eaten by him, O 
beautiful lady. 

26. It is as though Bhaskara (the Sun-god) has been eaten 
by him. That man becomes a leper. Hence all efforts should 
be made to eschew the leaves of Arka (from food). 

27-28a. If a pilgrim visits Arkabhaskara for the first time, 
O goddess, he should, after the Visit, give a she-buffalo to a 
learned Brahmana. The buffalo may be copper-coloured. It 
should be offered along with a red cloth. Thereby Bhaskara 
becomes pleased. 

28b-29. In the vicinity thereof, O highly esteemed one, 
not very far off in the south-eastern corner, there is the Linga 
remembered as Siddhesvara, O goddess, this Linga bestows all 
Siddhis. It is adored by all the three worlds. 

30. Formerly in Krtayuga it was known by the name 
Jaigisavyesvara. O my beloved, it becomes well-known as Siddhesvara 
in Kali Age. 

31-33. On seeing the deity, O goddess, a man attains all 
the Siddhis. 

O goddess of the chiefs of Devas, there is a crevice leading 
to Patala. It is not far from it. It is to the south and south-west 
of the deity Sun. 

On being scorched by the brilliance of the Sun, the Raksasas 
named Mandehas and the Salakatarhkatas went to Patala. O my 


VII.1.13.34-35—14.1-8 


87 


beloved, in Kali Age only the crevice exists but there is no 
passage leading to Patala. 

34. Yoginls and Mothers Brahmi etc.guard that place. One 
•should worship the groups of Mothers at night on the four¬ 
teenth lunar day in the dark half of the month of Magha, by 
means of oblations and floral offerings. Thereby Siddhi is achieved. 

35. Thus, by listening to the story of the whetting of the 
body of Bhanu, eulogized by Hara, Brahma and Visnu, one 
goes to the world of Divakara at the close of one’s life.Indeed 
Bhanu is the cause of all holy rites and feelings. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

Creation of Siddhesvara 


The Devi said: 

1-5. What has been narrated by you as the greatness of the 
deity Sun, may be further expounded in detail, O Lord of 
Devas, O Lord of the worlds. 

How did Arkasthala, the ornament of Prabhasa Ksetra, take 
shape? The great Lord has to be worshipped by those desirous 
of the benefits of a perfect pilgrimage. 

What are the Mantras? What is the procedure of worship? 
What are the Parvas (festive occasions) during which one should 
offer worship? How did the deity become Siddhesvara after 
having been Jaiglsavyesvara originally. O Lord of Devas, nar¬ 
rate this to me in full detail. 

How was the crevice leading to the nether world created 
formerly? How did the Yoginls and the groups of Mothers 
come there? O Lord Virupaksa, O Hara, O Lord of the worlds, 
have mercy on me and describe everything to me, if I am your 
beloved. 

Isvara said: 

6. You have put a pertinent question, O goddess. I shall 
narrate briefly how Jaiglsavyesvara Hara became Siddhesvara. 

7-8. Listen even as I expatiate upon the procedure of worship. 




88 


SkandaPurdna 


O goddess, in this Krta Yuga there was a son of Satakalaka 
well-known by the name Jaigisavya. He was an expert in all the 
lores (branches of knowledge). He came to Prabhasaksetra 
and performed a very difficult penance. 

9. He stood for a hundred years with air alone as the sole 
intake, a thousand years with water constituting his diet and 
ten thousand years with green vegetables for his food. 

10. A thousand Candrayanas were performed and Santapana 
thereafter. With meagre intake of food, he dried up his body 
and became Digvasas (nude). 

11. There is a Linga well-known as Mahodaya which was 
self-born in the previous Kalpa. He installed this Linga of the 
Lord of Devas and worshipped it. 

12. He used to lie in holy ash. He smeared his body with 
the holy ash. He propitiated the deity with dances and songs. 
He performed Japa and made sounds like the bellow of a bull'. 
By means of penance he sanctified himself and remained pure. 

13. Even as he was endowed with great devotion and pro¬ 
pitiated the Lord thus, the Lord came to him and spoke these 
words: 

14. “O Jaigisavya of great intellect, look at me with your 
divine vision. I am pleased with you. I shall grant you boons. 
Tell me whatever you cherish in your mind”. 

15. On being told thus by the Lord, he looked at the Three¬ 
eyed Lord, bowed down to his feet and spoke these words: 

Jaigisavya said: 


16. O Holy Lord, O Lord of the chiefs of Devas, if you are 
p eased with me, impart to me Jnanayoga that cuts off (the 
bonds of) worldly existence. 


17. O Holy Lord, there is nothing more beneficial than 
Yoga and I do not wish for anything else. Let me have perma¬ 
nent devotion unto you, Skanda, Ganesvara and the goddess. 

18. Let there be no fear of ailments nor insult to (my) 
n lance, rant me absence of haughtiness, forbearance, re- 

straint and quiescence. 

, ^^ L° r d, O great Lord, O Three-eyed One, I wish for 
these boons from you. 


1. This is the Pasupata procedure of worship. 



VII.I.14.20-32 


89 


Isvara said: 

20. You shall be immortal, free from old age and free from 
all griefs. You shall be a great Yogin of great power. You will 
become endowed with Yogic supernatural powers. 

21. By the power of this well-protected holy spot of mine, 
you will attain the eight Yogic powers such as Anima, Laghima etc. 

22. O most excellent sage, you will become a well-known 
Yogacarya (Master of Yoga). 

23. He who regularly worships this Lihga consecrated by 
you, shall be liberated from all sins. He will attain the divine 
Yoga. 

24. He who comes to this cave of Jaiglsavya and practices 
Yoga shall become a liberated soul in seven days. He shall cross 
the ocean of worldly existence. 

25. Within a month he will begin to recollect the previous 
birth and everything that has happened before. Within a single 
night he will get a pure body. Within two days he will be able 
to redeem the Pitrs and when three nights elapse, he will 
redeem seven succeeding generations. 

26. Further, O Brahmana sage, you will become invincible 
to other yogins. You will have my vision whenever you wish. 

27. After granting the boons thus, the Lord vanished there 
itself. This is what happened in Krta Yuga. It is thus explained 
to you, O goddess. 

28-30. O great goddess, the same happened in Tretayuga 
as well as Dvapara. After the advent of Kaliyuga, the great 
sages, Valakhilyas numbering eighty-eight thousand, came to 
this Prabhasika Ksetra. Near Suryasthala they propitiated the 
Lord of Devas who resided in the middle of the cave. Practis¬ 
ing strict celibacy these sages performed penance for ten thousand 
years and attained the Siddhi in the form of identity with the 
Supreme Soul. 

31. Therefore, O lady of excellent countenance, it became 
well-known in Kali Age as Siddhesvara Linga. O goddess, rare 
indeed is the vision of that Lord on Sivacaturdasi—the four¬ 
teenth lunar day in the dark half which has conjunction with 
the Moon. 

32. By worshipping the Siddhalinga, O goddess, one gets 
that merit which accrues from donating the entire Cosmic Egg. 





90 


Skanda Purdn a 

CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


Origin of Papanasana 


Isvara said: 

1-3. To the south-east thereof, O goddess of Devas, there 
is the Liriga installed by Aruna, the charioteer of Surya. It i s 
very near the Siddhalinga, say three Dhanus (12 Hastas) away 
It dispels the sins in Kali Age by mere vision. It’s name is 
Papanasana. 

A person should worship it duly with great faith and devo¬ 
tion, O lady of excellent countenance, on the thirteenth lunar 
day in the bright half of the month of Caitra. He shall obtain 
the fruit of the Paundarlka Yajfia. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

Origin of Sunanda and Other Mother Goddesses 

Isvara said: 

1-4. Now listen to the greatness of the Pdtdlavivara (Crev¬ 
ice leading to the nether worlds). O great goddess, this was already 
asked earlier by Brahma, the creator of the Universe. 

When there arose prevalence of darkness, Raksasas were 
born there too. They were innumerable, very powerful. All of 
them hated Surya. 

They had Dhumra as their leader. On seeing the noble- 
souled Divakara (Sun) rising, all of them immediately laughed 
at im. Who is this perpetrator of evil deeds who may be our 
estroyer? Standing before Surya, they spoke these and vari¬ 
ous other similar words. 

5. On hearing this, the Lord got angry and his lips throbbed. 
Divakara appeared to swallow the words of the Raksasas. 

‘ *kea killer lion, the destroyer of darkness wanted to 

annihilate the cruel Raksasas. He looked at them with wrathful 
eyes. 

V. Surya traversing the sky with great rays thought of killing 


VII.I.l 6.8-20 


91 


them, but the Lord of heaven did not know the weak point of 
the Raksasas till the end. 

8. Then he saw these ones fallen from Dharma, having 
minds overwhelmed with sins. After considering this. Lord 
Prabhakara began to meditate. 

9. The Rajariicaras (demons) came to know that the three 
worlds were swallowed (pervaded) by the splendour. Then they 
were looked at by Bhanu with eyes (as if) burning with anger. 

10-11. Slipping down from the sky they fell like the planets 
with dwindling merit. Dhumra surrounded by the Raksasas falling 
down from the sky, shone like a half ripe Tala fruit surrounded 
by monkeys. They fell automatically like stones released from 
a machine. 

12. Thereafter, they fell further, dislodged and carried off 
by the wind. After reaching Prabhasa Ksetra, they pierced through 
the earth and went to the nether worlds, O lady of excellent 
complexion. 

13. It is there that Lord Arkasthala, the bestower of all 
Siddhis, is present. O goddess, the great Patala cavity is in its 
vicinity. 

14-15. There were crores of other cavities but, O beautiful 
lady, they had become lost. Beginning with Krtasmara and ending 
with Arkasthala with the Sun as the deity in between these two, 
O goddess, is the holy place of Surya. Attaining the boon from 
Devamatr (i.e. Aditi) the eight Siddhis had set up there. 

16. It is remembered, O goddess, as the middle part of the 
splendour of Surya. It is fully golden. No one without merit 
sees the place, O goddess. 

17. O great goddess, a hundred and one cavities and crores 
of Sparsa gems (philosopher’s stones) are there, and Siddhesa 
guards them. 

18. O great goddess, this holy spot is always dear to Surya. 
O my beloved, in the Surya Parva (festival day of Sun), it is 
more efficacious than Kuruksetra. 

19. Brahmi, Hiranya and the confluence of the great ocean, 
these three meeting places together, bestow the fruit of visit¬ 
ing Kotitirthas (a crore of Tirthas). 

20. The Devamata and Manklsa are there. So also it is 
cited that Nagasthana (holy spot of Nagas) and Nagasthana 
(holy spot of the mountains) are also there. 


92 

Sk anda Puran a 

21. Thus the great origin of Arkasthala has been nar • 

It is also explained how the cavity came into existent J ' ated ' 
the fall of Raksasas. dUe to 

22. O goddess of Devas, the other cavities there have be 
lost but this is clearly manifest even today, O beautiful w^° me 

23-24. That cavity named Srimukha is guarded by the Moth**' 

° 7 be,0ved ' A devotee should w °rship the groups of Mo'th 
ers beginning with Sunanda in accordance with the iniu 
tions on every fourteenth lunar day for a period of one year' 
through the offerings of animals and flowers and exceLm 
incense and lights. Brahmanas should be fed. O eodde,, 7 
will achieve Siddhi. ^ aaess > he 

2o-27. Hence, if one desires achievement of Siddhis bv 
oneself one should assiduously worship all the Mothers All 
these Mothers become famous by the name Sunandagana in 
his Prabhasa Ksetra, O lady of excellent complexion. It is !o 
the north and middle of Patala. It has been briefly told On 
hearing ,t an excellent man becomes rid of all dangers.' 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

Procedure of Worship 


Isvara said: 


1-5. O lady of great renown, now I shall tell you the in 

ir h rrruM ns b the ; vorship of the Lord 

AH 7 be ad ° red by exce Hent men. 

Devas Sinr^ Caded - tbe P rirnor< diaI one among all the 
Devas. Since he is the Adikarta (first creator) he Is called 

no^oly^te^ 3 day n ° r ni S ht ’ no libation, 

mobile or immobUe^exTst USnCSS ^ "° HVing beingS whether 

an n i h ila te s e ve ry t h i ng ^e n ceh & ^ S Aditya creates - Adit Y a 
O jrreat vnAA* ?' u ,? he IS ldentlca l with Trayi (Triad). 

ship of the noble-souled a Bh5sk y ° U h he pr ° Cedure of the wor ' 
Vedic Mantras. O beautifuH^r^ mCanS ° f the extensive 
of all sins. ^ ad y> listen to it. It is destructive 



VII.1.17.6-16 


93 


• sh f 11 teI l you fully, O great goddess, how Dvadasatman 

(i.e. Sun) is to be adored duly as (incorporated in) an icon. 

. , ' f . At . th t°A t f Set ° ne shou,d cleanse the mouth, Then one 
takes the bath. After wearing washed clothes and with purified 
body one should touch Surya (i.e. the idol of the Sun-god) 

8. First I shall explain the procedure for cleansing the 
mouth through Dantakdstha (a twig used as toothbrush) 1 . If 
Madhuka tree is used (i.e. a twig thereof), there shall be the 
acquisition of a son. O my beloved, if Arka twig is used, it is 
good for the eyes. 

9. By using Badarl twig, one shall attain eloquence, by 
using Brhatl twig one defeats wicked people. If a Bilva twig is 
used, there shall be good fortune. Undoubtedly so with Khadira 
twig also. 


10. By using a Kadamba twig ailment is reduced; by using 
Atimuktaka twig there is acqusition of wealth. If Atarusaka twig 
is used, one receives greater respect. 

11. If a Jati twig is used, one attains chiefship of one’s 
community; Asvattha yields fame; by resorting to Sirisa one 
gets all glory. 

12. Conjugal felicity shall be attained by one using a Priyangu 
twig. By resorting to a Plaksa twig always, one attains what one 
desires. 


13. One should never use a twig if it is split, damaged, 
crooked, or dried in the upper part or if the bark is peeled off. 

14. One should chew the twig a Vitasti (i.e. a span or 12 
Angulas) long, neither more nor less. One should sit comfort¬ 
ably facing the north or the east. One should remain silent 
while chewing. 

15. One may have some specific desire cherished in the 
heart, in which case one should recite the following Mantra. 
An intelligent (householder) shall chew the twig always in this 
manner. 

16. “O Dantakdstha (toothbrush twig), obeisance to you. O 
Vanaspati (tree or plant), you have granted me the boon. Hence 
you know my desire. Grant me the full Siddhi (accomplishment 
of desire) always.” 


1. See HD II. i. pp. 653-656.. With minor differences, Smrtis- present a 
consensus on this procedure. Vide Smrii Candnka, p. 105-6. 




94 


Skanda Purana 


17. After repeating the above Mantra three times, one should 
begin to Chew the twig. After cleansing the mouth, the twig i s 
washed and kept in a clean place. 

18. O goddess of Devas, the tongue should not be cleaned 
by means of this twig. If one desires good reputation, one 
should do these two acts separately.. 

19. Cleansing the teeth with finger, taking in salt by itself 
directly and eating mud—all these are on a par with eating 
cow’s meat. 

20. If the mouth remains stale (i.e unwashed) a Brahmana 
always becomes impure. Hence one must use a dry or damp 
tooth-brush twig. 

21. On days when Dantakastha is prohibited one must gargle 
sixteen times with sixteen mouthfuls of water. One should 
cleanse mouth with waterrenderedfragrant by means of lotus. 

22. A Brahmana who touches (the idol of) Bhaskara with¬ 
out cleaning the mouth, becomes a leper for three thousand 
years. 

23. After washing clothes etc. a person should take his 
bath. A lump of clay should be extracted from a clean pleasing 
spot with the Astra Mantra repeated. 

24. The letter H(^)along with the letter U (3) and Anusvara(') 
and Phat is called Astra Mantra (i.e. Humphat). One should 
gather a lump of clay by repeating this Mantra and then take 
bath. 

25-26. The lump of clay should be without grass blades or 
gravel.Three parts thereof are made.One part is to be rubbed 
well repeating the Astra Mantra; another part with the Bhaskara 
Mantra. The third part is to be charged with the ancillary 
Mantras once each. After uttering the Astra Mantra, the clay 
is to be thrown in different directions. Now the water has 
become free from impediments. 

27. A man should cover (ritualistically) the Suryatlrtha with 
the second and third parts once each. Then he shall take his 
bath in the Ravitlrtha. 

28. The sounds of musical instruments and conch should 
be thought of when the devotee meditates on Lord Divakara. 
After the bath, the Acamana rite is performed again with royal 
ostentatiousness. 

29-30. The bath is performed along with the utterance of 


VII.I.17.31-40 


95 


the Mantraraja}. The mantraraja is as follows: Letters H(^) and 
R-(L) a l°ng with Bifidu (dot) and LaksmI.Then the vowel is 
lengthened.The letter S(^) with the Visarga. Ultimately OM 
HRJM HREM SAH becomes the Mantraraja. 1 2 

31. Then the devotee propitiates all the Mantras with the 
fingers.The Devas are to be meditated on the point where all 
the finger tips converge. The sages are to be meditated on the 
left side (Savya) and the Pitrs should be propitiated anticlockwise 
(Apasavya). 

32. Aksara (Imperishable) is that which is sung about by 
learned men as the most excellent of all letters. It has nine¬ 
teen Matras. 

33. After taking the holy bath thus in accordance with the 
injuncdons, the person should offer the Sandhya prayers duly .Then 
the learned devotee offers water with palms joined together 
(as a cup) to Bhaskara. 

34. Then he should perform the Japa of the three-syllabled 
and six-faced Mantra casually (or as he pleases). O beloved, 
this has already been mentioned to you as Mantraraja. 

35. Afterwards the person concentrates the mantras and 
ritualistically touches the heart with the Tirtha (holy water). 
Through the Mantras, he concentrates in the soul and offers 
the Arghya. 

36. The devotee remains clean after the bath. He makes 
a circular diagram on the ground by means of sweet scents and 
red sandalpaste. He then sits there with mental concentration. 

37. Karavira flowers are placed in a copper vessel, scented 
water is poured into it and gingelly seeds, Kusa grass and raw 
rice-grains are put into it. 

38. The materials of worship are fumigated with incense 
and red sandal. The devotee places that pot on his head and 
kneels down on the ground. 

39. He then offers the Arghya to Bhanu (the Sun-god) 
uttering the Mula Mantra. He who makes this offering is rid 
of all sins. 

40. By offering Arghya to the Sun, one obtains that benefit, 
O goddess, which one gets by offering Arghya in Jyestha Puskara 


1. Comparison of the details of Bath in HD II. 1 pp. 656 -668 shows that 
the cryptic description of Snana is different - special to this Tirtha. 

2. As the editor of the Text notes, this Mantra of three syllables is a Surya 
Mantra in Meru Tanlra . 



96 Skanda Purana 

in the course of a thousand Yugadis, a hundred Vyatipatas and 
a thousand Ayanas (transits of the Sun). 

41. There is no doubt about it, O goddess, that even if one 
be without the initiation and utterance of the Mantra, the 
devotee obtains the benefit through the Arghya, if offered with 
devotion for a year. 

42. In the case of a devotee who is learned and has due 
initiation, if he offers Arghya to the Sun, he is not reborn on 
the earth, even when Bhaskara gets dissolved. 

43. Along with his wife, O goddess,he attains ere long happiness 
in this very birth, conjugal felicity, long life, riches and free¬ 
dom from illness. 

44. Thus for the sake of the welfare of good men, the 
procedure regarding holy bath for the propitiation of the Sun 
god has been succinctly told to you. It is destructive of all sins. 

45. Or, an excellent Brahmana who is unable to perform 
the Snana-rite with elaborate utterance of Mantras without the 
requisite Diksa (initiation) can perform Snana following the 
Vedic procedure. 

Isvara said: 

46. Now, O lady of good renown, I shall tell you the pro¬ 
cedure regarding the Puja (worship) in accordance with the 
holy Vedic way. It is conducive to the welfare of Brahmanas. 

47. After the devotee has gathered together all the requi¬ 
site things and has arranged in proper order the flowers etc. 

he should install the deity Bhanu on the Karnika and invoke 
him. 

48. For the Upasthana (waiting on the deity for the prayers 
to begin) the Mantra, beginning with udutyamjdtavedasam (RVI. 
50.1) is to be used. This is the Mantra glorified, O lady of good 
holy rites. 

_ ^ 9- ^e deity is to be invoked by the Mantra beginning 
with agnim duta etc. O lady of beauty, and adored by the Man¬ 
tras beginning with akrsnena rajasa etc. (RV I. 35.2) 

50. The Puja should be performed with the Mantra begin¬ 
ning with hamsah sucisat (RV IV 40.5.). Special Puja should be 

fn!f 0rme< ^ Mantra beginning with apatye tayavo vathd 

(RV I. 50.2) etc., O goddess. 

51. The excellent Samarcana of Surya should be performed. 


VII.U 7.52-61 


97 


O goddess, with the Mantra beginning with adnramasya (RV 
I. 50.3.) etc. There must be constant Japa with the Mantra 
beginning with taranir visva darsa etc. (RV I. 50.4) 

52. Bhadra Devi should always be adored with the Mantras 
beginning with citram devanam udagat (RV 1.115.1) Vibhuti 
(glory) should always be adored with- the Mantra beginning 
with yena pavaka caksasa etc. (RV I. 50.6) 

53. Vimala should always be adored with the Mantra begin¬ 
ning with vidydm esi rajasprthu etc. (RV I. 50.7), O lady of 
excellent holy rites. Amogha should always be worshipped with 
the same Mantra. 

54. Siddhida (The bestower of Siddhis) in all the holy rites 
should be worshipped with the Mantra beginning with sapta 
tvd haritah (RV I. 50.8) etc. With the same sapta tvd haritah. 
one should worship the Lord of Vidyuts (Lightning). 

55. With the Mantra beginning with ud vayam tamasas pari 
(RV I. 50.10) etc. one should worship the ninth goddess 
SarvatomukhI always, O goddess. 

56. The first Bijaksara should be repeated after uttering 
the Mantra beginning with udyannadya mitramahah (RV I. 50.11). 
The second should be adored, O goddess, with the Mantra 
sukesu me harimanam (RV I. 50.12). 

57. With the Mantra beginning with udagadayam adityah 
etc. (RV I. 50.13) one should worship the third Bijaksara. It 
is glorified that the fourth Bijaksara should be worshipped 
with the Mantra beginning with Tat Savitur Varenyam etc. (RV 


III. 62.10). 

58. It is proclaimed that the fifth should be adored with 
the Mantra beginning with mahahivo mahaya etc. With the Mantra 
beginning with hiranyagarbhah samavartata (RV X. 1.1) etc. the 
sixth one should be adored. 

59. O lady of excellent complexion, the seventh Blja should 
be adored with the Mantra beginning with savita pascattat savita 
(RV X. 36.14) etc. After performing the rite of Nyasa thus, O 
splendid lady, Aditya should be installed. 

60. After installing Aditya, the devotee should perform the 
Nyasa of the Afigas. 

61. The Nyasa of the heart is in the south-east, that of Siras 
in the north-east, that of Sikha (tuft of hair) in the south-west 
and that of Kavaca (coat of mail) in the north-west. 


98 SkandaPurana 

62. After the Nyasa of the Astra in the quarters the Karnikd 
(pericarp) should be adored with its Blja. One should perform 
the Puja of the Hrdaya with the Mantra beginning with amosi 
prdnitena (Asvalayana Srauta Sutra) 

63. One should worship the head, O goddess, with the 
Mantra beginning with ayusyam varcaseti vat etc. (RV, Khila 
X. 128.2). Sikha set up in the south-west should be worshipped 
with the Gayatri Mantra. 

64. One should worship kavaca separately with the Mantra 
beginning with jimutasyeva bhavati etc. (RV VI. 75. 1.) The 
Astra should always be adored with the Mantra beginning with 
dhanvannaga dhanvana etc. (RV VI. 75. 2.). 

65. Netra (eye) should be worshipped, O goddess, with the 
Mantra beginning with asvina tejasa etc. (Vajasaneyt Samhita 
20.80). Externally the Nyasa of Soma (Moon) is in the east, 
that of Budha in the south. 

66. Guru (Jupiter) should be placed (Nyasa) in the west, 
the Nyasa of Bhargava is in the north. The Nyasa of Mangala 
is in the south-east and that of Sanaiscara is in the south-west. 

67. The Nyasa of Rahu is in the north-west and that of 
Ketu is in the north-east. One should always worship Soma with 
the Mantra beginning with apyayasva etc. (RV I. 91.16.17). The 
Pratlka is common to both. 

68. O great goddess, Budha should be always worshipped 
there with the Mantra beginning with udbudhyadhvam etc. (RV 
X. 101.1). Guru should always be adored with the Mantra beginning 
with brhaspate etc. 

69. O goddess, Bhargava should be worshipped with the 
Mantra beginning with sukrah susukvan etc. One should always 
adore Mangala (Mars) with the Mantra beginning with agnirtnurdha 
etc. (RV VIII.44.16). 

70. One should adore the son of Bhaskara (i.e. Saturn) 
with the Mantra sam agni (RV VIII. 18.9) etc. O goddess, one 
should always worship Rahu with the Mantra kaya nascitra (RV 
IV. 31.1). 

71. A sensible man should always worship Ketu with the 
Mantra beginning with ketum krnvanti (RV I. 6.3). etc. Exter¬ 
nally the following deities are installed: Sakra in the east, Yama 
in the south. 

72. Isvara should be known in the north-east, Agni in the 


VILI.17.73-82 


99 


south-east, Virupaksa in the south-west and Pavana in the north¬ 
west. 

73. One should adore Indra with the Mantra beginning 
with tamustavdma etc. and one should always worship Vaivasvata 
(i.e. Yama) with the Mantra beginning with udlratam avara etc. 

74. O goddess, one should always worship Varuna with the 
Mantra beginning with tattvdydmi (RV I. 24.11) etc. and wor¬ 
ship Dhanada with the Mantra beginning with indrdsomdvata. 

75. O goddess, one should worship Pavaka (Fire) with the 
Mantra beginning with agnirn liepurohitam (RV I. 1.1). etc. and 
worship Virupaksa with the Mantra beginning with raksohanam 
vajina (RV X. 87.1). etc. 

76. O goddess, one should always worship Vayu with the 
Mantra beginning with vayavayahi etc. A sensible man should 
always worship these Devas in this order. 

77-79. Externally the adoration of Indra etc. from the east 
etc. should be performed thus all round: 

Aditya’s Riipa (form) should be meditated upon on the ground 
where the mystic diagram (Mandala) is drawn. It is red in colour 
and highly brilliant. It is stationed on a white lotus. It has all 
the characteristic features and is adorned with all ornaments. 
It has two arms and a single countenance. The hands hold 
Saumya Pancaka. The radiant disc is circular and is stationed 
in the centre. The cloth is red in colour. This form of Aditya 
is adored in all the worlds. 

The Devi said: 

80. The procedure of the adoration of Bhaskara as 
stationed in the Mandala (mystic diagram) has been mentioned 
by you. You have explained how he should be worshipped 
devoutly by men, O Surasrestha. 

81. O Sankara, tell me how one should duly worship Bhaskara, 
the omnipresent Lord stationed in (represented as) the idol 
and arising from the lotus 1 . 

Isvara said: 

82. Well! Well! O great goddess of good holy rites, I have 

1. Two forms of Sun-worship: 

(i) drawn in a Mandala, (ii) as represented in an idol. 



100 Skanda Purana 

been well asked. O goddess, listen attentively. I shall tell y OU 
how to worship the Lord stationed in an idol. 

83. The Uttamanga (head) should always be worshipped 
with the Mantra beginning with ise tva etc. The right hand 
should be worshipped with the Mantra beginning with agnim 
tie etc. (RV I. 1.1). 

84. The feet of the Lord should be worshipped with the 
Mantra beginning with agna a yahi etc. One should adore the 
deity with flower garland with the Mantra beginning with ajighra 
etc. 

85. Handfuls of loose flowers should be scattered with the 
Mantra beginning with yogeyoge (RV I. 30. 7) etc. The devotee 
bathes Ravi with the Mantra samudragaccha etc. 

86. O beautiful lady, the deity can be bathed with the 
Mantra beginning with imam me gauge etc. also. The bathing 
rite (with medicinal herbs) is to be duly performed with the 
mantra beginning with samudrajya etc. 

87. One should bathe with water from a conch with the 
Mantra beginning with sinivati etc. Uttering yajnam yajnena 
etc. ointments and unguents are smeared over the idol. 

88. O goddess, one should bathe the deity with milk utter¬ 
ing the Mantra beginning with apyayasva. One should duly 
bathe Ravi with curds uttering the mantra dadhikravna etc. 

89. It can also be done, O beautiful lady, with the Mantra 
beginning with imam me gauge etc. It is remembered that the 
bathing with herbal medicines is performed with the Mantra 
samudrajya etc. 

90. Then one should anoint the body of the (Sun) deity 
with perfumes etc. uttering Dvipadas (two-footed verses etc.) 
The simultaneous bath with several liquids shall be performed 
with the Mantra beginning with manastoke etc. 

91. One should bathe with scented water with the Mantra 
visno rarata etc. and offer Arghya and Padya with the Sauvarna 
Mantra. 

92. The Arghya is offered with the Mantra idam visnur vicakrame 
etc. Upavita (sacred thread) is offered with the Mantra vedosi 
etc. 

93. One shall offer garments to Bhanu uttering the Man¬ 
tra brhaspaie etc. One shall adore with flower garland with the 
Mantra yena sriyam prakurvanah. 


V1LI.17.94-105 


101 


94. Dhupa (Incense) is offered with r»<™roi 

Mantra dhurasi etc. One shall offer Anjana frnll * UUenng the 
Mantra beginning with s. midd JjaZTc K w 

95. One should rub Bhanu with Recall n ^ 29 - 1} - 
uttering the Mantra yunjdna etc. For the sake of 1 C ° W - P ‘ g - ment ) 
(waving of lights) is offered. " ^ S3ke ° f long ^ty 

JLs m ^(RvKr; h T e h ad uuerin * 
b ' 9 7 ip T h (or r r !hou,d 

97. The whole body of Bhanu is rubbed with the M an , 

vUvalascaksuh etc. Ravi is worshipped in all the limbs whh the 
Mantra snsca laksmisca etc. ine 

Isvara said: 

98 . Now,Ogreatgoddessof holy rites, I shall briefly tell you 
the Mantras relevant to the adoration of the eight-peaked Me™ 

99. O great goddess, the Astasrnga (eight-peaked moun¬ 

tain) is to be adored in this manner. One shall adore the first 
peak in the middle by the following Mantra, O lady of good 
holy rites. 7 

100. Uttering the Mantra mahahivomahaya etc. diverse kinds 
of flowers are offered. One should always adore the eastern 
peak with the Mantra trdtaram indra etc. (Vdj. Samhitd 8 46) 

101-102. O beautiful lady of the Suras, Puja should be 
performed unto him uttering the Mantra tamustavdma etc. One 
should adore the south-east peak with the Mantra atmim ile 
purohitam (RV I. 1.1). It can be adored either with Agneyi 
Gayatrl or this Mantra. One should adore the southern peak 

with the Mantra yamaya tva makhaya tvd etc. ( Vdj. Samhitd 
37.11). 

103. The Puja can also be done with the Mantra udiratam 
avare etc. or with this Mantra. One should adore the south¬ 
western peak with the Mantra beginning with ayam gauh. 

104. Asurantika can also be worshipped with the Mantra 
raksohanam vdjinam va (RV X 87.1) etc. or with the Mantra 
indrasoma ca vo etc. 

105. One should worship the north-eastern peak with the 
Mantra beginning with abhi tvd sura nonuma. etc. (RV VII. 32. 

22) or the Mantra beginning with yenedam bhutam etc. (Vdj. 
Sam 34.4.) 







102 


Skanda Purana 


106 One shall always adore Merupltha uttering namostu 
sarpebhyah etc. Again one should always adore in the centre 
with the Mantra hiranyagarbhah samavartatagre etc. (RVX. 121.1.). 

107 One should offer flower garland uttering the Mantra 
savitd pascattat etc. (RV X 36. 14) The Arcana should be per¬ 
formed thrice a day, O goddess, and the Arghya is offered with 
great respect. 

108. In the forenoon, the Puja is performed uttering the 
Mantra mata. rudrdnaui duhita vasunatn etc. (RV VIII. 101.15). 
O goddess, at midday, the Puja is done with the Mantra be¬ 
ginning with tad visnoh paranxarn padam etc. (RV I. 22. 20). 

109. In the afternoon the Puja is offered with the Mantra 
beginning with hamsah sucisat (RV IV. 40.5.) etc. Thus, O lady 
of excellent complexion, one should adore Bhanu along with 
the planets. 

The Devi said: 

110. O Lord of Devas, do me this favour of telling me the 
names of the flowers always recommended in the adoration of 
Bhaskara. What are the flowers mentioned in this connection? 


(Sub-Chapter: Puspadhyaya) 


Jsvara said: 


111. Listen, O goddess, I shall expound the excellent 
Puspadhyaya (Chapter on flowers). O goddess, on being wor¬ 
shipped duly, Arkasthala, the Lord, becomes pleased thereby. 

112. The Puja performed with Malati flowers causes the 
Sdnnidkya (proximity to the Lord). If the adoration is through 
Mallikd flowers, the man becomes an enjoyer of pleasures. 

113. Worship with Pundarika flowers causes conjugal felic¬ 
ity and permanent wealth. Through Kadarhba flowers, O god¬ 
dess of Devas, one attains the greatest Aisvarya (glory, power). 

114. If worship of Ravi is performed through Bakula flow¬ 
ers, one acquires everlasting foodgrain. Adoration through Manddra 
flowers destroys all types of leprosy. 

t , 1 If’ 7 h T gh thC n ° WerS and leaves of Bilva > one a «ains 
ArL Zf ^ and Wealth Thr °ugh a garland made of 

“Sde' "s ' 1 ' 5 ^ ' ha ' >" e,dS ' he ° f 





VII.1.17.116-129 


103 


116. On being worshipped with Bakula garland, Lord Bhaskara 
shall bestow a beautiful daughter. On being adored with Kimsuka 
flowers, he desists from troubling the devotees. 

117. On being adored with Agasti flowers the Lord be¬ 
comes favourable.O goddess of Devas, by adoring with Karavira 
flowers, one becomes a follower (servant) of Surya. 

118. O goddess, through a garland of Satapatra one attains 
Suryasalokyata (sharing the same world as that of Surya). O 
great goddess, through Baka flowers poverty is ever averted. 

119. By worshipping Divakara through the seasonal flow¬ 
ers and scents, one enjoys this earth with the four oceans as 
its boundary. 

120. One who devoutly plasters the shrine of Surya with 
Gairika (red chalk) shall attain great fortune and is rid of 
ailments. 

121. If the shrine is smeared with clay, all the eighteen 
types of leprosy and many other ailments of men get cured 
completely. 

122. Of all unguents Kumkuma and red sandalpaste are 
the best. Of all flowers, O lady of excellent countenance, Karavlras 
are the most praiseworthy. 

123. Nothing is more pleasing to Bhasvan than Kumkuma 
(flowers), Jati, Satapatra and Agaru. 

124. If one worships Ravi with all these, what is it that he 
will not get. The devotee should smear and plaster the shrine 
and draw the auspicious Mandalaka. 

125. If one such Mandalaka is drawn, one shall attain 
wealth. With two such, one attains normalcy of health. With three, 
one acquires all lores,andwithfour,oneshallenjoyall pleasures. 

126. Through five, one attains plenty of food grains; through 
six, Longevity, strength and fame; and one who draws seven 
Mandalas, shall become a Mandaladhipati (a sovereign). 

127. By offering a light with clarified butter, a man be¬ 
comes one with good vision. A man offering light with mustard 
oil defeats his enemy. 

128. By offering light with gingelly oil, one is honoured in 
the world of the Sun. One will attain great Saubhdgya (conjugal 
felicity) through the light with Madhuka oil. 

129. Jati is the most excellent one of all flowers. Vijaya 
(yellow myrobalan) is the greatest among the incenses. Kumkuma 




104 


Skanda Purana 


(saffron) is the most excellent of all sweet scents. Red sandalpaste 
is the most excellent one of all unguents. 

130. Among light offerings that of clarified butter is the 
most excellent. Among food offerings, sweetmeat is the best. 
The Lord of Devas becomes pleased with all these and grants 
Sannidhya (proximity). 

131-133. After duly adoring thus, the devotee circumambul¬ 
ates the Pitrs and bows down to the deity.Facing Ravi, he sits 
comfortably and surveys Arkasthala (the region). He then should 
put a grain of white mustard in water taken on the palm. 
Wishing for whatever he has in the heart in the presence of 
Arkasthala, he should drink that water once, O goddess, with¬ 
out letting the teeth touch it. 

134-135. By doing thus, O goddess, the man attains the 
benefit of a crore pilgrimages. O lady of excellent holy rites, 
Brahma, Visnu, Mahadeva, Jvalana (Fire-god) and Dhanada 
(Kubera) resort to Bhanu (the Sun-god) and all of them re¬ 
joice in heaven. Hence Ido not see any deity on a par with Bhanu. 

136. After the performance of all these, O great goddess 
of excellent countenance, the devotee circumambulates Bhanu 
seven times again uttering the Mantras. 


137-140. The Mantras to be uttered during the circumambula- 
tion: For the first, the Rk beginning with tamustavama 
(RV VIII, 96.6) etc. the second with the Rk beginning with 
elonvindram stavama (RVVIII. 95.7). The third is indramsuddho 
na dgahi (RV VIII. 95.8) and the fourth is indrasuddho hi no 
rayim. O splendid lady, the fifth one is asya vamasya (RV I. 164) 
etc. The sixth one is tribliistvam deva. The devotee makes the 



all these Samans should be performed i 


lBrahma). The Japa of 
in accordance with the 


injunctions. 




mi. 17.145-158 


105 


145. Listen to my explanation of another Jyestha Saman, 
the second. It should not be (loudly) chanted. The Japa should 
be performed by one who wishes for salvation. 

146. That Jdpya is mentioned as the greatest by Lord Bhanu 
himself.The application and the definition of the Japya are 
being mentioned. Even as I expound it, listen and understand. 
Stobha (a division in the Saman text) is its essence. Aukdra etc. 
get merged in the breath. It is remembered so by learned men. 

147. (Obscure) Urbhanu, dharmam, Dharma, Satya, Rta, 
dharmamye, dharmavaddharme, dharme vai dhanam gatah). (These 
are the allusions to the different passages.) 

148. With these words one should worship. It is so prac¬ 
tised by the Brahmanas following Saman Sakha. This Jdpya has 
been mentioned as the greatest by Lord Bhanu himself. 

149. One who performs the Japa of this is never reborn in 
the world. Rid of all ailments he is liberated from the sin of 
Brahmana-slaughter. 

150. Another characteristic of the Jyestha Saman is ajyado 
hadyado ha etc. 

151. After worshipping the Lord of Devas thus, another 
prayer is recited by means of five Rks. Listen to them atten¬ 
tively. 

152. The first proclaimed is that which begins with uksdnam 
prsnim etc. (RV1.164.43). The second one is the Mantra beginning 
with catvari vak parimita etc. (RV I. 164.45). 

153. The third Rk proclaimed is idam mitram etc. The 
fourth one proclaimed is hrsnam nlyanam hi etc. (RV I 164.47). 

154. The fifth one proclaimed is dvadasa prathama etc. Ut¬ 
tering the Rk beginning with yo ratnavahi etc. the devotee puts 
the crown on Ravi. 

155. With the Rk beginning with gatehanam etc. the devo¬ 
tee performs the Nyasa (concluding rite of the adoration) of 
the unmutilated (idol of) Ravi. Thus, O goddess, one should 
duly worship Ravi in accordance with this procedure. 

156. Thus the entire procedure for the worship of the idol 
has been described to you by me. 

157. He who always worships in accordance with this pro¬ 
cedure, attains most of his desires in this world as well as in 
the world hereafter. 

158. One who seeks a son gets a son.One who seeks wealth 






106 


Skanda Purana 


gets wealth. One who seeks a daughter gets a daughter. One 
who seeks learning becomes fully conversant with the Vedas. 

159 By the greatness of this Ksetra and by the power of Sun- 
god at Arkasthala, one who worships without any specific desire 

certainly gets liberation. . , . , , _ 

160 By feeding one Brahmana in Arkasthala, the benefit 

gained is the same as is obtained elsewhere by feeding a crore 
of Brahmanas. 

161. Snana, Dana.Japa, Homa—all these performed in Surya 
Parva have the benefit increased a crore times, by the power 
of Suryakoti (Arkasthala). 

162. A man who faithfully performs the rite of Jagara (re¬ 
ligious vigil) on the seventh lunar day on Sunday in the dark 
half of the month of Magha, in the vicinity of Arkasthala, 
attains the greatest goal, O great goddess. 

163. By visiting Arkasthala one attains that benefit which 
one obtains by making the gift of a hundred cows in Kuruksetra. 

164. Arkasthala should be worshipped through Arka flow¬ 
ers and Japa flowers by the permanent residents of that holy 
spot, especially the sick ones. 

165. Divakara should not be worshipped with flowers like 
Patrorna, Unmatta and Amrataka. 

166. A flower of Amrataka is looked upon as Nirmalya (used 
up for worship and kept aside). Since it is not fresh externally, 
it should be avoided. 

167. If one desires prosperity, one should not offer a gar¬ 
land of flowers, if it is not from known (familiar) variety. If it 
is faded, defiled or stale, it should not be offered. 

168-169. If a man makes the sweet-smelling flowers disap¬ 
pear from the idol of the Lord immediately due to greed for 
flowers, and in the case of the regular priest any flower, the 
priest enamoured and covetous incurs the sin of Brahmana- 

slaughter. He falls into Maharaurava and is cooked there for 
many years. 

170. Oh, I shall now explain to you, the procedure for 
offering incense. I shall tell you which incense yields which 
truit on being offered to the Lord of Devas. 

, n !^' t If Loi if ^ vi is offered incense always, he stays nearby 

IJ® a11 desires > whatever the man may wish for. 

172. If Aguru incense is offered, the Lord bestows the desired 





VII.1.17.173-184 


107 


treasure. One who seeks health and wealth should always burn 

Quggala. 

173. Bhanuman is always pleased with the offering of Pindata 
incense. He himself grants freedom from ailments. Thus there 
will be greatest happiness. 

174. Through the incense of Srlvasaka one gets the 
monopoly of trade. One who burns Sarjarasa incense shall get 
wealth. 

175. One who burns Devadaru gets everlasting foodgrains. 
Smearing with Kumkuma (saffron) as unguent yields all desires. 

176. Remaining very happy in this world, he shall attain 
everlasting heavenly pleasures. By the unguent of sandalpaste 
one gets fortune and longevity. 

177. The unguent with red sandal is very efficacious. Divakara 
grants everything. Even if one is affected by hundreds of ail¬ 
ments, one gets happiness and welfare and health. 

178. By offering (powder or) unguent of musk, one gets 
unparalleled prosperity, good goal, scents and highest conju¬ 
gal felicity. 

179. Through scents together with camphor one becomes 
an emperor.If all the four types of scents are offered, one 
realizes all one’s desires. 

180. Thus, O goddess, the excellent greatness of Surya has 
been described to you in detail by me. What else do you wish 
to ask? 


The Devi said: 

181. O my Lord, if, in this way. Lord Surya is the most 
excellent of all luminaries, why is he swallowed by Rahu, the 
son of Sirhhika? 


Isvara said: 

182 Listen, O goddess, I shall explain the cause of an 
eclipse. It destroys all sins and resolves all illusions and mis- 

^183. O beautiful lady, Rahu is (positioned) ben ^* ** 
disc of the Sun. He seeks nectar and so is stationed i 

chariot till the liquid nectar drops down. 

184. He is therefore hidden by the disc. It is the solar 



108 


Skanda Purana 


eclipse. No one can swallow him. Aditya certainly burns (all). 

jgg Those beginning with Brahma worship him (the Sun- 
god). He is the primordial one among all heaven-dwellers. All 
other Devas and Danavas are born of the body of Aditya. 

186. He is called Aditya because he is the first and primor¬ 
dial agent. The Lord, the destroyer of all sins, is stationed in 
Prabhasa. 

187. The Lord is the bestower of worldly pleasures and 
salvation. He is the destroyer of ailments and evil deeds. There 
in the holy spot, O goddess, the guardians of the world and 
great sages became Siddhas. 

188-192. Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, sages, 
Dhanada (Kubera), Bhlsma, Yayati, Galava and Samba attained 
the great Siddhi from this place. 

O goddess of Devas, this, the excellent greatness of Surya, 
is a great secret. It should not be divulged to people of wicked 
intellect and sinners in particular. This story should be told 
neither to an atheist nor to one who has no faith, nor to a 
ruthless man at any cost. 

If one is not ardently devoted to Siva, it is not to be passed 
on to him. This story should be told to a son, to a disciple, 
to a righteous one and to one who abides by justice. 


The great Brahman should be mentioned to a devotee of 
Suiya and to one of good holy rites. This greatness of the Lord 


of Arkasthala is excellent. 



iq<7 tt . . 

• He is protected by Yoginls. He i: 


is not separated from 




VII.1.17.198-202—18.1-3 


109 


dear ones. A Brahmana should listen to the story after sipping 
water ritualistically and becoming clean. He will get all desired 
things. No doubt should be entertained about this. 

198. O lady of excellent countenance, by the glorification 
of the origin of Surya, a Vaisya gets unlimited prosperity, a 
Ksatriya becomes Lord of the earth. Merchants will flourish 
hundred times more in their trading activities. 

199-200. O beautiful lady, Sudras will attain all desired 
objects. All fear of premature death and terrible death due to 
accidents perishes. There is no doubt that what is done at the 
royal palace gets nullified (i.e. complaints against a devotee do 
not stand. He is acquitted). Richly endowed with all desired 
objectives, he is honoured in the world of the Sun. 

201. Thus, O goddess, the greatness of the deity Sun has 
been narrated in the context of Arkasthala.What else do you 
wish to hear? 

202. May the Solar Disc protect you all. It is the perma¬ 
nent abode of vigour. It is the goal unto waters, eternal light 
unto the quarters. It is the gateway to Siddhis. It destroys 
obstacles, dangers. It is the common eye for all the worlds. It 
is the golden lotus in the lake of the vast firmament. It is the 
brilliant earring unto heaven. It is the means of reckoning the 
time. It has no destruction nor has it any boundary. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

The Birth of Moon-God 


Sula said: 

1. O leading Brahmanas, on being told thus by Sankara, 
the goddess of great renown further asked him about the details 
of the greatness of the Ksetra. 

The Devi said: 

2. O my Lord, today my birth has become fruitful. My 
penance too has borne fruit. O Sankara, with your favour, 
divinity has been attained. 

3. Today I have become one who has done an auspicious 
act. Wisdom-eye has been granted by you. Today my ears have 


110 


Skanda Purana 


become adorned with the ear-ornaments in the form of the 
greatness of the ^ becomc . solid entity as knowl- 

4. ioaayi / , Today my decorum and 

nSltobS a " d ' characteristics have become well-defined. 

5 Today my delusion about the pilgrimage to holy places 
has become dispelled. O most excellent one among honoured 
ones, my mind has become steady in regard^ to Prabhasa 

“ 7 . The Lord of Suras was propitiated by me earlier. 
Today the Lord has become pleased. I was surrounded by fire 
(in Paiicagni penance). I have been standing on a single foot. 
That penance has become fruitful today. O Lord to .whom 
devotees are favourites, the greatness of Prabhasa Ksetra has 
been revealed to me today. 

8. I am asking you again, O Lord of Devas. O Lord, do tell 
me the exact facts. 

9. Still, O Lord, I entertain doubts regarding the great¬ 
ness of the Ksetra and the Tirtha. O Lord Mahesvara, do tell 
me if there is any other interesting thing. 

10. Here this Candra (Moon) is on your head. Of whom 
is he born and how? At what time? Do tell me, O Lord! 


Isvara said: 

11-12. This is the period (Kalpa) well-known as Varaha. 
The second Parardha of Brahma is current now.At the begin¬ 
ning of the second month, this is the Pratipad (first lunar 
day). Lord Varaha (the divine Boar, Visnu) redeemed and 
lifted up Dhara (the Earth) on this day, O my beloved. There¬ 
fore, this Kalpa came to be known by the name Varaha Kalpa 
on the Earth. 

13-14. In that Kalpa, O great goddess, O my beloved, the 
Sandhyamsa (twilight period i.e. interregnum of two Kalpas) 
has passed. The First Manu Svayambhuva was reigning, O goddess. 
The Ocean of Milk was being churned by Devas and Danavas. 
Gems, fourteen in number, were born (recovered) therefrom. 

15. Among them the highly refulgent Candra is one born 
of the Tattva (eternal entities, principles). O goddess, O my 
beloved, he was held and kept on the head by me where he 
still continues to be. 

16. O great goddess, when the poison (Halahala) was swallowed 



VII. 1.18.17-18—19.1-8 


111 


by me while I was stationed in Prabhasa, Candra was formerly 
made my ornament - for the relief (from the effects of poison). 

17. Since I have been adorned with the Moon (SasI), I 
came to be known as Sasibhusana (Moon-ornamented). Even 
today I am stationed in that holy spot in the form of Svayam- 
bhulinga. 

18. I am the bestower of all Siddhis, O my beloved. I continue 
to stay through the duration of the Kalpa.Thus it has been 
narrated, O goddess; what else do you wish to ask? 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 
✓ 

Incarnations of Sri Visnu 


The Devi said: 

1 If it is so, O Lord, why was the Full-Moon with all its 
digits not worn by you? Tell me the reason for (liking) the last 
part of the digits. 


lsvara said: 

2-5. Ama (New Moon) is mentioned as the Mahakala (greatest 
digit as distinguished) in sixteen types (of Raids), O goddess. 
It is the greatest Maya and the supporter of the bodies of the 

Beginning with Ama and ending with Paurnamas i (Full-Moon) 
there are sixteen Kalas pertaining to the Moon.They are called 
Ttihis (Lunar days). The sixteen Kalas are thus 

Ama is the greatest and subtlest Saku. O goddess, it is 

^There^re'sixteen'primordia^Stiaras (Notes). They are men¬ 
tioned in the due order of time units, beginning wuh creation 
(of the world) and ending with its annihilation. ° bel oved, 
they should be known by the experts on time as unm of tinI . 

«• 

AyTna"vltmm (year), Yuga, Manvantara, Kalpa 

the sixteenth. Kala Viaarjan I (the creative one) is based on the 

1. This shows ihot ihe author accepted Pauroimania Calendar. 



112 


Skanda Purana 


Jlva (the individual soul). It creates the entire universe the 
two Visuvas (equinoxes) being included. Kala Samvarani ' (that 
which conceals and covers), O my beloved, annihilates the universe. 

9 . A fourth of the winking time is called Truti. Under¬ 
stand, O Mahesvari, that Nimisa is twice that (Lava is included 

in between). . _ 

10. Thirty Nimisas make a Kdstha and twenty Kasthas make 

one Kald. A Muhurta consists of twenty Kalas and fifteen Muhurtas 
make a Dina (day). 

11. Night is of the same duration as Dina (day) and these 
two together make one Alioratra (night plus day=24 Hours). 
Fifteen Ahordtras make one Paksa (fortnight). Two Paksas to¬ 
gether make what is called Mdsa (month). 

12-13. Six months make one Ayana and two Ay anas make 
one Varsa (year).Four million three hundred twenty thousand 
years should be known as one Caturyuga according to the solar 
reckoning. Seventy-one Caturyugas can be cited as constituting 
one Manvantara. 

14. This period along with the end of a month is acclaimed 
as the span of life of Indra.The period covered by the lives of 
fourteen Indras constitutes a Kalpa and it shall be one day of 
Brahma. 

15. The same period of a thousand Caturyugas constitutes 
his Ratri (Night) of Brahma. O my beloved, he (Brahma) lives 
for a hundred years calculated thus. 

16. Along with half of a Nimisa pertaining to me, fourteen 
thousand Visnus andunlimited number of Pitamahas (Brahmas)die. 

17. O goddess of Devas, this universe is created (and 
maintained) in this order. The reckoning may be lunar and 
solar, the universe is infinite and variegated. 

• L 8 ' 2 S ° d J d c' SS -’. thC KaIa is unborn > beginningless and 
mutable and Sasin (Moon) is established therein with face 
down and accompanied by it. 

should 2T thC 'T 102 3nd W3ning of the Moon and the Sun 

narrate] IvZZ' r ^ ° f Creatio " that been 

20 b L , ^°, W hSten to the annihilation. 

20-23. Mahakalpa is struck (becomes extinct) by passing 

" SS 7S Hcnc’rr^ %Zt7 YCd bUl WUhdraWn Whhin 




VII.1.19.24-33 


113 


away of Kalpas constituting it and a Kalpa is destroyed by 
Manvantaras. Masa gets annihilated by Paksas and that (Paksa) 
is divided through Ahoratras. This Ahoratra is divided by Muhurta 
and a Muhurta is struck down by Kalas. Kala is made extinct 
through Kasthas and Kastha is divided through Nimisas. Nimisa 
is ended through Lavas and the Lava is divided by means of 
Truti. Thus that (which is beyond that) remains quiescent, sans 
characteristics and devoid of aberrations. The Kala thereof, 
the great Maya has been held over the head. O my beloved, 
it is the Sakti of the Lord of Devas. It has the form of the 
universe. O Parvatl, it deludes the Santana (series, progeny) 
and makes it undergo worldly existence. 

24. Thus this universe, O goddess, has its characteristics of 
origin and sustenance. The entire universe gets dissolved wherein 
it is born. 

25. Such is the Sakti in the form of Maya. It’s features are 
Suddha (pure) and Asuddha (impure). To you, O goddess, it 
reveals itself as slaying in the form of Candra (Moon). 

The Devi said: 

26. I performed penance in which I got myself scorched 
by five fires for many crores of years. O Lord, O Lord of the 
universe, that penance has become fruitful today. 

27. The Srstiyoga (process of creation etc.) is understood 
by me, O Mahesvara, and that of the annihilation too (is 
understood). The origin of the Moon and the magnitude of 
Kala also (is understood). 

28. Now, O Lord of Devas, there is a doubt in my mind. 
O Lord Mahesvara, my curiosity is very great. Do tell me. 

29. Sasin (Moon) that delights everyone is born of nectar. 
O Lord of Devas, this Candramas is your de-ar favourite. 

30. In regard to the word Candra, the root generally taken 
is VEad ‘w delight’, but I think it means whiteness and aqueousness. 

31. Sasin is the Lord of all herbs.He pleases the Pitrs much. 
He is your devotee. Heiseagertoserveyou. He has resorted toyou. 

32-33. You are the Lord whose crest is embellished by groups 
of Cosmic Eggs coming into clash with one another. Yet he has 
a stigma despite being established on your head. This arouses 
my curiosity. If such a Candra too has to suffer, then why 
should a miserable one in the world be bewailed and pitied. 


Skanda Purana 

114 

, 4.,7 A parallel instance is not seen in all the three worlds, 
Tl :. be so This is a case where you can bring about an 
end to this. (Yet you do not do so.) In this regard, O Mahesvara, 
everyone has a grave doubt as it is in my case^ What « the cause 
of the origin of the stigma in the Moon? O Lord Mahesvara, 
do tell me what caused it. How comes it that one who has 
issued forth from nectar has a stigma? He is your favourite, O 
Lord of Devas, yet the stigma continues to be there. My 
curiosity is great, O Lord. It behoves you to tell me the truth. 


38. On being enquired thus by Parvatl, Mahesvara, the Lord 
of Devas, became highly pleased. He spoke to the Daughter of 
the Mountain lovingly: 


Isvara said: 


39 . O goddess of excellent complexion, how is it that a 
great doubt such as this has occurred to you ? No aspersion 
should be cast on me. O my beloved, do not be agitated. It 
is due to the power of your father (i.e. Daksa) that Sasin con¬ 
tracted this stigma. 

40. O goddess, it is due to the inevitability of the destined 
Karma. The Moon was told: “You should be impartial in regard 
to all your wives.” Since the Moon transgressed this command 
of Daksa (he had to incur this curse). 

41. O my beloved, Sasin did do something against his words 
(of advice).So he was cursed. And, O goddess, it is this that 
you have asked me, the cause of the stigma (on the Moon). 

42. In every kalpa, O beautiful lady, there is difference due 
to various reasons. It is numberless and hence cannot be narrated. 
O my beloved, it cannot be mentioned by me. 

43. Innumerable Moons come into existence again and again 
and they perish. In every Manvantara this happens, O goddess 


Pi«lJ nn ,T\ rable . ,r ' th ° S ' ( P eriods > called Kalpa. The 

numerahf '""“merable and Haris too are in- 

numerable. But Mahesvara is one and only one 

crores andl° f bubWes in wattr ’ ° "V Moved, 
issue forth fron^me^n^my^sporr Brahmaa< ^ as (Cosmic Eggs, 
46. In different places (Cosmic Eggs), four-faced BrahmSs, 


VII.1.19.47-60 


115 


Haris and Bhavas are created by the Pradhana (Maya). Then 
the proximity to Sarhbhu was obtained. 

47. 1-Ie (Mahesvara) brings about the mutual merger and 
dissolution of beings as well as the beginning and end. Lord 
Mahesvara is the agentof creation, annihilation and sustenance. 

48. I get combined with Rajas at the time of creation. I am 
established in Sattva while maintaining it. I am united with 
Tamas during the annihilation (of the world). Thus I abide in 
three forms. 

49 . Hence Brahma is the son of Mahesvara. Siva is the 
Lord, master of Brahma. Sadasiva may become Visnu and Brahma, 
because he is Sarvdtmaka (the immanent soul of all,identical 


with all). 

50. He alone is Lord Rudra and Visnu, the Lord of the 
entire universe.These worlds are in this Cosmic Egg, this world 
is within the universe. 

51. O goddess, O highly intelligent one, it is impossible to 
count the Moons,Suns and Planets which are (now) in exist¬ 
ence, and those that have come and gone and those which are 
as yet to come. 

52. In the present Varaha Kalpa, O intelligent lady, six 
Moons have already come and gone in the Cosmic Egg. 

53. O great goddess, the present one issued forth from 
nectar and is seen now weak and wearied due to the curse of 

Daksa and is the seventh one. 

54-56. In the second Parardha of Brahma, the thirtieth 
Kalpa was well-known as Pitrkalpa, In the beginning of l ' ie 
Svayambhuva Manvantara therein, you were (known as) Sato. 
O great goddess, the Daksa who was then your father was born 
of Prana, the patriarch. But in this Manvantara, O goddess, 
Daksa was born of Pracetas. 

57. Now, O my beloved, Daksa will be born of the right 
Aiigustha (thumb). All the Brahmanas beginning with Daksa 
are born in every Yuga. 

58. They will again die. A sensible man does not bee 

deluded thereby. O goddess, on being insulted by him ( 
formerly you abandoned your body. . 

59. Thus bereaved of you formerly, O m >'^ ’ 

separated from you till the Caksusa Manvantara of theVarahakalp^ 

60. This is the twenty-first Manu (i.e. beginni g 


116 


Skanda Pur ana 


Svayaiiibhuva of Pilrkalpa and ending with Caksusa of Varaha 
Kalpa) in the Kalpa called Varaha. 0 great goddess, in every 
Kalpa you will have a different name. 

61. In this Varaha Kalpa, O goddess, you became Parvatl 
obtained by Himavan through his penance, when the Caksusa 
Manvantara has passed off. 

62. O beautiful lady, due to the anger of Daksa you had 
to be separated from me for the duration of a day of Brahma. 
Your span of life is the period of his six months. 

63. O goddess, the sages who were formerly cursed by me 
out of my anger in your case, are also born along with you in 
the Vaivasvata Manvantara. 

64. They are the eight sons of Brahma, viz. Bhrgu, Arigiras, 
Marici, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri and Vasistha. 

65. Formerly, in theSvayambhuva Manvantara they had been 
cursed at the lime of the Yajna of Daksa. O goddess, they are 
reborn in this Kalpa after the Caksusa Manvantara has elapsed. 

66-67. Adopting the VarunI body in the course of his Yajna, 
the great Lord Brahma performed the Homa of his Sukra (semen) 
with a desire to get progeny. 

Then the sages with the refulgence of the solar disc were 
born again. O my beloved, in order to woo you, they were sent 
by me to your father (Himavan). I hope you remember it, O 
lady of holy vows. 

68-69. Why digress with profuse verbosity? I shall give reply 
to your excellent question. In the present second Parardha of 
Brahma beginning with Sveta Kalpa and ending with the Varaha 
Kalpa, many Candras have come and gone. O lady of excellent 
countenance, listen to them. 

ha™ co™ ° d , d | I” ° f D T' fOUr hu " dred and ““‘V™ “oons 
ve come and gone. O my beloved, the present one is the 
four hundred twenty-seventh. present one is the 

Tretayuea o^Va^ 000 * S P resent now * s born in the tenth 
the context of theT'^ Man f vantara al °ng with Dattatreya.In 

human O^bT 1 JT ^ 

(later) the earlier nhvcirJ? ° 7 beloved > 1 sh *Il describe 

was in the fifteenth Treta ThC F ' fth incarnation 

(as 7 preceptor) WaS M * ndh5t *’ the emperor, along with Utathya 


VII.1.19.78-86 


117 


In ihe nineteenth Treta Yuga was bornJamadagnya who was 
the slayer of all Ksatriyas. It was the sixth incarnation with 
Visvamitra as the leader (teacher?). 

In the twenty-fourth (Treta) Yuga, Rama was born with Vasistha 
as Priest. That was the seventh incarnation. He was the son of 
Dasaratha and the incarnation was for (the slaying of) Ravana. 

Visnu was born as Vedavyasa, the eighth incarnation 1 . It was 
in the twenty-eighth Dvapara and he was born of Parasara with 
Jatukarnya as the leader (priest). 

The ninth incarnation of Visnu was also then born as the 
son of Acliti and Kasyapa. 

78-80. He was born of DevakI and Vasudeva with Brahmagarga 
as leader (priest, preceptor). It was in the twenty-first Dvapara 
towards its close. When Dharma was spoiled Visnu was born in 
the Vrsni dynasty. He was born in order to establish Dharma. 
He destroyed the Asuras. 

He who was the powerful one named Pramati will be born 
as Kalki in the Gotra of Candramas, (with) the name of Visnuyasas. 
He will have the exploit of Parasarya (Vyasa). 

81. He will be the tenth incarnation. He is not yet born. 
With Yaj naval kya as the priest he will be dragging (taking with 
him) an army full of elephants, horses and chariots. 

82. He will be accompanied by hundreds and thousands ol 
fully armed Brahmanas.He will exterminate all the Sudra kings 

83. Thousands of heretics, barbarian tribes and robbers 
will be slain including the haters of Brahmanas and the Vedas, 
those who are not very religious and pious. 

84. The powerful hero will move about on the earth re¬ 
maining invisible to all living beings. He will establish his 
soverignty.The mighty one was (will be) a destroyer of many 
brave enemies. 

85. With a part of Manava Deva (Lord and incarnation of Manu) 
he will undermine all those already so destined. Along with his 
followers he will disappear in the middle of Gariga and Yamuna. 

86. When Kalki passed away along with his ministers and 
army, when all the kings were also slain, the subjects became 
helpless (leaderless). 

1. The author does not recognize the popular belief of Buddha being the 

ninth Avatara. By making Vyasa as the eighth and Kr$na as the ninth 

incarnation, Buddha is deleted from the list of Avataras. 



118 


Skanda Purana 


87 Succour and protection having been denied they (people) 
began attacking one another and continued kill.ng one an- 
other in fights. They were highly miserable and lamented much. 

88 When this Kaliyuga of thousand years according to the 
divine reckoning becomes diminished and when it becomes 
extinct along with the Sandhi (intervening period) Krta Yuga 
will begin. 

89. When the Sun and the Moon as well as Jupiter come 
to the same zodiac with the Pusya Star, Krta Yuga will set in. 

90. When Janardana was born the constellation was Abhijit, 
the night was Jayanti and the Muhurta was Vijaya. 


The Devi said: 

91. The entire (story of incarnation) has not been narrated 
as it happened as a result of the curse of Bhrgu. O Mahesvara, 
narrate to me the earlier incarnations not yet mentioned. 


Isvara said: 


92-94. When the earth was occupied by highly powerful 
Danavas, Visnu took birth again and again with the curse of 
Bhrgu as an ostensible cause.He took the incarnation in order 
to establish piety (Dharma). 

Narayana should be realized through Dharma (piety). He 
was then born in the Caksusa Manvantara. He propagated Yajna 
in the Vaivasvata Manvantara. At the time of his manifestation, 
Brahma became his priest. 

95. During the fourth quartet of Yugas, when Suras be¬ 
came distressed, he issued forth from the ocean for killing 
Hiranyakasipu. 

96-97. The second incarnation was Narasirhha. Rudra was 
his priest. 


In the seventh quartet of Yugas when all the worlds were 
un er Bali, in the Tretayuga when all the three worlds were 
overcome by Daityas. Visnu became Vamana reducing his limbs 
m size. Brhaspati was his priest. 

rt. ^_ j T j. tent ^ ^ ret ^ Dattatreya was born when 

hifnH? t A,, l aPPeared inthe fourth P* n - Markandeya was 

have hep 1 clivine incar nations in the mortal world 
have been narrated earlier. 



VII.I.20.1-15 


119 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

Creation of the Moon 


Isvara said: 

1-5. Henceforth, the order of the lineage of Daityas is 
being described again. Hiranyakasipu shone as the king for 
one hundred seven million two hundred eighty thousand years. 
He was the emperor of the three worlds. 

During the Asvamedha of Kasyapa, the Atiratra sacrifice was 
performed.On the Sautya day (day when Soma juice is extracted) 
thereof, a golden throne was assigned to the Hotr. A deep pit 
occurred there. Hiranyakasipu sat there. 

He performed a very severe penance for a hundred thou¬ 
sand years. Formerly he had stayed in the womb of Diti for ten 
thousand years. 

6-9. An old verse has been sung about Hiranyakasipu by 
Daityas: “The Suras along with the sages used to pay respect 
to that direction which Hiranyakasipu, the king, looked at.” 

After his term was over, Bali became the king for ten million 
three hundred sixty thousand years. While Bali continued to 
be the king, Prahlada was held as hostage by the Suras. Indra 
and other famous (Suras) killed the Asuras with their valour. 

10-12. The rule of the Daityas continued thus for ten Yugas 
without any enemy. Then for eighteen Yugas, the entire region 
of the three worlds was protected carefully by Mahendra. In 
the tenth Treta Yuga, Kartavlrya 1 was the extremely powerful 
king for eighty-five thousand years. He was an emperor in 
possession of seven gems. 

13. During his reign that king used to go round in all the 
seven Dvipas (continents) armed with a sword, shield and bow 
in his chariot, accompanied by his followers. By his Yogic power 
he used to detect thieves. 

14-15. If he is remembered, men will never lose their wealth. 
After the lapse of a quartet of Yugas (Caturyuga) the eleventh 
Manu became the Lord. Half the period of his reign elapsed 


1. It is surprising that Kartavlrya, a disciple of Datta, is regarded as a Daitya. 
He is a seer of Mantras (Narada Purana). He belonged to Haihaya dy¬ 
nasty. His greatness is described in Mbit, Santi 49. 



120 


Skanda Purana 


and Dvapara Yuga ensued. Mada was the son of Narisyanta, the 


son of Manu. — u . , ^ 

16. His ninth successor was remembered as Trnabindu. He 

became the king at the beginning of the third Tretayuga. 

] 7. His daughter Ilavila was unrivalled in beauty. The saintly 

king gave his daughter to Pulastya. 

18-20. Sage Visravas was born of her and he is known as 
Ailavila too. He had four wives and they were ornaments to the 
family of Pulastya: Brhaspati’s splendid daughter named 
Vedavarnini, the two daughters of Malyavan named Puspotkata 
and Blk* and Kekasi, the daughter of Malin. O goddess, listen 
to her progeny. The lady of excellent complexion gave birth 
to the eldest son of Visravas. 

21-22. The boy had eight teeth and three feet like those 
of a dog. He had green moustache and pike-like ears. His 
hands were small. He was tawny in complexion but had pure 
ornaments. His body was huge and the head was large with a 
great chin. She saw the son so very ugly as this (and felt sad). 

23-24. On seeing him,she said to herself: “This is Kubera”. 
The word Ku is used to denote contempt. Bera means the 
body. He was named Kubera because of his ugly body. His wife 
was Vrddhi and son Nalakubera. 

25-26. KaikasI (Kekasi is an alternate form) gave birth to 
Ravana who later became Lord of Raksasas. His ears were like 
pike. He was tawny in colour with red hairs. He had ten heads, 


eight feet and twenty arms. He was very powerful with a huge 
body. He had complexion resembling black collyrium. He had 
curved fangs and his eyes were red. 

27. He was endowed with the vigour of Raksasas. He was 
naturally terrible in features and strength. He was cruel. He 
was remembered as Ravana because his ciy was shrill. 

28. He was King Hiranyakasipu in his previous birth. He 
was asking for fourteen Yugas as a.Raksasa. 

29 31. O my beloved, in terms of years, the time extended 
to five crore sixty-one lakh sixty thousand years. During this 

s P Ieenl d ’ 'T nf,ed ° eVaS and the sa S es a " d made them 

and in th^'VrT^ (i ' e ’ P ° Wer of Prance) dwindled 
alone wkh n ™ Yuga ’ he met with his death 

DaTara* ‘ he ha " ds of > h <= *>n of 




VII.I.20.32-47 


121 


32-36. O goddess, this same ten-headed Ravana, a suppres¬ 
sor of enemies,' was reborn as son of the saintly king Damaghosa. 
His manliness was well-known. He was born of Srutasrava as 
Sisupala and became king of Cedi (modem Bundelkhand, Madhya 
Pradesh). KaikasI gave birth to four children, viz. Ravana, 
Kurhbhakarna, Vibhisana and Surpanakha. 

Puspotkata’s children were Manohara, Prahasta, Mahaparsva, 
Khara (four sons) and one daughter Kumbhinasl. Trisiras, Dusana,. 
Raksasa Vidyujyihva and a daughter named Syamika are re¬ 
membered as the children of Bika. Thus in the family of Pulastya 
nine Raksasas were of ruthless activities. Vibhisana, an extremely 
pure soul, is glorified as the tenth. 

37. The children of Pulaha were all the deer, all tigers with 
curved fangs, Bhutas, Pisacas, serpents, boars and elephants. 

38. It is remembered that Kratu was issueless in this Vaivasvata 
Manvantara. Atri had ten wives. All of them were beautiful and 
chaste. 

39. The ten celestial damsels ending with GhrtacI were 
born of Bhadrasva. 

40-41. O great goddess, Prabhakara is well-known as the 
husband of these ten: Bhadra, Sudra, Madra, Nalada, Jalada, 
Urna, Piirna, Gopucchala, Tamarasa and Raktakotika the tenth. 

42-44. When Surya was struck down by Svarbhanu (i.e. 
Rahu) and the Lord fell to the ground from heaven, the whole 
world was assailed (enveloped) with darkness. At that time the 
Brahmanical sage said: “Hail unto you”. Divakara (the Sun 
god) who was about to fall did not fall. Hence the sage was 
called Prabhakara because he caused light to function. The 
great sages called him so. Lord Prabhakara begot of Bhadra 
the reputed son Soma. 

45. The refulgent Lord Soma was a son unto Dharma.His 
rays are cool. He was born of Krttikas.He is cause of night 
(Nisakarah). 1 

46. O goddess, Atri held the Lord of all-the worlds in his 
eyes and stationed himself thus. In this way the holy sage Atri 
became the father of Soma. 

47. Mentally, verbally and physically, whatever he performed 
was only auspicious. 


1. The reading is Nisacarah - one who moves at night. 







122 


Skanda Purana 


In the course of his penance the highly lustrous sage re¬ 
mained motionless like a wooden piece or a wall or a rock. He 
kept his arms raised up. 

48 The penance performed by him formerly was very severe 
and great. O beautiful goddess, he performed that penance for 
three thousand years according to the reckoning of Devas. 

49. O auspicious lady, the highly intelligent one remained 
winkless thus. He had sublimated his sexual energy. His body 
attained the state of Soma (Moon). 

50. As his body attained the status of Soma, the Moon rose 
up and the Soma juice flowed out of his eyes illuminating the 
ten directions. 

51. The ten delighted directions duly conceived it in their 
wombs.They received it collectively but they could not hold it. 

52. That eternal foetus, the cool-rayed Moon, the delighter 
of all, suddenly fell down from the directions and illuminated 
the worlds. 

53. When those ladies were unable to hold the foetus, Sltamsu 
(the cool-rayedMoon)fellonto the ground from the directions. 

54. Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, saw the fallen 
Soma. With a desire for the welfare of all the worlds, he placed 
him into a chariot. 

55. O goddess, O beautiful lady of Suras, the chariot was 
fitted with a thousand white horses by me for the purpose of 
establishing piety. He was truthful in speech. 

56. O goddess, when the great soul, the son of Atri, fell 
down, the well-known mental sons of Brahma eulogized him. 

57. These as well as all the Angirasas and sons of Bhrgu 
eulogized him with the Mantras of Rg Veda, Samaveda and 
Atharva Veda. 

58. As he was being eulogized, the splendour of the reful¬ 
gent Soma became well-nourished and enhanced. He illumi¬ 
nated all the three worlds. 


59. The excessively renowned one circumambulated the 

ocean-girt earth twenty-one times (riding) in that excellent 
chariot. 

60. From the part of (his) Tejas that reached the earth, 

lustre b ° rn) medicinal herbs which shone with great 

61. With them, he (i.e. Moon) enlivens this world and the 




VII.I.20.62-76 


123 


four types of subjects (creations). These Osadhis (medicinal 
herbs) are of seventeen varieties (in the form of cereals and 
lentils). They mature and bear fruits. 

62-64. They are: Vrihi, Yava (barley), Godhuma (wheat), 
Anu, gingelly seeds, Priyahgu (the sixth), Kovidara, Koradusa, Tinaka, 
Masa, Mudga, Masura, Nispava, Kulattha, Adhaki, and Canaka 
and Kana. These are remembered as the rural varieties of 
Osadhis. 

65-68. Osadhis pertaining to Yajnas are both Gramya (ru¬ 
ral) and Aranya (grown in forests) .They are fourteen: Vrihi, Yava, 
Godhuma, Anu, Tila (gingelly seeds), Priyangu forming the sixth 
variety, Kulattha the seventh variety, Syamaka, Nivara, Jartila, 
Gavedhuka, Uruvinda, Markataka, and Venuyava. These are the 
fourteen varieties grown in village fields and forests.There are 
crores and crores of varieties of grass and creepers etc. Candra 
is the Lord of all these. He sustains the entire universe. 

69. Lord Soma sustains the entire earth by means of Jyotsna 
(Moonlight) with a desire for the welfare of the universe. Therefore, 
Brahma the foremost among the knowers of Brahman, gave a 
kingdom unto him. 

70. O lady of excellent countenance, the highly resplen¬ 
dent Nisdliara (Moon) was crowned in the kingdom of seeds 
and medicinal herbs, Brahmanas and Mantras. 

71-74. The foremost among the refulgent luminaries sus¬ 
tained the three worlds with his lustre. Nine Devis (goddesses) 
viz. Sini, Kuhu, Dyuti, Pusti, Prabha, Vasu, Kirti, Dhrti and Laksmi 
served him.Daksa, the son of Pracetas, gave him his twenty- 
seven daughters of great holy rites, whom they (people) knew 
as constellations. 

After attaining the great kingdom, Soma, the most excellent 
one among those endowed with Soma juice, performed a Rajasuya 
Yajna. The monetary gifts consisted of hundred thousand (gold 
coins). Hiranyagarbha was the Udgatr and Brahma accepted 
the Brahmatva (the post of the presiding priest). 

75. Lord Hari, Narayana was his Sadasya (member of the 
sacrificial assembly). He was surrounded by the primordial sages, 
the chief of whom was Sanatkumara. 

76. O splendid lady of excellent countenance, Soma gave 
the three worlds as the Daksind to those Sadasyas of whom the 
Brahmanical sages were the chief ones. 



124 


Skanda Purana 


77. After the Avabhrtha bath, unperturted and honoured 
by all the Devas and the sages, the leader of Rajas (kings) 
excelled all the kings illuminating the ten directions. 

78. Therefore, he attained that Aisvarya (power and afflu¬ 
ence) which persons lacking self-control find it impossible to 
obtain. Thus is Candra well-known as the son of Atri. 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 
Advice to Propitiate Siva 


The Devi said: 

1-5. The origin of Candra has been listened to entirely. Now 
do narrate how he acquired the stigma. 

Isvara said: 

O goddess, formerly Brahma had a son named Daksa. Ear¬ 
lier Daksa was instructed by the Self-born Lord (Brahma): “Create 
the subjects”. 

Daksa, the patriarch, begot of Vairini sixty daughters. He 
gave ten of them to Dharma, thirteen to Kasyapa, twenty-seven 
to Soma, four to Aristanemi, two to the son of Bhrgu, two to 
the intelligent Krsas'va and two to Angiras. O goddess, listen 

‘° n ', e ' r names. Listen to the expansion of progeny of the 
mothers from the beginning. 

lady ’ ?'*>"<”'*”» mentioned as the 

SadV'Ma™!^ ^eT ° f ^ SSdh >* **« »,nh to 
sons of Vast, b ° rn ° f Vasus were the 

sons of MuhurtsTthose Mdciio 1 ™' M uhiirtakas are the 
Nagavithi was born of jam! WCre born of Larfl ba; 



VII.I.21.11-26 


125 


11-12. Sarhkalpa was the son of Samkalpa. 

These ten are remembered as the ten sons of Dharma. The 
eight Vasus are: Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, Anala, Anila, Pratyusa 
and Prabhasa. 

Vaidandya, Srama, Santa and Dhvani are the sons of Apa. 

13. Lord Kala, the reckoner of time, is the son of Dhruva. 
Soma’s sons are Bhagavan, Sarva, Dhruva and Grhabodhana. 

14. Hutahavyavaha is also the son of Soma. Dravina is re¬ 
membered as the son of Dhara. Manojava and Avijnatagati 
were born of Anila. 

15. Devala, Bhagavan and Yogi were the sons of Pratyusa. 
Bhuvana, the sister of Brhaspati, was an expounder of 
Brahman. 

16. She became the wife of Prabhasa, the eighth of the 
Vasus. Visvakarma was his son. He is the patriarch and the 
architect of Devas. 

17-18. I shall mention the names of the Sadhyas called the 
Tusitas (the delighted ones). They are Mana, Anumanta, Prana, 
Nara, the powerful Apana, Bhakti, Bhaya, Anagha, Hamsa, 
_Narayana, Vibhu and Prabhu. The twelve Sadhyas have been 
mentioned. 

19-20. O lady of excellent complexion, I shall enumerate 
the progeny of Kasyapa.The following are remembered as the 
twelve Adityas (sons of Aditi): Arhsa, Dhatr, Bhaga, Tvastr, 
Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, Vivasvan, Savitr, Pusan, Amsuman and 
Visnu. They are thousand-rayed ones. 

21-22. The following are called Rudras, the eleven leaders 
of Ganas: Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya, Virupaksa, Raivata, Hara, 
Bahurupa, Tryambaka, Suresvara, Savitra, Jayanta, Pinaki, Aparajita 
(unconquered). 

23. From Kasyapa, Did obtained two sons very arrogant of 
their power viz. Hiranyakasipu, the elder and Hiranyaksa, the 
younger one. 

24-25. A verse has been sung about Hiranyakasipu by the 
ancient Daityas: “The Suras together with the great sages paid 
respect to that direction which was looked at by Hiranyakasipu. 
Hiranyakasipu had four very powerful sons. 

26. Prahrada was the eldest among them.The next one was 
Anuhrada. Then Hrada and Hrada. Thus the sons have been 
enumerated. 



126 


Skanda Purdna 


27. Sunda and Upasunda were the two sons of I lrada. Hrada 

had only one son well-known as Muka. 

28. Marica, the son of Sunda, was born of Tadaka. He was 
killed in the Dandaka forest by the powerful scion of the family 

of Raghu. . 

29-31. Muka was killed by Savyasacin (i.e. Arjuna) in the 

course of his encounter with the divine Kirata (hunter) (i.e. 
Lord Siva). There were three crores of Nivatakavacas of the 
family of Daitya Saiiihrada. They were killed by Savyasacin (Arjuna). 
The following are remembered as the sons of Prahrada: GavesthI, 
Kalanemi,Jambha, Valkala, Jrrhbha and a younger brother (the 
sixth) of them. Sumbha and Nisumbha are remembered as the 
two sons of Gavesthin. 

32. Dhanuka and Asiloman are glorified as the two sons of 
Sumbha. Virocana had only one powerful son named Bali. 

33-34. (The following) five sons of Hiranyaksa were very 
powerful and valorous: Andhaka, Sakuni, Kalanabha, Mahanabha 
the valorous and Bhutasantapana. Hundreds of hundred thou¬ 
sands of these Daityas were killed in the course of the hostili¬ 
ties pertaining to Taraka 1 . 

35. Thus the Kneage of Kasyapa has been succinctly narrated. 
The entire universe consisting of Devas, Asuras and human beings 
is pervaded by these children. 

36. O great goddess, among the twenty-seven daughters 
given to Indu (Moon-god) RohinI was his greatest favourite. 

37. Among them, the fair lady RohinI was the dearest darling 
of the Lord of Constellations, greater than his own vital airs. 

38. He forsook all the others and sported about secretly 
with her in forests and gardens. He was so passionately infatu¬ 
ated that he took her to beautiful lands, caves and crevices and 
sported about. 

39. Thereupon, O renowned lady, the remaining miser¬ 
able wives sought refuge in Daksa and spoke these words: 

40 43. Soma has eschewed all of us and is rejoicing with 
Rohm, alone. Ever since our marriage, for these thousand 
years he has been sporting about with her as he pleases. Ever 
since our marriage, all the twenty-six of us are devoid of glory 


'■ JSLZZ CaUSCd ^ ‘ he abdUCtion of Bfhaspati’s wife Tara by Canclra 



VII.I.21.44-56 


127 


and we have been rendered devoid of lustre and dirty, though 
we are faultless. He seems to consider this entire period of a 
thousand years a mere night. O dear father, though we are 
blameless, we have been abandoned. He diverts himself with 
that RohinI alone. Hence our unhappiness. So, in view of this 
that we have already been burnt by misery, death itself would 
have been more welcome.” 

44. On hearing these words of these distressed ones, the 
patriarch endowed with Brahmanical splendour, urged by his 
affection for his daughters, went to the place where the Lord 
of Constellations was present and spoke these words: 

45. “O Nisakara (Moon), be have impartially in respect to all 
my daughters.If not.youwill undoubtedly be incurring the fault.” 

46. On hearing these words, the Lord of Constellations 
stood with his head bowing down due to shame and spoke thus 


to Daksa: 

47. “Of course, O Brahmanical sage, from this day onwards 
I shall behave impartially with your daughters. It is the truth. 


I solemnly take this pledge.” 

48. O Ambika, when the Lord of Night took this oath, all 
the daughters endowed with beauty were dul) informed. 

49 Daksa went back to his abode, experiencing great relief 
and happiness. But, O goddess, Candra remained indulgent 

towards RohinI as before. , , 

50 With his mind deluded by infatuation he discarded a 
of them. So, once again, all of them complained to Daksa: 

51. Even before it, on seeing them all emaciated and dis¬ 


tressed, dusty and gloomy, Daksa fell into a swoon. 

52-53. On regaining consciousness he spoke to all those 
daughters of his with the hair bristling due to anger: Why are 
you in dirty garments? Why are you so pale m your faces 
O my sinless dear ones, do tell me. O my daughters, whet 
they be Che Asuras with .heir followers, or Che ocher exceUen. 
Suras, I shall strike them all down by means of my curses^ 
54 On being told thus by Daksa all of them uttered thus. 
55-56. “ O Lord, the Lord of Night does not approach us 

Hence we have come to you. He has 
even after menstrua,, °" a “" e is ^dieted to RohinI secretly. 

fusing u°s increased grief he diverts himself with her in his 
lasciviousness.” 


128 


Skanda Purana 


57. On hearing their words, Daksa became furious. He went 
to Candra, O great goddess, and cursed him even as he stood 


face to face: 

58. “Since you ignored my advice and are going on in your 
exclusive indulgence with RohinI by excluding the other fault¬ 
less daughters of mine, the consumptive disease will assail you. 
There is no doubt about it.” 

59. In the meantime, O Daughter of the Mountain, the 
consumptive disease, at the behest of Daksa, penetrated the 
body of Candra. 

60. With his body assailed by consumptive disease Candra 
waned day by day. 

61. O goddess, on being cursed thus by Daksa Soma be¬ 
came lustreless and motionless. He fell down on the ground 
along with RohinI. 

62. Regaining consciousness after a short while, he spoke 
to RohinI: 


63. “O fair lady, what is to be done now? I have been 
cursed by your father. O my beloved, afflicted by consumption 
and leprosy what can I do now?” 


64. On being told thus, RohinI’s eyes became dimmed with 
tears. Glancing at Soma struck down by the curse of Daksa, she 
spoke these words: 

65-66. “Seek refuge in him alone, by whom you have been 
cursed. Indeed, now that you have been afflicted by his curse 
he wil bring about your welfare by all means. With his favour’ 
you will regain your lost splendour, the splendour with which 
you were formerly so pleasurable.” 

67. On hearing the words of RohinI, Candra went near 
Daksa andstoodtherehumblywith tears rendering his eyes tur- 


heart^Casr ^r^ 31 SaSe ’ Dak?a ’ do bl ess me with a delighted 

nr r b r haA «- 

take pity on me anrl ° Ul ^ eason - It behoves you to 

esteemed one, I am fully awa^ofX^ 6 CUrSe ‘ ° highl y 
been cursed. Bur , a m distressed and , *£ 

JLZz*; r ,hus ' Dat5 * wt 


VII.I.21.72-85 


129 


Daksa said: 

72. O Soma, no one who has been struck down by my curse 
can be saved by Devas. O Soma, whatever I say remains as it 
is (i.e. unchangeable). There is no doubt about it. 

73. Span of life, Karma, wealth, learning and death—all 
these have been pre-destined and they remain so. 

74. Asuras, Suras, Yaksas and Raksasas—none of these can 
save you, except Mahesvara. 

75. Sankara will bless even those whom I curse. No one 
except Bhava, Pasupati, is competent to grant succour. Hence, 
go quickly and propitiate Sankara. 

76. Excepting Mahadeva, the blue-throated consort of Uma, 
O Candra, none can free you from impurities. 

77. On hearing the words of Daksa, Soma stood there with 
palms joined in reverence. With an over-delighted mind he 
replied thus: 

78-79. “O holy sage of excellent pious rites, if you are 
pleased with me, your devotee, and if you have decided to bless 
me, then tell me where is Siva. O Daksa, where can I find 
Mahesvara? I shall go to those places. Tell me what those places 
are.” 

Daksa said: 

80-81. O Soma, listen carefully. After hearing, understand 
it well. In the west, in the vicinity of the ocean and ,the marshy 
land nearby beyond Krtasmara, within a distance of three hundred 
Dhanus, there is a Lihga of great power. It has come up by 
itself and has stationed itself there. 

82. It’s lustre is like that of the solar disc. It is adorned by 
a girdle of serpents. Its magnitude is that of a hen’s egg. It 
is stationed within the ground. 

83. Understand that it is a Sparsa Linga '(a Linga to be 
known by touch). You will know it through devotion. Sankara, 
Paramesvara is present therein. 

84. Do go and propitiate the Lord of Suras by means of 
severe penance. 

85. Make yourself free from impurities after eulogizing the 
Lord of the chiefs of Devas. He will grant you a boon and thus, 
you will regain your excellent form. 


130 


Sknnda Puranci 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 
Soma Gets a Boon 


Isvara said: 


1-2. On being thus instructed by Daksa, Soma who be¬ 
wailed his misdemeanour and was utterly grief-stricken, came 
to Prabhasa. He went to the southern shore of the sea and saw 
nearby the mountain well-known as Krtasmara. 

3-6. The whole region was occupied by Yaksas, Vidyadharas 
and Kinnaras. It was beautified by trees such as sandal, agallocham, 
camphor, Asoka, splendid Tilaka, Kalhara and Satapatra in full 
bloom. It appeared beautiful with trees laden with fruits such 
as Amra, Jambu, Kapittha, Dadima, Panasa, Nirhba, Jarhbira, 
Naga, banana, Kramuka, Nagavalll etc., Sala, Tamalaka, Bljapura, 
date palm, grape-vines sweet and pinkish in colour. There were 
Bilva, Campaka, Tindu, Kadamba and Kakubha trees. 

7. The mountain shone with different kinds of trees— 
Dhava, Asoka, Sirisa etc. The trees were splendid with pleasant 
fruits and flowers. 

8. The place was resonant with the chirping sounds of 
various kinds of birds such as Hamsa, Karandava, Cakravaka, 
cuckoos, and parrots. 

9-10. Some birds having power to remember previous births 
spoke with human voice. The excellent mountain shone with 
couples of Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Ser¬ 
pents etc. who were playing different kinds of divine sports. 
Devas and Gandharvas were engaged in dances. The notes of 
flutes and lutes echoed all round. 

11. It was resounded with the chanting of Vedas. It was 
enveloped with smoke which rose up from the fires of sacri¬ 
ficesland/W emitting pleasant smell of clarified butter (oblated 
in them). 


excellent RrStn m ° Untain was ^aced by the divine sages and 
T , a h" 13 " 35 ’ ex perts in the four lores (or four Vedas) 

Bh^7 r - e l n ’ VaSi? - ha ’ Pu,ast y a > Pulah *. Kratu, Bhrgu, Marlci' 

PaS r r J wT’, ManU ’ Yama ’ Vi-U^tatapi 
Katyarana^^t^a^^hU^Ukhita^SaircV^ 3 ^ L 

«j fl ava, ly a, ^a, 


VII.I.22.20-29 


131 


Vyasa, Uddalaka, Suka, Narada, Parvata, the fierce ascetic Durvasas, 
Sakalya, Galava, Jabali, Mudgala, Visvamitra, Kausika, Jahnui 
Visvavasu, Dhaumya, Satananda, Vaisampayana, Jisnu, Sakatayana, 
Vardhikya, Agnika, Badarayana and the noble-souled Valakhilyas. 
In fact all the sages existing on the earth, reside there on 
Mountain Krtasmara. O my beloved, all the righteous sages 
and the refulgent sons of Brahma (stayed there). 

20. By their penance, all the ascetics were (refulgent like) 
blazing fire devoid of smoke. Some observed fasts for a month 
and some for a fortnight. 

21. Others took food once in three days. Yet others per¬ 
formed Santapana expiatory rite. Some abstained from food. 
Some had fruits and flowers for food. Some ate only dried and 
scattered leaves. 

22. Some subsisted on cowdung (Pafica-gavya?) and some 
on mere water. All were excellent scholars performing Agnihotra 
rites. They pondered over matters pertaining to salvation. 

23. There were other sages with Markandeya as the leader. 
These and many others were experts in Sruti, Smrti, Itihasa, 
Purana etc. 

24. All these sages, O goddess, came and stayed on the 
Krtasmara mountain in the holy spot of Prabhasa. Thus Krtasmara 
is resorted to by all the Devas. Later in this Manvantara, it will 
be burnt completely by Vadava fire, O fair lady. 

25. On seeing the beautiful mountain and the great ocean, 
Nisdkara (Moon) circumambulated it seven times. After circu¬ 
mambulating the mountain he went to the place where Mahesvara 
was present. 

26. The deity was near the ocean, in the form of a Sparsa 
Linga (felt by touch?). He then propitiated the Lord with a 
delighted mind. 

27-28. He resolved within himself: 'I seek refuge in Mahesvara 
for the annihilation of the curse or I shall meet with death or 
it is better that I meet with death from Sankara . After resolv¬ 
ing thus Soma began to propitiate Siva by means of penance 
for a period of a thousand years. He took in only fruits and 
roots as food. 

29. O lady of excellent complexion, when the fourth round 
of a thousand years concluded Lord Rudra became pleased 
and spoke these words: 


132 


SliandaPurana 


30 “O Candra of good holy rites, I am pleased with you. 
Do choose your boon.Do tell me what wish of yours shall I 
fulfill even if it be very difficult to acquire.” 

31. On seeing that Bull-emblemed Lord has come within 
the ken of his vision, Nisdkara (Candra) devoutly bowed down 
and eulogized. 


Candra said: 


32. Om, obeisance to Siva, the Lord of Devas, the supreme 
soul, the Lord whose form and features cannot be compre¬ 
hended. Obeisance to the Lord whose form is both manifest 
and unmanifest. 

33. Supreme God! You are the Lord of Yogins. Everything 
is well-established in you. You are Yajfia. You are Vasatkara. 
You are Orhkara and Prajapati (patriarch). 

34. There are two hundred twenty-four Bhuvanas (worlds). 
Above them the supreme refulgence of yours solely shines and 
keeps vigil. 

35. Obeisance to thy refulgent Linga that became the pillar 
of support to the Cosmic Egg when, at the conclusion of the 
Kalpa, the primordial Varaha deserted it. 


36. Obeisance to you having the name Andmaya. Obeisance 
to Krttivasas. Obeisance to Bhairavanatha. Obeisance to you, 
Somesvara. 

37. You Amrtesvara are eulogized by excellent Suras of the 
euloghed 6 " 1 ^ fUtUrC ’ throu S h these names worthy of being 

Jt M hen n th fu e W3S thC firSt Brahma > the grandfather of 

tur 1 Ca C w by C name Virafici ’ ° Consort of Parvati, 
your name was Mrtyunjaya. 

Padmabhii C vo ^ Brahma became well-known as 

Padmabhu, your name had been glorified as Kalagnirudra. 

your na^ was g'lormedtSr 3 " 6 Well ' kn °^ “ Sva X arilb hu, 
ment of glory. Amrtesa, a name causing enhance- 

Paramesthi^O^or^fn Brahma becarae well-known as 
bered as Ankmaya CVaS ’ y ° Ur name had been remem - 

O bCCame kn ° Wn aS S«rajyc 5 tha, 

V npura, y 0U r name was Krttivasas. 


VII.1-22.43-59 


133 


43. When the sixth Brahma was remembered as Hemagarbha, 
your name was glorified as Bhairavanatha. 

44-45. Now the Brahma who is present is known as Satananda. 
The Adisoma (primordial Soma) who originated from your left 
eye brought that Brahma when he was eight years old, in order 
to install your Lihga. He was in the form of a boy. Hence your 
name is glorified as Somanatha. 

46. Since then two Lakh two thousand one hundred six 
Somas have come and gone. 

47. O Mahadeva, I am the seventh and am well-known as 
Atreya. Being cursed by Daksa, the son of Pracetas, I seek 
refuge in you. O Lord of the chiefs of Devas, protect me suf¬ 
fering from the fell disease Phthysis. 

48. As Candra eulogized thus, the compassionate Lord Rudra 
became pleased and spoke these words: 

49. “O Candra of good holy rites, I am pleased with you. 
Choose you boon. What wish of yours shall I fulfill ? Tell me, 
even if it be very difficult to acquire. 

50. These secret names of mine are dear to me. I will grant 
everything mentally cherished by those men who recite these. 

51. In the 'case of Candras of the past and future, this 
Lihga shall be worthy of being adored till another Brahma of 
eight years arrives. 

52. Henceforth, the four-faced Brahma will be born; the 
name of the God will be Prananatha then. 

53. Winds are called by the name Prana. The name for the 
sake of propitiation is called Prananatha.That will be my name 
now. 

54-56. Thereafter, these names will be used: Agnisa, Kalarudra, 
Taraka, Mrtyunjaya, Tryambakesa, Isa, Bhuvanesa, Bhutanatha, 
Ghora, Brahmesa, Prthvlsa and Adinatha. 

57. Then the Lord will have the names Kalpesvara and 
Candranatha. The future names of the Lord have now been 

revealed. ,, 

58. These and other names have been self-reckoned as 

sixteen. Those that have gone by will be revived, since mfinite- 

ness is the nature of Time. . . 

59. Each of the names continues to exist till the dissolu¬ 
tion of Brahma. Then another name crops up befittingly. 


134 


Skanda Purdna 


60. Of what avail is much talk? The secret has been re- 
vealed to yqu. O dear one, tell me entirely the purpose for 
which all this penance has been undertaken by you. I am pleased 
with you. I shall grant you the boon.” 

Candra said: 

61. I have been cursed by Daksa for some reason. I have 
been reduced in size through Phthysis. It behoves you to save 
me therefrom. 


Sarhbhu said: 

62. Now, do look upon all the daughters of Daksa impar¬ 
tially. Reduction in your size is inevitable per fortnight. There 
will be waxing in the next fortnight. 

63-64. O Soma, with my favour, you will regain the lustre 
as it was previously. It is impossible to alter the utterance of 
Daksa, the son of Pracetas, the Brahmana whose sins have 
been destroyed by penance. No one else, not even Suras can 
alter his utterance. If infuriated Brahmanas may kill, may reduce 
one to ashes by the power of their own refulgence. 

65. They can reduce Devas to the position of non-Devas. 
They can destroy this universe. Brahmanas and Devas consti¬ 
tute one mass of refulgence split into two. 

66. Brahmanas are Devas, the perceptible (ones) in the 
world. Devas are invisible and are present in heaven. Without 
Devas Brahmanas are non-entities; without Brahmanas Devas 
are non-entities. 

67. Mantras are present on one side.Refulgence is present 
on the other. Brahmanas are deities in the world. Brahmanas 
are Devatas in heaven. Brahmanas are the most excellent ones in 
a the threeworlds.Brahmanas alone are the cause (of wefare). 

. Excellent Brahmanas employed in the holy rites of Pitrs, 
become Pit r s and if they are engaged in the rites of Devas, they 

excellent R V -h ^ ‘J® W3ter S P rinkled with their palms, the 
excellent Brahmanas become Devas. K 

do^ot assaif B^h^ 63 " *** d3nger aHsing from Pretas (S hosts ) 
engaeed in h! f t T a " 35 in , terested in the Vedic themes and 

(SiX dUliCS 0f a «> 


VII.I.22.70-82 


135 


70. Devas translate into real actions what highly praise worthy, 
Brahmanas speak. When the perceptible (Visible) Devas 
(Brahmanas) are pleased the invisible Devas too always be¬ 
come pleased. 

71. Theexcellent Brahmanas in the world are on a par with 
Rudras, Devas, Maruts, Vasus, Asvins, Brahma, Soma and Surya. 

72. All the subjects (people) are dependent on Devas; all 
the Devas are dependent on Yajnas. Those Yajhas are depen¬ 
dent on Brahmanas. Hence the excellent Brahmanas are Devas. 

73. One should always adore Brahmanas. One should pro¬ 
pitiate Brahmanas always. Brahmanas are the redeemers in the 
world. One enjoys heavenly pleasures through Brahmanas. 

74. Brahmanas guard and protect the ancient religious 
tradition that cannot be broken or cut off, that is beginningless 
and endless. A highly sensible man adores Brahmanas and 
becomes invincible like the king of Devas in heaven. 

75. An armour can be pierced through by a Naraca (an 
iron dart or an arrow). But the Brahm^nical benediction can¬ 
not be split even by a thousand Vajras (thunderbolts). 

76. A sin is quelled by Homa. Food subdues Homa. Food is 
subdued by the gift of gold and gold is subdued by the bless¬ 
ings of Brahmanas. 

77. If one wishes to go to hell along with his sons, cattle 
and kinsmen, one should assert undue authority over Devas, 
Brahmanas and cows. 

78. If due to delusion, a wicked-hearted person cherishes 
hatred for Brahmanas, Devas, cows and Yajnas, he shall never 
attain the other worlds or even this world. 

79. Brahmanas, cows, gold, water, women and the earth do 
not deserve to be censured. He who reviles these, is a sinner. 

80. Kings are the top of righteousness (Dharma) and 
Brahmanas are the roots thereof. Hence one shall not injure 
the root. The top stands on the root. 

81. Kings are the fruit of Dharma and Brahmanas are the 
flowers thereof. Hence one should not harm the flower. It is 
from flower that fruit grows. 

82. King is a tree of which Brahmanas are the roots. Citi¬ 
zens are the leaves. Ministers are its branches. Hence Brahmanas 
should be protected by king. If root is protected tree is not 
destroyed. 


136 


Skanda Purana 


83 Indeed fire bums when it is in close contact, but Brahmanas 
burn from afar (by curse). What is burned by fire may grow 
again but what is burnt by Brahmanas never grows. 

84. Hutasana (Fire-god) became Sarvabhaksa (omnivorous) 
due to the curse of Brahmanas, so also the ocean became Apeya 
(water of which was not worthy of being drunk) and Purandara 
became Viphala (impotent). 

85. O Candra, you became afflicted with Phthysis. Unfertile 
arid lands abound on the earth. There occurred fall of sun and 
moon again and there is redemption (for them). 

86-87 The exudation of juice (sap) from vegetation, de¬ 
feat of Danavas, subjugation of elephants, the extermination 
of Ksattriyas,originanddeathofDevasand upheavel of the world: 
These and other things constitute the refulgence of the noble- 
souled Brahmanas. Hence a king should always bow down to 


Brahmanas. 

88. (A king) may be in the greatest of adversities. Yet he 
should not infuriate Brahmanas. If infuriated they may kill him 
along with his army and vehicles. 

89. Fire may or may not be consecrated with prayers. Yet 
it is a great deity. So also whether learned or not, a Brahmana 
is a great deity. 

90. Refulgent fire is not defiled even in cremation ground. 
Fire in which Homa is performed blazes all the more in the 
course of Yajnas. 

91. In the same manner, a Brahmana may be engaged in 
all undesirable activities. Yet he is worthy of being adored by 
all. He is a great deity. 

92. A Ksatriya greatly flourishes through the power of 
Brahmanas. The Brahmanical power is extremely adorable. Indeed 
the Ksatriya’s valour arises from that of Brahmana (power). 

93. Fire originates from water; Ksetra from Brahma; steel 
from l ock. The refulgence of these, which spreads everywhere 
gets dissolved in their respective sources. 

P erson desirous of remaining alive can dare to 
assai (Brahmanas) on whose support Devas and the worlds 
stand up and whose words are the Vedas? 

J* , A ki " g sh * U not Iev y a nd exact tax from a Brahmana 

, n , W v, en ij 6 * S ^ ^ eat ^- A Brahmana residing in his 
realm should not (be allowed to) languish due to hunger. 






VII.I-22.96-l 09 


137 


96. If in the realm of any king, a Brahmana languishes due 
to hunger, ere long his entire kingdom splits into a hundred 
parts and faces annihilation. 

97. Brahmanas well-versed in the Vedas staying in the realm 
of a king, suppress the sin a king commits due to inadvertence 
or delusion. 

98. If holy rites (of Agnihotra etc.) are duly performed by 
Brahmanas in the beginning of a day or at the close thereof, 
that king flourishes along with the entire kingdom, as a result 
of the Brahmanical splendour. 

99. Everyday a king should get up early in the morning 
and adore Brahmanas. It is by the favour of Brahmanas that 
Devas shine in heaven. 

100. Of what avail is much talk? Brahmanas constitute my 
person. The form of the Lord of Devas, Siva the supreme soul, 
is glorified on the earth girdled by the ocean, as Brahmanas. 

101. The foolish ones who hate these Brahmanas of praise¬ 
worthy holy rites indeed hate me. Through worshipping them, 
they adore me. 

102. Hence no sensible man should dare to hate Brahmanas. 
Men struck down by the curse of Brahmanas perish instantly 
by hating them. 

103. Thus, O Candra, the ocean-like expanse of the good 
qualities of Brahmanas has been expounded to you. Carry out 
the subsequent work I am going to tell you. 

104. O Nisakara (creator of night), I give you protection 
from the curse. The utterance of those Brahmanas cannot be 
altered. 

105. All Devas including Vasava may be able to curse or 
bless but they cannot alter the words of Brahmanas. Hence, O 
Candra, you are sensible enough not to grieve over this. 

106. Your waning is inevitable during a fortnight but during 
the other fortnight you will wax. Listen, O Candra, to another 
task to be carried out by you. 

107. This excellent Linga that is present near the ocean 
is in the centre of the earth. It is not in the range of the vision 
of Devas. 

108. It has the size of a hen’s egg. It is adorned by serpen¬ 
tine girdle. It has the refulgence similar to that of hen s egg. 
It is my primordial refulgence. No one else knows it. 

109. But away from this side, in the centre of the ocean, 





138 


SkandaPurana 


within a distance of three hundred Dhanus, there stands (an¬ 
other) Linga endowed with all characteristics and well-guarded. 

110. In the first Kalpa, due to the curse of the great sages, 
my Linga (Penis) fell into the ocean. Do bring it quickly. 

111-112. O Lord, summon Brahma along with the leading 
sages. Make him perform great Makhas after placing it on my 
Linga called Sparsa (Touch) with effort in the company of 
Visvakarman and cause the installation. 

113. After saying thus, the Lord vanished there itself. Then, 
O lady of excellent countenance, the Lord of night regained 
his refulgence. 

114. Thereafter that holy spot became well- known as Prabhasa. 
Refulgence was given to one (who was) without lustre. Hence 
it is called Prabhasa. 

115. Nor was the curse of Daksa in vain. There is the stigma. 

Soma illuminates the worlds after receiving the boon from 
Mahesvara. That Lord of Devas became manifest only to Soma, 
the noble-souled one. % 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 

Installation of Somesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Although surprised, Candramas retained his mental 
calmness. With devotion to Sambhu filling his soul, he reached 
and stayed at Prabhasa Ksetra. 

Vidhu (Moon-god) duly carried out what he had been told 
earlier by the Lord. He went to the interior of the ocean and 

whhh UP , " XCellent Li " ga ' Su mmoning Visvakarman along 
th hls attendants, Soma ordered Tvastr, the divine architect 

Candra said: 





VII.I.23.6-20 


139 


Jsvara said: 

6-9. After saying this, Candra went to Candraloka. It is 
highly refulgent and extends to a crore of Yojanas. It is splen¬ 
did and full of nectar always. O great goddess, he summoned 
the porter Sumedhas and the minister Hemagarbhahga who 
was on a par with Brhaspati in intellect, and ordered him: 
“Gather together everything necessary for a Yajna and hasten 
to Prabhasa Ksetra at my bidding. You should be accompanied 
by Brahmanas with the sacred fires when you go to the excel¬ 
lent holy spot. 

10-12. Gather everything together quickly so that the Yajna 
can be initiated duly. Send separate aerial chariots to everyone 
of the Brahmanas residing in Candraloka. Ample wealth should 
be distributed among them. One million cows should be given 
along with their calves. Their lustre should be that of Kamadhenu. 
They shall be bedecked with a Bhara (weight) of gold. They 
must yield plenty of milk. Send one and one fourth million 
horses with black ears. 

13. There should be ten thousand elephants fully resplen¬ 
dent with ornaments and bells. There should be four thousand 
chariots having the speed of wind. 

14. There should be a hundred thousand camels laden 
with jewels and rubies. Ten million armies each consisting of 

four divisions should be sent. 

15. For the Brahmanas, there should be garments as pure 
as the sacred fire. For the Rtviks, there should be splendid 
divine ornaments. 

16. Different kinds of articles of food and edibles and various 
kinds of beverages should be kept ready. There should be a 
hundred thousand servants and the same number of maid servants. 

17. Whatever money is set apart for wooden pieces etc. as 
per my order and other things the Brahmanas may ask for, 

should be brought there. .... ~ 

18-19 Let there be a general proclamation inviting De , 
Danavasj Yaksas, Gandharvas, Raksasas staying in the seven Patala 
worlds, Kings of the seven continents, thousands of kings else¬ 
where. Let there be repeated announcements requesting the 

people to come to Prabhasa. , ,i 

P 20. After saying thus to the minister, Candramas hurriedly 

went to Brahmaloka to the presence of Brahma, for the pur¬ 
pose of Yajna. 





140 


Skanda Parana 


21. Hemagarbha, the highly refulgent minister of Candramas, 
took the command of Soma earnestly with his head bowed 
down and gathered the requisites for the Yajna. 

22. He duly arrived at Prabhasa and engaged himself in 
making provisions and arrangement for the Yajna. He invited 
all the residents of Bhuh, Bhuvah and Svah (Lokas). 

23-24. On hearing the invitation, all of them hastened to 
that place. Surveying the entire holy spot extending to twelve 
Yojanas, the minister of Soma addressed the Brahmanas: “O 
Brahmanas, all the ancillaries of the Yajfias have been brought 
here at the behest of Soma. What should be done next may 
be carried out by you venerable ones.” 

25. On being told thus, all the Brahmanas who had rid 
themselves of the sins through penance met Tvastr, the divine 
architect, there itself. 

26. On seeing him and the Liriga too nearby, those Brahmanas 
said: “How is this, O Visvakarman, tell us. Why are you present 
here with a crores of other artisans?” 


Visvakarman said: 

27. I have been commanded by Soma and so am engaged 
in guarding this Lihga. Due effort is being done by me to carry 
out his command, O Brahmanas. 


Isvara said: 

28. On hearing this, the Brahmanas understood the real 
purpose. Then they were glad and began the necessary pre¬ 
liminary rites of the Yajna. 

29. The splendid place of sacrifice unto the Devas (Devayajana) 
extended t° a Yojana. After making the Devayajana they made 
h ePatmsala (chamber of the honoured wives of Yajamanas) 


•J??' h T a he L ma ^- read J a11 the parts of the sacrificial cham- 
and Agnidhrt ” a ' ' WterS Vedi ’ the abode ofBr =>hma 

31. Visvakarman erected Yufias (sacrificial posts) in various 

v& d : of - 

32-35. There were thousands of Kundas to the end of the 



VII.I.23.36-46 


141 


Mandapas. All the Brahmanas were experts in the rites of installation 
and Yajhas. 

They were adorned with various kinds of ornaments. They 
referred to the scriptural texts frequently and performed the 
rites duly. 

Trees, divine medicinal herbs, sacrificial twigs, flowers, Darbha 
grass, ingredients for Homa, plenty of ghee and fresh milk and 
all other requisite things for the purpose of Yajna were kept 
ready. Vardhanlkalasa and other utensils were of gold and were 
auspicious. 

36. Groups of Brahmanas performed the holy Yajna of the 
installation duly. They were duly fed and honoured. They were 
delighted by the various kinds of foodstuffs. 

37. The sounds of the chanting of the Vedic Mantras touched 
heaven and earth.TheMandapadecoratedwithbannersshonewell. 

38. There were divine thrones in the Mandapa. Pearl strings, 
divine sandal garlands and festoons of the sprouts of Kalpa 
trees added to its beauty. 

39. Scents of celestial fragrance transformed it into a heavenly 
place. Fourteen kinds of Bhutagrama (living beings) had ar¬ 
rived there. 

40-42. Sthavara (stationary beings), reptiles like those of 
serpent class, classes of birds, the fourth group of Mrgas 
(deer etc.) the fifth one called Pasus (beasts), human beings 
constituting the sixth group, Paisaca (ghosts) making up the 
seventh, the eighth one mentioned as Raksasas, the ninth 
group that of Yaksas and the other groups in the fourteen 
referred to before, being Gandharvas, Ganas called Sakras, 
Saumyas, Prajapatyas and the Brahma group (had arrived). 

43. There were Visvedevas, Sadhyas, Maruts, Vasus, the eight 
Guardians of the Quarters and the Constellations along with 
the Planets. 

44. When the Yajna rite started at the Prabhasaka Ksetra 
all theDevaspresentin the whole Cosmic Egg had arrived there. 

45. Rivers of ghee and milk flowed there. Curds and milk 
puddings constituted veritable quagmires there. Heaps of cooked 
food and fruits resembled mountains. 

46. Various such heaps were seen in the place where the 
great festivity of the Yajna took place. The Gandharvas sang 
and the groups of celestial damsels danced. 


142 


Skanda Purana 


47 The Devas, the sages and the fourteen types of Bhutas 
(Beings) were fully satisfied with the different kinds of edibles 
and foodstuffs and beverages etc. as desired by them. 

48 After having got together all the requisites for the Yajna, 
the minister (of Soma), appointing guards (for protecting) 
there itself, went to Brahmaloka to call Soma. 

Isvara said: 

49-52. He saw the highly refulgent Soma standing by the 
side of Brahma. He prostrated on the ground like a log of 
wood before Soma and Brahma. With palms joined in rever¬ 
ence and bending down his neck (head) he spoke: 

Hemagarbha said: 

O holy Sir, at your behest the entire requisites for the Yajna 
have been collected together at the Prabhasika Kselra by me. 
All the Brahmana-sages and the saintly kings are awaiting your 
arrival with great eagerness. It behoves you to carry out what 
should be done henceforth. 


Isvara said: 

53. On being requested thus by the son of Samudra (i.e. 
Hemagarbha) Candra smiled and spoke to Brahma, the wit¬ 
ness unto all the worlds: 

54. “O Lord, O Lord of all the Devas, be pleased to accept 
my hospitality with a desire to bless me. I am desirous of performing 
the Yajna of installation (of the Lihga). 

55. Today my birth has become fruitful, O Lord, and my 
penance has borne fruit. O Brahma, with your favour, I will 
attain Devahood today. 

56. With a very severe penance I have obtained this Lihga 
of the Consort of Uma. It behoves you to perform the instal¬ 
lation thereof.” 


Brahma said: 

57. Certainly I will perform the installation ceremony of 

oankara m the Somesa Lihga which you have to propitiate with 
special emphasis. r 

58. It is the primordial deity of all belonging to the family 
of Soma, of all Nisakaras (Moon-gods) whether they be by- 
gones or are yet to be born. 


VII.I.23.59-78 


143 


59. This Lord Somesvara bore the name Bhairava at the 
beginning, in the other Manvantara that has eiapsed. I (shall) 
install it again and-again (in every Manvantara). 

60-61. When I went to the Prabhasika Ksetra, I was eight 
years old. I had been invited by Indra earlier for the purpose 
of the installation of Bhairava. My name is being mentioned 
as “Balarupin” since then. In all other Tirthas I remain in the 
form of an elderly person. 

62-63. But, O Candra, I stay in Prabhasa ever since my 
childhood. I am the first among all the Brahmanas in the 
Tirthas all over the Brahmanda. I am well established at Prabhasa. 
In every Kalpa I get a new name. 

64. The name in the first Kalpa was Svayambhu. In the 
second I am remembered as Padmabhu. In the third I am 
remembered as Visvakartr and in the fourth as Balarupl. 

65. There has been a repetition of these names again and 
again for two Parardhas I settled in Prabhasa. 

66. It was there that the primordial Soma, arising from the 
eye of Sarhbhu, performed penance in Prabhasa and saw Isvara 
directly. 

67-69. Thereupon the delighted Trident-bearing Lord granted 
boon to the Full Moon: “O Soma, since I have been propitiated 
for a long time by you devoutly, so this Linga will be named 
Somesa. All the Moons who are yet to be born until Brahma 
named Satananda is dissolved (dies) will repeatedly adore and 
propitiate me here.” 

70. After saying this Lord Sarhbhu vanished there itself. O 
Soma, the first Linga was installed by me then. 

71. Ever since then two lakh two thousand one hundred 
six Somas have gone by. 

72. You are the seventh (202107th), O mighty one, O Soma 
now. As many Lingas too have been installed by me. 

73. (I am enjoying) the benefit arising from his propitia¬ 
tion. Welfare unto you, O Soma.This is my duty. I shall install 
(the Linga). 

Isvara said: 

74-78. After saying this, Lord Brahma identical with all the 
Devas, equipped with all lores and accompanied by the Devas 
and Tirthas summoned Brhaspati, the Purodhas. He was 


144 


SkandaPurana 


accompanied by the leading Yogms and sages, the chief of 
whom is Sanatkumara, and also a crore of Brahmarsis. He rode 
on his vehicle of Hamsa (Swan). Thus Brahma, the Lord of the 
Universe, came to the Prabhasika Tirtha along with Somaraja. 
In this Prabhasika Tirtha the region where there is Daruvana 
grove as well as the river Rsitoya, the destroyer of great sins, 
is called Brahmabhaga. O my beloved, it has already been 
mentioned by me that this Ksetra has three deities. 

79. The Four-faced One came to Brahmabhaga, the purest 
portion, and invited the sages residing in higher regions. 

80. On seeing Vedhas (Brahma) coming in the company of 
celestial sages and the preceptor, all of them honoured and 
adored him through prayers on a par with the Vedic pass¬ 
ages. 

81-84. Then Brahma, the grandfather of all the worlds, 
spoke to all those Brahmanas: “Somesa, the destroyer of sins, 
was propitiated by Soma for a long time. When he was pleased 
the excellent Lihga was obtained by Soma. O excellent Brahmanas 
we have come here for the sake of the installation of the LorcL 
Just as the installation ceremony of Sankara should be per¬ 
formed always by me, the ancillary service should be performed 
by you all who have resorted to my Bhaga (portion of the 
Ksetra). Since the Lihga (Penis) fell on to the ground due to 
your anger, the installation also should be performed by you. 
There is no doubt about this.” 

Isvara said: 

85-86. Somaraja brought Brahma, the Lord of the universe, 
to the great Prabhasika Tirtha along with Savitrl and all the 
sages.Lord Brahma then erected a hundred Mandapas and caused 
a hundred Kundas to be dug. 

87. Directed by Guru (Brhaspati), the priest of Devas, Brahma 
assigned seventeen Rtviks to each of the Mandapas. 

88. Standing by the side, Brahma initiated Lord Soma 
accompanied by Rohini, in accordance with the injunctions 
laid down in the Vedic passages. 

J 9 . Rohl ' n " ho had aU the (auspicious) characteristic features 

Idv wore H v P ? ° f Patni ^n^-s wife). The fair 
lad) wore deerskm and covered her face with a silken cloth. 

90. She was brought to the Palmsila (chamber of the sacrificer's 



VII.1.23.91-103 


145 


wife) by the Rtviks who were the masters of the Vedas. Candramas 
who had been duly initiated, was eulogized by the sages and 
Gandharvas. 

91. He was clad in deerskin and he held an Udumbara staff. 
In the middle of the Assembly he shone with excessive reful¬ 
gence. 

92. Then, O great goddess, Brahma, the grandfather of all 
the worlds, performed the rite of Rtvigvarana (formally select¬ 
ing the Rtviks for starting their work) in the manner it has 
been enjoined in the Vedas. 

93. Guru (Brhaspad) was selected as the Hotr there, Vasistha 
as Adhvaryu, Marici as Udga.tr and Narada was placed in the 
position of Brahma. 

94-95. Sanatkumara and others connected with him were 
made the Sadasyas. They were bedecked in good garments and 
ornaments such as crowns, rings etc. The Rtviks were adorned 
with many ornaments in the course of that Yajfia. In each of 
the four entrances there were four Rtviks. Thus there were 
sixteen Rtviks. 

96. Kasyapa was the Prastotr there and Galava the Pratihartr. 
Garga was Subrahmanya and Pulaha was made Sadasya. 

97. Sukra was named Hotr . Kratha was cited as Nestr. Durvasas, 
Maitravaruna, and Kausika were Brahmanacchamsi. 

98. Sakalya was Acchavaka, Kratu was Gravastha, Salankayana 
was Pratiprasthd.tr. 

99-100. Manu was Agnidhra; Ahgiras was made the Unnetr. 
The Lord thus made these the Rtviks in the Mandapas. In the 
other Mandapas too there were Rtviks similarly. After arrang¬ 
ing thus in all the hundred Mandapas, he caused the Kunclas 
(to be prepared). 

101. Each one of the Mandapas was twenty Hastas in di¬ 
mension. The ground was sprinkled with Pancagavya after duly 

cleansing it with Astra Mantra. 

102. O Parvatl, the ground was covered with the sacred 
Carman (leather), the rites of Alekhana and Ullekhana (scratch¬ 
ing and engraving) were performed with Astra Mantra. Then 
water was sprinkled and the digging was performed duly. 

103. O my beloved, for each Mandapa eight Kundas were 
assigned. The Mandapa was duly plastered and Vajrdkarana (making 
the ground firm iike thunderbolt) was performed. 


146 


Skanda Purana 


104. The shapes of the Kundas beginning with that in the 
east, were square, bow-like, circular and lotus-like. 

105-107. The square-shaped Kundawas in the east. That in 
the shape of Bhaga (vagina) was in the south-east, that in the 
shape of a bow was in the south, the triangular one in the 
south-west, the circular one was in the west, the hexagonal one 
in the north-west, the lotus-like one was in the north, the 
octagonal one was in the north-east. In the centre one was 
made in accordance with the injuncdon. Everyone of the Mandapas 
was splendid with sixteen pillars. 

108-110. Banners and festoons were put up by Brahma in 
accordance with the injunctions. The pillar of Nyagrodha tree 
was placed in the east, that of Udumbara in the south, Asvattha 
in the west and Palasa in the north. He fixed the banners in 
accordance with the length of the staff. A yellow-coloured banner 
was fixed in the east. (In the other quarters banners were of 
other colours.) Then Brahma began the Agnisthapana (install¬ 
ing or placing-sacred fires) rite in the Kunda. 

111-115. (Brahmanas belonging to different Vedas were 
made to recite certain Suktas of their respective Vedas as follows.) 
He made the Brahmanas sit in their respective places and 
employed them in the utterance of Japya. In the east the Rgvedins 
recited Snsukta, Pavamana, Vajina, Vrsakapi and Aindra Suktas. 
In the south the Yajusas (Yajurvedins) performed the Japa of 
Rudra Mantra, Purusasukta, Krokadhyaya, Vaikriya, Brahmana, Pailrya 
and Aindra. The Chandogas (Samavedins) performed the Japa 
of the following in the west: Devavrata, Vamadevya, Jyestha Saman, 
Rathantara and Bheruryda Samans. In the north the Atharva 
(Brahmana of Atharva Sakha) performed the Japa of Atharvasiras, 
Skambhastambha, Nilarudra etc. Then the Lord performed 
Garbhddhana and other rites of Agni (Fire-god). 

116-117. After the offering of the Purndhuti the rites for 
the holy ablution were begun. The waters from the Tirthas 
were brought along with Pancapallavas (sprouts of five specific 
ees), um ps of clay, Kasdyas, Pahcagavyas and the five Amrtaphalas. 

n»^, U "r ran “ of the Mamras - lhe ablution started. 

mart n,„ u S deit >' and the “cred Tiloka 

mark was put. He caused all the Tirthas on the earth Patala 

and Svargaloka to be brought. In the meantime, e en as the 

Devas were watch,ng Brahma pierced the ground and entered 


VII.I.23.122-132 


147 


the bowels (of the earth). There he saw the Lihga called Sbarsa 
(i.e. Tactile? Lihga) which he covered with roots of Darbha 
grass and poured honey over. Above it he placed the Brahmasild 
Over that he installed highly refulgent Lihga and made it firmly 
stable. The self-possessed Lord made it Fixed. 7 

122. Stationing (i.e. concentrating himself in the Supreme 
principle) he performed the Nydsa rite with the Mantras. After 
installing the Lihga thus, Brahma, the preceptor of the uni¬ 
verse, performed the adoration rite by means of elaborate Vedic 
Mantras. 

123. When the Nydsa rite with Mantras was performed by 
Brahma, the creator of the worlds, the groups of Brahmanas 
became delighted. They hailed with words “Be Victorious” and 
other auspicious sounds, The fire became smokeless and it had 
the refulgence of crore of Suns. 

124. In the great festivity of the sacrifice divine Dundubhi 
drums were beaten. The quarters and their Guardians became 
pleased. There was a shower of flowers. 

125. After the installation ceremony of Srisomesa the grand¬ 
father (Brahma) caused plenty of Yajna Daksina to be distrib¬ 
uted among the Brahmanas. 

126. Surrounded by the ancient Brahmarsis, the chief of 
whom was Sanatkumara, Soma gave the three worlds to Brahma 
as Daksina. 

127. Crores of gold pieces, jewels and plenty of cash pre¬ 
sents were given to the Sadasyas (members of the sacrificial 
assembly) and principal Brahmarsis. 

128. After being crowned by all the Brahmarsis, the most 
excellent one among the luminaries, illuminated the three 
worlds with his refulgence. He was endowed with excessive 
brilliance. 

129. Nine goddesses viz Sint, Kuhn, Dyuti, Pusti, Prabha, 
Vasu , Kirti, Dhrti and Laksmi served him. 

130. The unperturbed Lord of the Night had his valedic¬ 
tory bath after the celebration of the Mahesvara Makha. He 
attained fullness and perfection and had his objects achieved. 

131. Thereafter, O lady of excellent countenance, Brahma, 
the grandfather, gave him the flourishing kingdom of seeds 
(of plants), medicinal herbs, Brahmanas and cooked food. 

132. To those kings who were present in that Yajna, he 
gave wealth, enjoyment of pleasures and everlasdng Svarga. 


148 


Skanda Purana 


133. The Lord of medicinal herbs himself fed the Brahmanas 
and gave everything unto those who resided in Piabhasa Ksetra. 

j-jg made the great sixteen Ddfias beginning with gold. 
Even an ordinary person, an uncultured rustic, got whatever 
he requested for according to his fate (past actions). 

135. After the accomplishment of the Yajfia, Devas along 
with Indra installed their own Lbigas and went the way they 
came. 

136-137. O goddess. Lord Candramas in the company of 
Brahma, once again propitiated the Linga in Prabhasa which 
quells all sins. Thrice a day he adored it with incense, garlands 
and unguents. O goddess of Devas, the Lord of the night bowed 
down to and eulogized the Lord. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 


Importance of Somavara Vrata 

The Devi said: 


L O Lord of the universe, at what time was the Linga 
installed? How did the contented Consort of Rohini continue 
the propitiation? 

Isvara said: 


2-5. In the course of the Manvantara of Vaivasvata Manu 
in the tenth Treta Yuga, O my beloved, the Lord of Rohini was 
born along with Durvasas. 

During the period he performed penance and when a thou¬ 
sand years elapsed (in penance) he made Lord Sankara mani¬ 
fest himself to him. 


He caused the Linga to be installed by Brahma, the creator 
of the worlds. Then he adored Sankara for a thousand years. 
After adoring the Lord in accordance with the injunctions 

nicrh!* P urpos< ; of resizing his own objectives, the Lord of the 
night who could perceive Sankara directly eulogized (thus): 


Candra said: 


6. Thereis no god on a par with Sankara. There is no goal 


VII.I.24.7-15 


149 


or destination like Sankara. There is no Lord on a par with 

Sankara. There is no goal like Sankara'. 

7. Obeisance to that Jneydtman (the soul worthy of being 
realized) whom the Sarhkhyas cite always and Yogins ponder 
over always as the supreme Pradhana and Purusa. 

8. Obeisance to that Jnanatman (the soul in the form of 
spiritual knowledge) whom learned men know as the cause of 
the origin and destruction of Devas, Asuras and human beings. 

9. Obeisance to that Yogatman whom the learned men 
know as the unchangeable, permanent and steady, eternal, 
supreme Brahman without beginning and end, and free from 
impurities. 

10. Obeisance to that Tirthatman (the soul of all holy places) 
who is the purest of all pure things; to the primordial Lord 
Mahesvara who sanctifies by his mere vision. 

11. Obeisance to that Saruatman (the soul of all) from whom 
everything issues forth, who maintains the entire universe and 
into whom everything gets dissolved. 

12. Obeisance to that Yajnatman (the soul of sacrifices) 
whom the twice-born adore by means of Agnistoma and other 
Yajnas with the full complement of monetary gifts. 

Isvara said: 

13. Thus Nisakara (Moon-god) continued to eulogize day 
and night when Lord Sankara became pleased and said smil¬ 
ingly: 

Sankara said: 

14. O Sitarhsu (Cool-rayed One), O dear one, I am well- 
pleased with you due to this prayer. Welfare unto you! Choose 
your boon whatever may be in your mind. 

Candra said: 

15. O Lord, if a boon is to be granted to me, if you are 
pleased with me, O Lord of Devas, be present in this Linga for 
ever. 

1. The first line is repeated for the sake of emphasis on devotion - just as 
we say “Siva, Siva". 



150 


Skanda Purana 


16 O Lord of Suras, let those have the greatest Siddhi, 
who are endowed with the most ardent devotion and view you 
stationed here in the Lihga. Let those have the Siddhi with 
your favour. 

Sambhu said: 

17. O great Lord, even earlier I had been present in this 
Lihga. It is all the more so, O Candra, now due to your inces- 
sant devotion. 

18. From this day onwards, I have to.stay in this holy spot 
along with Uma. The name of this holy spot shall forever be 
Prabhasa because with my favour illumination was acquired by 
you in this Ksetra. 

19. Since, O Soma, the splendid Lihga of mine has been 
installed by you, my name shall be well-known as Somanatha. 

20-21. This name Somanatha of mine has already been 
well-known earlier and will be so till the end of Brahma. Again 
will this become popular. O dear one, O Nisakara, listen to the 
benefit of those persons who view me installed here with great 
devotion. By my power, they will have no ailment, no poverty, 
no wretchedness, nor any separation from their beloved ones. 

22. If they perform pilgrimage with a desire to view me 
stationed here with great devotion in their minds, their benefit 
is cited (as great) as that of a horse-sacrifice at every step. 

23. O Nisakara , of what avail are the many Yajnas performed 
and fasts undertaken? Even those who view me only once, will 
attain the benefit thereof. 

24-25. If one, imbued with devotion performs monthly fast 
(fast continuous for a period of one month during a year) for 
one thousand years and another (simply) views me, the benefit 
derived by both of them is the same. No hesitation need be 
entertained in this respect. 

26. One may observe celibacy throughout his life, O Nisakara, 
and another may view me here, but once. Their benefit is 
remembered to be the same. 

27. One makes all kinds of Dana-offerings to the twice- 

orn and another sees me here; their benefit is remembered 
as the same. 

28. O Mrgaldnchana (The Moon, marked with the figure of 
a eer), one may perform all the Vratas while another sees me 



VII.I.24.29-40 


151 


here; the benefits accrued to them is remembered as the same. 

29. One person undertakes pilgrimage to all the Tirthas 
and performs plenty -of Japas; another views me here (in this 
Ks'Ctra ), their benefit is remembered as the same 

30. One may certainly be keen to get salvation through 
Jnanayoga etc. Another sees me here. Their benefit is remem¬ 
bered as equal. 

31. O Nisakara, one meets with death through the rite of 
Bhrgupata (falling from a precipice). Another views me here. 
The benefit of both is remembered as the same. 

32. One excellent man takes holy bath always during the 
month of Magha at Prayaga. Another views me here. The ben¬ 
efit of both is remembered as the same. 

33. One may offer rice-balls (to the manes) in the Pitrtirtha 
(like Gaya). Another views me here. The benefit of both is 
remembered as the same. 

34. One makes the gift of a thousand cows to a Brahmana 
who has mastered the Vedas; (while) another sees me here. 
The benefit of both is remembered as equal. 

35. One may practise the penance amidst five fires during 
severe summer. Another views me here. The benefit of both 
is remembered as the same. 

36. O Candra, if a person takes his holy bath devoutly at 
the time of lunar eclipse on a Monday and views me, he 
acquires the benefit of all these. 

37. Five things beginning with the letter ^ (S) are very 
rarely achieved viz Sarasvati (the river), Samudra (the ocean), 
Soma (Moon, Soma juice), Soma-graha (lunar eclipse) and the 
opportunity to view Somanatha. 

38. If one offers worship duly and continuously for six 
months and another only on the Visuva (Equinox) day, both 
acquire the same meritorious benefit. 

39. The same should be understood in the case of eclipse, 
northern transit and the (group of) Samkrantis (Solar transits) 
of Dhanus, Mithuna, Kanya and Mina called “Sadasitimukhas”. 

40. The benefit one gets by duly worshipping Sankara for 
four months (of Catunnasa) is derived by KarttikI (i.e. by view¬ 
ing me present in the Somesvara Linga on the full-Moon day 
of Karttika) alone and on the Caitri it is remembered as twice. 


Skanda Purana 
152 

The benefit and merit on Phalguni and Asadhi is also the 

same. . . . , _ _ 

41 If one adores my Linga, his merit is more than that of 

one who makes the gift of a hundred thousand milch-cows to 

one who has mastered the Vedas. 

42. O goddess of Suras, one may take food only once in 
a month and continue thus throughout one s life. Another 
may adore my Linga but once. These two are equal (in merit). 
There is no doubt. 

43. Through the offering of a flower, one gets the same 
benefit as is obtained by offering ten million pieces of gold to 
a deserving person who has mastered the Vedas and who is 
endowed with good qualities and is a regular practitioner of 
penance. 

44. Even if a single Arkapuspa is offered to Siva, one gets 
the same benefit as one gets by offering ten pieces of gold. 

45. Karavira (flower) excels thousands of Arkapuspas. 
Dronapuspa excels thousands of Karavira . 

46. Apamarga excels thousands of Dronapuspas. Kusapuspa 
excels thousands of Apamarga. Samipuspa excels thousands of 
Kusapuspas. 

47. A Samipuspa and a flower of Brhati are mentioned as 
equal. The flower of Jati, Vijaya and Patala should be known 
as equal to Karavira. 

48. A flower of white Mandara and those of Naga, Campaka , 
Punnaga andDAattimzareremembered on a par with white lotus. 

49. One should avoid the following flowers: Ketaki, Atimukta, 
Kanda, Yuthi, Madantika, Sirisa, Sarja, and Jambuka flowers. 

50. One should avoid Akutz flower, leaf of Karanjendra, Vibliitaka 
flowers etc. 

„ Kanaka and Kadambaka flowers are to be offered to 
Sankara at night, all the remaining flowers of deities during 
the day and Mallika during the night. 

52-54. Malli stays (fresh) for a Prahara (three hours). Karavira 
for a day and night. 

The following flowers should be abandoned: Those eaten 
and defiled by insects and hairs; those that have been kept 
overnight and so are stale; flowers that have automatically dropped 
down and those that are broken (mutilated). Tulasi, Satapatra, 





VII.I-24.55-68 


153 


Gandhdn, Damana and Marubaka are remembered as the most 
excellent ones among all leaves. Somesvara should always be 
adored by means of these flowers. 

55. The person attains the benefit of pilgrimage (or reli¬ 
gious procession). He is honoured in the heavenly world. 

After saying this much, he (Sambhu) vanished there itself. 

56. Candramas was rid of Phthysis and he settled himself 
in his own place. He summoned Visvakarman and made him 
build a palace of crystal-like splendour and sparklingly white 
like cow’s milk. 

57. The palace was named after Meru. It has gold-ramparts 
and ornamental gates. All round it fourteen other palaces were 
also built. Their names I shall mention separately. Do listen. 

[Names of palaces of the Moon] 

58-60. ( The names exceed fourteen - See, Verse 64) Kesan, 

Sarvatobhadra, Nadana, Nandtsalaka, Nandtsa, Mandara, Sriwksa, 
Amrtodbhava, Himavan, Hemakuta, Kailasa, Prthivijaya, Indranlla, 
Mahamla, Bhudhara, Ratnakutaka, Vaidurya, Padmaraga, Vajraka, 
Mukutojvala, Airavata, Rajahamsa, Garuda and Vrsabha. 

61. Meru is the king of the palaces. Indeed it is the abode 
of the Devas. At the outset the palace by the name Kesan 
should be known as having five Andakas (domes). 

62. The height of the palaces goes on increasing to one 
fourth of the height of Meru. 

63-64. After building these fourteen palaces separately, 
O lady of excellent countenance, he caused ten more palaces 
to be built for the Devas beginning with Brahma, who were the 
residents of the neighbourhood. These ten are palaces begin¬ 
ning with Bhudhara and ending with Vrsabha. They were con¬ 
structed with Kapardin in view as the first. 

65. Meru is the king of the palaces. It was constructed at 
Somesvara, in the tenth Tretayuga in the Vaivasvata Manvantara. 

66. After causing the Mandapas to be made and having 
installed them duly, he caused a hundred Nadas (rivers, prdb- 
ably wide canals) and a thousand tanks and wells to be dug. 

67. After causing thousands of houses, hospitals and or¬ 
phanages duly, he offered them to the Brahmanas severally. 

68. Soma thus set up a city in the vicinity of Srisomesvara 







154 


Skanda Purana 


and requested the Brahmanas for an elaborate performance of 
their rites: 

69. “With the favour of Paramesthin, I am Soma your king. 
Yet I humbly and devoutly submit to you. 

70-71. I have placed at your disposal all these things: Wealth, 
cash, gold, jewels etc., foodgrains, cereals, barley etc., cows, 
buffaloes and other animals, different kinds of garments, plan¬ 
tains, coconuts, betal leaves, areca palms and parks, all round 
with charming border strips. 

72. All the rulers of the Jarhbudvipa will carry out your 
orders with heads bowed down. You who stay here can issue 
excellent orders which they will honour. 

73. Your abodes are filled with camphor, agallocham, san¬ 
dal and various other kinds of articles coming from other con¬ 
tinents. 

74. The merchants who are engaged in trading activities 
in hundreds of commodides will set apart Brahmottaras (a percentage 
of their profit) for the sake of you, Brahmanas, because they 
desire for more gain. 

* 

75. Seeking their own welfare, they will be your well-wish¬ 
ers and behave like your servants.Thus they and the other 
citizens will never face failure and fatigue. 

76. Thus equipped with full complements of the requisite 
materials, you should strive for my prosperity. Hence may the 
rites of Yajnas be performed duly with adequate monetary gifts. 

77. May all the rites pertaining to Brahman (Vedas) such 
as studies and recitation of the Vedas be performed day and 
night. May the distress of the blind, disabled and wretched 
ones be alleviated. 

78. Hospitality should be extended to the guests properly. 
Noble-souled ones who have assembled in the course of their 
pilgrimage should be honoured with due formalities. 

79-84. May shelter be always, given to Brahmanas, sages in 
the hermitages. O learned Brahmanas of steadfastness in the 
o y vows, may excellent Brahmanas always worship with holy 
rites, the Lihga installed by me here. 

Eight persons of authority should look after the affairs of 






VII.I.24.85-95 


155 


ones, extend your support to the arrangement made by me 
here even as the Elephants of the Quarters do to the earth. 
Thus, O Brahmanas, take up the leadership here, in this holy 
spot of Siva and carry out the rites and activities mentioned 
in the Srutis and the Smrtis.” 

On hearing these polite words of Soma, the Brahmanas, 
Kausika, the first among the families there said: “Dvijaraja (Soma) 
has given us excellent advices in every respect. 

85-86. We shall carry out all this. But listen to (consider) 
one matter. Even while we adore in accordance with the 
direction, if we make use of Sivanirmalya (remnants of the 
adoration of Siva) it will result in our downfall as it is censured 
in the Srutis and Smrtis. And the Srutis and Smrtis constitute 
the two great commands of Rudra. 

87. Which fool will transgress them even if the vital airs are 
at the throat (even if death is imminent)? 

88. But we shall perform Makhas (sacrifices) in the sacred 
fire, one of the cosmic bodies of Astamurti (Siva) and the 
mouth of Devas. We shall perform Yajnas according to the 
Vedic path and propitiate the entire universe. 

89. This universe is the manifest form of Lord Puradvis 
(Siva). They are different from each other but all are non- 
different from Isvara. 

90. The Ahuti (oblation) consigned to the holy fire per¬ 
fectly, goes over to Aditya (Sun-god). From Aditya shower of 
rain results and from shower foodgrains and the subjects are 
nourished thereby. 

91-93. We are interested in the regular study and practice 
of Sruti, Smrti, Purana etc. Our activities are entirely condu¬ 
cive to acquisition of merit in regard to different pursuits of 
aims. We may not get enough time to worship the Linga. We 
do worship Isvara by means of great Yajnas and Rudrajapyas. 
We attend every moment in due course to our main symbol 
Veda. O Soma, you wish that we adore Somesvara. O highly 
intelligent one, that we assure you we will carry out specially. 

94-95. Listen to the means whereby your desire can be 
fulfilled. On hearing the dialogue between Gauri and Sankara 
straight from the mouth of the Lord, Narada told us earlier. 
We shall mention that to you. 





156 


Skarida Purana 


Formerly hundreds of Daityas and Danavas inimical to Brahmanas 
and Devas resorted to Sankara by means of different kinds of 
severe penances. 

96. Isvara, the veritable ocean of nectar-like compassion, 
granted favour to them as they performed very severe penance 
with the minds not attached to anything else. 

97. Mahesvara, the Lord of Devas, the master of the three 
worlds, expects only continuous, firm devotion for the purpose 
of granting boons. 

98. Although they were the enemies of Devas and Brahmanas, 
the Lord became pleased with their devotions alone and granted 
them the desired boons pertaining to the Lordship of the worlds. 

99. The limits of the power of the Lord cannot be com¬ 
prehended either by Brahma or by Visnu. The Lord’s prowess 
is thus incomprehensible. Who can then divine the intention 
of the Lord? 

100. The pure-hearted Parvatl asked Paramesvara who, due 
to their penance, granted boons unto Daityas although they 
were of wicked activities. 

Parvatl said: 

101. O Lord, on receiving your favour (boons) the Daityas 
dare to assail the three worlds. They harass Indra and other 
Devas. They make them agitated. 

102. Why do you grant boons to them, to the evil-souled 
ones like them? None of their activities brings even the slight¬ 
est peace and welfare of the universe. 

103. You have granted boons to these and they enjoy divine 
pleasures. How then does Visnu disregard your lordship and 
kill them? 

104. O Lord, tell me what will their ultimate goal be on 
being killed? 



VII.I.24.107-120 


157 


107. That I grant them boons is because of their devotion. 

I can be easily won over by means of devotion. There is no 
doubt about it. 

108. Those Daityas of sinful deeds acquire boons befitting 
their penance. Let me explain why then they are killed by 
Visnu. 

109. Hari and I are apparently different. The reason thereof 
is the difference of the Guna. In fact we are non-different. 
This is the greatest secret. 

110-113. The difference due to being the adored and the 
adorer is common to both of us. For, I bear on my head devoutly 
this Gariga that has issued forth from the tip of Visnu’s foot 
despite the fact that I have been viewed with suspicion by you. 

Further, for the sake of protecting the three worlds, Visnu 
adored me for a long time systematically and obtained the 
discus that kills the evil ones. You are the Mahamaya of Hari 
of incomprehensible nature. Out of devotion to hir.-., I propi¬ 
tiate that Mahamaya, the cause of the origin of the three worlds. 
Similarly Hari also has another Sakti of mine placed on his 
head. 

114-116. Though he is unborn, he resorts to births and 
carries out the protection of the world. In order to kill 
Hiranyakasipu he adopted the form of the Man-lion. When he 
(Visnu as Man-Lion) was about to destroy die universe, I adopted 
the form of the (fabulous lion-killer) Sarabha and subdued 
him. In my attempt to save Bana I raised my trident aloft. But 
even in his human incarnation, he could sportively stun me 
then. Further, increasing my prowess and greatness he adores 
me daily, although the Lord" is my immanent soul. 

117. Moreover, I always meditate on him, the Supreme 
Soul, devoid of beginning and end, by means ot'Dhyanayoga. 

118. Therefore, there is no real difference between us. 
Difference and comparison are resorted to by deluded persons 
alone. 

119. Assuming the form of Visnu, I kill those persons of 
evil deeds. Now, O great goddess, listen to their ultimate goal. 

120. After the devotion to me has ended, they are assailed 
by (overwhelmed with) anger and arrogance on seeing Han. 
So they do not attain salvation. 


158 


Skanda Purana 


121 By our power, their sins become wiped off and they 
attain nativity in the families of Brahmana-sages, which in turn 
brings about their salvation. 

122. Adopting the holy vow of celibacy, they resort to Pasupata 
Yoga. In view of the latent impressions of previous actions, 
they begin to adore me once again. 

123. Others adopt Pasupata and other Vratas devoutly by 
means of Bhaktiyoga and reside in cremation ground. Some are 
nude and some wear a single cloth. 

124. Eating what they get by way of alms and smearing the 
body with ash, they worship my Lingas. They keep their intel¬ 
lect concentrated on me alone. They adhere firmly to the vow 
of meditating on me alone. 

125. I grant salvation at the time of death to those who 
bow down to you, the goddess of the worlds and mine. 

126. To those who have directed their minds to me, I grant 
the salvation of Sarupya (similarity in form) and Salokya (stay¬ 
ing in the God’s region) types. That is because this Pdsupalayoga 
is not conducive to the salvation of the Sayujya type. So it has 
been censured by good sages, Smrtis and good people. 


The Brahmanas said: 


127. We shall receive with equal honour those Brahmanas 
who come here during their pilgrimage and whose minds have 
become humble with devotion. 

128. They will be duly received and offered pure alms, loin 
cloth, waterpot etc. After coming here those ascetics need not 
do any other work. 

129. They will be carefree on account of the presents pro¬ 
vided by you. They will be solely devoted to Sivadharma based 
on the twenty-four Tattvas. 


130. By worshipping Srisomesvara, they will enhance your 
Sreyas (ultimate welfare). In the end they will attain salvation 
which is very rarely achieved (by others). 

th J‘t 1 ’ ° ther u ascetics wil1 come after them. Many others after 

by't e . r ' after ' ° L ° rd ° f ‘ he niSht ' they 


The Brahmanas said: 


132-133. On being asked by the goddess, the Three-eyed 


VII.I.24.134-143 


159 


Lord said thus. Narada heard this dialogue and when we asked 
him during our discourse, he narrated it to us. Now everything 
has been mentioned to you by us. 

134. On being told thus by them Soma became pleased 
and went home. At his behest, they also began to carry out 
whatever he had ordered. 

The Devi said: 

135. The Lord of Devas, Somesa, has such a prowess, He 
is the destroyer of sins. By what means can he be pleased? By 
what Vrata or restraint? 


Isvara said: 

136. I shall clearly mention the holy rite for the sake of 
the welfare of human beings. O beautiful Deva lady, listen to 
that by means of which the Lord becomes pleased. 

137. There are various kinds of Vratas and Upavdsas (fasts). 
Fasts observed every day, at day time or only during nights? In 
a Tirtha many gifts are made over to deserving persons. 

138-139. But if the divine Somavara Vrata is observed in 
one’s own abode, it is as good as performance of all kinds of 
penance etc. It is like a holy bath in Puskara. It is as good as 
going to Kedara and drinking the water thereof. It is as good 
as viewing the Jyotirlinga of excessive refulgence, O beautiful 

lady. . 

140. Of what avail are many Danas, though given to deserv¬ 
ing persons, O beautiful lady? 

141. If any one worships with devotion for eight Somavaras 
(Mondays) it is as good as performing everything and observ- 
ing great Vratas. 

142. O my beloved, O Mahadevi, in the context of Somavara 
Vrata I shall narrate to you this Ilihasa (a true story) just as it 
has occurred. 


Isvara said: 

143. O great goddess, to the north of Kailasa on the moun¬ 
tain Nisadha, there is a large city named Svayamprabha. 


160 


SkandaPurana 


144. It has all the features of a city. It is splendid with 
various, kinds of jewels. It is full -of Gandharvas of different 
tribes.lt is on a par with Indra’s capital city Amaravatl. 

145. A Gandharva named Ghanavahana stays there and 
enjoys great pleasures not available even to Devas. 

146. His wife was in the prime of her youth. She was charming 
with stout and protruding breasts. Mature in her speech, she 
had splendid conduct. 

147. The leader of Gandharvas enjoyed all pleasures along 
with her. After eight sons, a daughter was born to him in due 
course. 


148. O Paramesvarl, she was well-known by the name 
Gandharvasena. She had all her limbs in perfect proportion. 
She knew all lores. 

149-150. She was the most excellent one among thousands 
of girls there. She was endowed with beauty. With enthusiastic 
fancy, she was told by the father: “O sweet girl, go and play. 
This park is very fascinating. It is full of different kinds of trees 
and creepers. Many trees grow there. They are in full bloom 
and richly laden with fruits.” 

151. Accordingly she used to play there always surrounded 
by other girls. Once looking at her daughter playing thus, the 
mother said to her husband: 


152. I feel my life, your life and the lives of other kinsmen 
is fruitless in view of the fact that such a daughter stays at 
home without a husband, O my Lord.” 

153. On being told thus, the Gandharva spoke these words 
to his wife: I shall be on the lookout for a handsome husband 
for our daughter.” 


154-155. After saying so, Ghanavahana sent for his daugh¬ 
ter to come to him. On being called by her parents the beau¬ 
tiful girl hastened to them and fell at the feet of everyone in 

due order (and said): "Command me, dear father, what can 
1 do for you now?” 

.. 156, Th « delighted Ghanavahana said: “O my daughter, is 
there any bridegroom who appeals to you now? I shall look for 
a jewel among Gandharvas befitting you ” 

. 157 , „°u bC ;" g t0ld thU5 ’ her ^ S^ew red in anger and 
she asked her father: “Is there anyone in all the three worlds 
aving one-ten-milhonth of my beauty ?” On hearing her highly 


VII.I.24.158-169 


161 


surprising statement, the father and the mother virtually fell 
into a swoon. 

158. All the kinsmen and other people were sad. “What 
this girl uttered now is not good at all.” Saying thus all the 
kinsmen and mother went away. 

159. That beautiful girl continued to sport about in the 
park rocking herself in the swing during that vernal month. 

160. In the meantime Sikhandi,the group leader (of Siva 
Ganas) was going through the sky in his divine aerial chariot. 
He saw the girl with exalted beauty and charm. 

161-163. She was having fun with songs, instrumental music 
and dance. The group leader got down from the aerial chariot 
for offering midday prayer. He wanted midday sporting-about 
with the celestial damsels. He got down from the aerial chariot 
and stood there in the park. He then heard the statement of 
the Gandharva girl: “No one on a par with me in beauty is 
seen No Deva or Danava possesses one-ten-millionth of my beauty.” 

164. On hearing this statement the group leader became 
angry. The Lord of Ganas cursed that girl of beautiful limbs 
but of arrogant nature. 

The Gana said: 

165. Despite seeing me, O large-eyed girl, you disparage 
Gandharvas and Devas as well as others. You are so haughty 
on account of your excessive beauty and charm? 

166. Hence,Ohaughty girl, leprosy shall affect all your limbs. 

On hearing this curse the poor girl became terrified. 

167. She fell at his feet stretching to the full length and 
requested for blessing. “O kind Sir, bless me and withdraw the 
curse. I am a wretched girl. I shall not behave like this in 
future.” 

168. On being appealed thus, Sikhandi, the group leader, 
blessed the Gandharva girl out of compassion. 

Sikhandi said: 

169. A living being may be endowed with birth in high 
caste, beauty, learning and riches, but if he becomes haughty 
and proud thereby he perishes. 


162 


Skanda Purana 


170. Hence one should not be puffed up and vainglorious. 
The result of haughtiness is this. O iny girl, listen to my bless¬ 
ing (by way of redemption). After listening, ponder over it. 

171. Gosrnga, a leading sage, is in the Himalayan forests. 
He will render help to you. 

After saying this, O my beloved, he went away. 

172. By that time it was evening in all the worlds. 

173. Thereupon, the Gandharva girl lost all her enthusi¬ 
asm. She left the beautiful park with head drooping down and 
came to her parents. 

174. She told them everything that resulted in leprosy. On 
hearing it, the parents were grief-stricken with no lustre (pale 
in their faces). 

175. They hastened to Mountain Himalaya along with their 
daughter. They found out the hermitage of Sage Gosrnga. 

176-177. They saw the leading sage Gosrnga seated in the 
middle. They bowed to him and prostrated on the ground like 
a log of wood and eulogized him with many hymns. Sitting 
before him and saluting him again and again, he spoke words 
about what happened earlier. 

178. When the story was heard, he asked the reason. When 
that was asked, the Gandharva said: 

The Gandharva said: 

179-180. The body of my daughter is afflicted with the fell 
disease of leprosy. It behoves you to do something that finishes 
it. O Brahmana-sage, be pleased. I am highly distressed now. 
The reason of our coming here is to see that the leprosy of 
my daughter is eradicated. 

Gosrnga said: 

181-183. In Bharatavarsa, there is the highly resplendent 
Lord Somesvara by name near the ocean. He is bowed down 
to by all the Devas. Resolve to worship him taking only a single 
meal for the sake of destroying all ailments and for the fulfilment 
t/ 3 °^j e ^ ves * Propitiate Sankara by tneans of the Somavara 
Vrata. If this is done the sickness of your daughter will be 



VII.I.24.184—25.1-9 


163 


Isvara said: 

184. On hearing these words of the great sage of purified 
soul, he resolved to go there for the purpose of propitiating 
Somesvara. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 
Description of Somavara Vrata 


Isvara said: 

1. Desirous of propitiating Bhava, O goddess, that Gandharva 
asked the excellent sage about the Somavara Vrata (vow to be 
performed on Monday). 

The Gandharva said: 

2. How is this Somavara Vrata to be observed? What are the 
injunctions regarding its procedure? At what time is it to be 
performed? Narrate everything in detail. 

Gosrhga said: 

3. Very well! Very well! O highly intelligent one! This is 
what has not been mentioned to anyone else. It is conducive 
to help all living beings. 

4. What is called Somavara Vrata is divine. It is destructive 
of all ailments and it confers all Siddhis. It bestows all the 
desired benefits. 

5. It can be observed at all times. It causes auspiciousness 
to all the Varnas. Seeing good result thereof, this has to be 
performed always by men and women. 

6. This great Vrata has been performed by Brahma, Vispu 

and other Devas. Further, this has been performed by Somaraja 
when he was overwhelmed by Daksa’s curse. , 

7 Fully devoted to the meditation on Sambhu, Sarhbhu 
was propitiated by him. The great Lord was pleased with the 
devotion of Somaraja. . 

8-9. He (Soma)said: “If you are pleased, be present in the 


164 


SkandaPurana 


installed Liriga permanently. May my Liriga installed along with 
Uma, continue to stay as long as the Sun and Moon shine and 
mountains stand.” 

10. After praying to Mahesvara, the Linga was installed by 
him and known after his own name. Then he was rid of the 
ailments. 

11. Thus he has got his body heated and purified and he 
now shines in the sky. 

12. Ever since then, those men too who perform the Vrata 
ontheearth.attainpurityofbodylike Moon and go to his region. 

13. Of what avail is much talk? I shall describe the mode 
of procedure thereof. It can be adopted and performed in any 
month on any Monday in the bright half of the month. 

14. Earlier in the Brahma Muhurta, the devotee finishes 

cleansing the teeth with the toothbrush twig (of any tree) and 
performs the rite of ablution and all holy rites laid down in 
his own code of pious activities. ^ 

15. In a pleasant site on a clean level ground, one should 
place a polished pot. The pot is covered with mango shoots 
and beautified with sandalpaste. 

16. The vessel is then embellished with all the ornaments 
and covered all round with a white cloth. Siva (Linga) with its 
pedestal base is put therein. 

17. There Lord Somanatha along with his Sakti and ac¬ 
companied by Uma is worshipped with white flowers. In the 
(eight) quarters the Astamurtis are also worshipped. 

18. There shall be different kinds of foodstuffs and snacks. 
The fruit offered shall be Bljapuraka (pomegranate?). The 
rites are entirely performed with the following Mantra: 

19-20. The adoration and the Homa are performed with 
this Mantra: “Om, obeisance to the Five-faced One with ten 
arms and three eyes. O Lord with half the body united with 
the body of Uma, O Lord riding on the bull, O Lord adorned 
with white ornaments, obeisance to you, the omniformed one.” 

' . HaVmg P erfor med thus during the day, the man should 
f °° t Cep a , t ™ g ^ after vie wing the Moon*. He should be on 
a mattress of Darbha grass and meditate on Hara, Somesvara. 


1. Read candram for caivarn. 



VTI.I.25.22-33 


165 


22. If the rite is thus performed the eighteen 
leprosy will be dispelled. 


varieties of 


On the second Monday (Somavdra) the devotee shall use a 
twig of Karanja as toothbrush. 


23. He should worship the subtle form of the Lord accom¬ 
panied by Jyesthasakti (the eldest Sakti) by means of lotuses and 
imbibe honey duly. 

24. An orange fruit (Ndranga) is offered and all other rites 
are performed as before. If the rite is thus performed one shall 
attain the benefit of (gifting as Dana) a hundred thousand 

COWS. 


25. On the third Somavdra, the tooth-brush twig is from an 
Apamarga tree. After cleansing the teeth the devotee should 
worship Trinetra (Siva—the three-eyed). 

26. A Dadima fruit (pomegranate) should be offered and 
the deity is adored with Jati flowers. At night the devotee eats 
grapes and worships God Siva attended by Siddhis. 

27. On the fourth Monday ( Somavdra) the tooth-brush twig 
is that of Udumbara (Indian fig tree). The devotee should wor¬ 
ship Gaurlsa accompanied by Suksma (the goddess in the subtle 
form). 

28. A fruit of Narikela (coconut) is to be offered and the 
adoration is performed with Damana (Artenisia indica—MW). 
At night the devotee eats Sarkard (sugar granules) and keeps 
vigil at night. 

29. On the fifth Monday the devotee worships the Lord of 
Ganas accompanied by Vibhiiti (goddess of prosperity). The 
adoration is done with Kunda flowers. 

30. The toothbrush twig is from an Asvattha (Peepal) tree. 
The Arghya is offered through grapes. At night the devotee 
eats Moca (Phala) (banana). One will get the benefit of a horse- 
sacrifice. 

31. On the sixth Monday the devotee should worship the 
Lord named Surupa.Withgreatdevotionheshould eatcamphor. 

32. On the seventh Monday the toothbrush is a twig of 
Mallika. The devotee should worship Sarvajiia accompanied by 
Dipta. 

33. A Jamblra fruit is offered and the adoration is done 
with Jati flowers. The devotee should eat Lavanga (cloves). It 
has infinite benefit. 


166 


Skanda Parana 


34. On the eighth Monday Lord Amoghayuta is to be 
worshipped with Marubhaka flowers. A Kadaliphala (banana fruit) 
is offered as Arghya. At night the devotee takes milk. He shall 
obtain the benefit of Agnistoma (sacrifice). 

35-36. When this Vrata is performed, the benefit is a crore 
times more than the benefit remembered as being derived 
from a crore times of perfect ablution in Gaiiga or the benefit 
of gifting ten thousand gold coins to a Brahmana well-versed 
in the Vedas at the time of a solar eclipse in Kuruksetra. 

37. If the Somavara (Monday) Vrata is performed the benefit 
is a crore times more than the benefit of the gift of a hundred 
elephants and a hundred thousand chariots and horses. 

38. If the Somavara is performed, one gets the benefit of 
fumigating Guggulu crores of times. 

39. He shall be endowed with all the riches. He will have 
the same valour as that of Siva. He shall reside in Rudraloka 
till the dissolution (death) of Brahma. 

40. When the ninth Somavara falls the devotee performs 
the splendid Udyapana (conclusion) rite. O Gandharva, I shall 
explain to you now how it is done. 

41. A circular pavilion is erected and decorated with flags 
and banners splendidly. A Kunda is also made. Four ornamen¬ 
tal gates are erected. 

42. The altar is to be made in the centre. It should be 
square in shape and very splendid. There, in the middle, the 
mystic figure of Padma inside a circle is to be drawn. 

43. In the eight quarters, eight pots are placed with gold 
therein. They are placed separately. Varna and other Saktis are 
in due order installed in the pots in east etc. 

44. In the pericarp of the lotus, the highly resplendent 
golden image of Srlsomesa along with Sakti is installed. 


45. The Lord occupies a golden bed and is accompanied 
by Manonmani (a form of Durga). Vessels of gold etc. are filled 
with honey. 

46. H is covered with a golden bedstead and the deity therein 

is duly adored.lt is duly and serially adored uttering the names 
beginning with Atlanta and ending with Sikhandin. 

n h Th ? rC ShaU bC SWCet SCents ’ § arlands > incense, lamps 

and different kinds of food offerings. With Somesvara in view 



VII.1.25.49-60 


167 


the following are offered to the preceptor well-versed in the 
Puranas: garments, ornaments, betel-leaves, umbrella, chowries, 
mirrors, lamps,bells,canopiesandbedstead with cotton cushion! 

49. After adorning the preceptor, the devotee should perform 
the rite of Homa. At the conclusion of the rite of offering 
oblations, the devotee keeps vigil at night there itself. 

50. Then he drinks Pancagavya (the five substances got 
from a cow) and meditates on Lord Somesvara in his heart. At 
dawn he takes his holy bath and performs the meditation in 
accordance with the injunctions. 

51. Thereafter, O Gandharva, he should feed Brahmanas 
devoutly with various kinds of foodstuffs made of milk, sugar- 
candy etc. 

52. He then should offer a pair of garments and a cow and 
see them off. 

53. In this way the devotee performs the Vrata duly and 
acquires everlasting merit. He becomes richly endowed with 
wealth and foodgrain along with his sons and wife. 

54. No one born in that family becomes poor and miser¬ 
able. One without a son becomes blessed with sons. Even a 
barren woman bears sons. 

55. This Vrata should be particularly performed by all these: 
a woman who is Kakavandhya (one who has given birth to only 
one child), a woman whose child is dead, one disliked or maltreated 
by husband and one who gives birth to only girls. 

56. After these Vratas have been duly performed, when he 
(or she) dies, the devotee shall go to heaven. He enjoys elabo¬ 
rate and unlimited pleasures for thousands and hundreds of 
crores of Kalpas, until the annihilation of all living beings. 

57. Thus the entire procedure of Somavara Vrata has been 
narrated to you in due order. O highly esteemed one, hasten 
to the place where Somesvara is present. 

Isvara said: 

58. O lady of excellent countenance, on being told thus, 
the Gandharva arrived at Prabhasa Ksetra along with all req¬ 
uisite offerings and accompanied by his daughter. 

59-60. There he visited Somesvara and his eyes became 
filled with tears of joy. In the course of his pilgrimage, he duly 




168 


Skanda Purana 


worshipped the Lord and performed Somavrata in the com¬ 
pany of his daughter. Mahesvara became pleased with that 
highly esteemed devotee. He granted him the kingdom of 
Gandharvas and perfect devotion unto himself. All the ail¬ 
ments were dispelled and all the desires richly fulfilled. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 

Greatness of Gandharvesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. On the acquisition of the boon, the Gandharva named 
Ghanavahana became contented. With great devotion l\e in¬ 
stalled a Linga there. 

It was to the north of Somesvara in the vicinity of Dandapani. 
The Linga was called Gandharvesvara. It bestows skill in Gandharva 
(art of music). It is stationed to the west of Varada at a dis¬ 
tance of five Dhanus. A man who adores it on the fifth lunar 
day, never becomes miserable. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 

Greatness of Gandharvasenesvara 

Isvara said: 

1-4. Further, O goddess of Devas, there is a Linga installed 
there itself by Gandharvasena, the daughter of Ghanavahana. 

It is in the vicinity of Gauri, within a distance of three Dhanus 
in the east. 

It is called Vimalesvara and is destructive of all ailments. 
A woman who adores it on the third lunar day is rid of all 
wretchedness. She obtains all that she desires. She will become 
well-established with sons and grandsons. 

O goddess this Vrata which is destructive of sins, was nar- 
rated to the Gandharva in the twilight (interim) period of 
Treta Yuga. If this Vrata is heard, it destroys sins. 


VII.I.28.1-10 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 
Procedure of the Pilgrimage 


169 


The Devi said: 

1-2. Thus, O Lord, this wonderful narrative has been heard 
by me from you entirely. Now it behoves you to narrate duly 
and in detail the greatness of Mahesvara, the Lord of Soma 
How should men proceed to visit him? How is the religious 
pilgrimage to be performed? At what time, O great Lord’ And 
what are the regulations? 


Isvara said: 

3-4. Whether in Hemanta (early winter) or in Sisira (late 
winter) or in spring, O beautiful lady, if a person feels inclined 
and has also the requisite money on hand and the festival 
season falls, the Yatra (pilgrimage) should be performed. It is 
the keenness of the devotion that is the criterion. O lady of 
excellent complexion, the devotee himself should observe some 
sort of (religious) rules and regulations in his own house. 

5. He bows to Rudra mentally and performs the Srdddha 
in accordance with the injunctions. He circumambulates the 
holy spot, observing the vow of silence with great concentra¬ 
tion. 

6. He should be self-restrained. He should observe full 
control on the diet. The devotee should be rid of lust, anger, 
covetousness and delusion. 

7. He must be free from rivalry, malice and indulgence. 
Thus the men should start on their religious procession. Under¬ 
taking pilgrimage is highly meritorious. It excels even (perfor¬ 
mance of) Yajhas . 

8. By performing Agnistoma and other Yajhas with plenty 
of monetary gifts, one gets that benefit which one acquires by 
means of pilgrimage to holy places. 

9. In the extremely terrible Kali Yuga with its full comple¬ 
ment of sinfulness, one cannot obtain piety and heavenly pleasures 
through any other means. O great goddess, there is no doubt 
in this that there is no other means except pilgrimage. 

10. In the Kali age, men who undertake pilgrimage with 




170 


Skanda Purana 


purity and faith, shall be ones who have achieved their objec- 
tives. Others are useless. 

11 Just as there is no reservoir of water on a par with the 
areat ocean,so also there is noTIrtha equal to PrabhasikaKsetra. 

12. One not observing the holy fast for three days, not 
undertaking pilgrimage to holy spots and not gifting gold or 

cows definitely becomes indigent. 

13. If a devotee is desirous of the benefit of all the Tirthas, 
but these are inaccessible and impossible places of pilgrimage, 

he should visit them mentally. 

14. If one’s hands and feet and the mind are fully under 
control, if one has learning, penance and fame, one attains the 
benefit of (pilgrimage to) holy spots. 

15. A man of self-control, one with full diet control, one 
keenly interested in holy ablution and Japa , and one regular 
in observing holy vows and fasts, attains the benefit of pilgrim¬ 
age to holy spots. 

16. O goddess of Devas, one who is never angry, one who 
is habitually truthful and steadfast in vows and one who views 
all living beings on a par with his own self, attains the benefit 
of pilgrimage to holy spots. 

17. A Brahmana should undertake pilgrimage to places 
like Kuruksetra which can be traversed by means of chariots. 
There is no fault in making use of vehicles therein. 

18. Those good men who have ample wealth and who 
constantly think of visiting Tirthas, will have more benefit through 
making gifts in holy spots as well as by Yoga. 

19. Those poor people who have no money but who are 
interested in pilgrimage, will have the acquisition of the ben¬ 
efit of Yajnas even without possessing ready cash. 

20. It should be known that a TIrtha bestows benefits to 
persons of all Varnas and stages of life. No hesitation need be 
there in this matter. 

21. If a person goes to a holy spot for some other task (of 
his own) but incidentally takes his holy ablution, he does not 
acquire the benefit of the pilgrimage but gets only that of the 
holy bath. 

22. Undertaking pilgrimage on foot is considered the greatest 
penance. If the same is undertaken by means of vehicles, one 
gets only the benefit of the holy ablution. 


VII.I.28.23-34 


171 


23. O goddess, if anyone pays another the expenditure 
(for the Ydtra) and also places his vehicle at his disposal for 
the pilgrimage, he gets four times the benefit. 


24. Having undertaken pilgrimage, O great goddess, if people 
control their sense-organs and subsist on alms, they acquire 
ten times the benefit. M 


25. A Brahmana (who undertakes a pilgrimage) without 
using umbrella and shoes, who subsist himself on alms and 
keeps his sense-organs under control, he is rid of all terrible 
results arising from committing Mahapatakas. 

26. Taking alms is not on a par with taking other people’s 
cooked food. Accepting alms is not acceptance of gifts. Taking 
alms is on a par with imbibing Soma juice. Hence one should 
beg for alms. 

27. In this world there are two types of holy spots: one type 
is created by self-willed ones; the other type is self-born (natu¬ 
ral) like Prabhasa etc. or created by deities. 

28. In a great TIrtha that is self-born i.e. natural and is by 
nature more exalted, a Pratigraha (gift) taken is as good as 
accepting all Pratigrahas. 

29. In the case of one refraining from Pratigraha the ben¬ 
efit of the pilgrimage is ten times that of the pilgrimage. All 
gifts are made by him. The Devas are propitiated by means of 
Yajnas. 

30-31. It is as though after reaching the holy spot great 
restraint is indulged in by him. If anyone is inclined to take 
Pratigraha because of his liking for the object, he is a wicked 
soul. He has neither this world nor the other world. But if a 
Brahmana weak for want of an avocation, accepts Pratigraha he 
shall make a gift of a tenth of what he got thus. Thereby he 
never become a loser. 

32. If a Sudra assumes the guise of a Brahmana and takes 
the Pratigraha of anything like grass or wood, he meets with 
a downfall. 

33. He falls into crores of great hells such as Kumbhlpaka 
etc. He remains there, O lady of excellent countenance, till 
fourteen thousand Indras reign. 

34. Hence no Pratigraha should be accepted in both the 
types of Tirthas, Krta (created) or Akrta (natural) even by other 
Brahmanas. 


172 


Skanda Purana 


35. One who is fully endowed with Bhava (emotional purity) 
attains the full benefit. But one who goes (on pilgrimage) with 
another man’s food, attains only a sixteenth (part of the benefit). 

36. In the case of a blind man, a man of failing health and 
weakness, a lame man and a Yayavara (one who moves about 
from one village to another every night), a vehicle has been 
permitted for cogent reasons. Why should there be (such a 
concession) in the case of an Acchidra (having no holes, i.e. 
weakness, healthy, with no weakness) Brahmana? 

37. One who visits Tirthas, gives away the benefit of ablu¬ 
tion, eating and drinking to those who bear him. But the benefit 
of the TIrtha, he acquires entirely. 

38. If he does not give away the entire sixteenth fraction 
of what he has acquired with effort, he shall give unto Brahmanas 
a fifth (of this sixteenth). 

39. If honouring the good wishes of preceptors, parents 
and deities, one gives away one’s merit the person gets the 
same multiplied eight times as the benefit. 

40. Whether in the case of holy ablution, Dana,Japa, Homa, 
self-study of the Vedas and adoration of deities, it is the Punya 
(merit) that has to be given, demerit is never given. 

41. If a pilgrim dips in a TIrtha with his father, mother, 
brother, friend, or preceptor in view, that person gets a twelfth 
of the merit. 

42. O great goddess, if a pilgrim makes an image of any¬ 
one and gets it immersed in the waters of a TIrtha, that person 
gets one-eighth of the merit. 


43. Those Brahmanas deficient in learning who accept great 

gifts (Mahadana) are reborn as trees or as Brahmaraksasas. 

44. One should not take interest in Pratigraha on the strength 
of Vedic knowledge. Whether due to ignorance or due to mistake, 
Karma burns, not the other things. (?) 

45. On touching a log of wood in a funeral pyre or a Yaina 
Yupa (sacrificial post) or one who sells Veda, bath is prescribed 
(by way of atonement). 

46. One who reads command and the one who gives it— 

both of them are sinful ones, residents of the nether worlds 
(i.e. hells).(?) 


47. He who reads command wiih a desire to collect Pratigmka, 
particularly in a holy place, is Brahmaghna (slayer of Brahmanas)! 


VII.I.28.48-59 


173 


none else. One may be staying at the entrance to the palace 
of a king but one should not make a sale of the Vedas. 

48. A base Brahmana may very well kill a cow and eat its 
flesh, or one may live like fish, but one shall not sell the Vedas. 
There has never been and there will never be a sin like Brahmana- 
slaughter. 

49. O goddess, one may commit that sin but one shall not 
make a sale of Vedas particularly in a holy spot, so also in a 
Mahaksetra. 

50. A person undertaking pilgrimage renders the Tirtha 
holy and sacred if he abandons (refrains from accepting) a gift 
offered. He sanctifies his ancestors. 

51. A sin committed elsewhere becomes reduced in Tirtha. 
But what is committed in the Tirtha is never destroyed any¬ 
where. 

52. A pilgrim shall guard himself like a pot filled with oil 
by not letting it spill. That Brahmana of self-control attains the 
benefit of the Tirtha. 

53. If a pilgrim eats cooked food from anyone whether in 
a large quantity or only very little, he gives a moiety of that 
benefit of bath to him. 

54. If a Brahmana pilgrim does not beg for alms despite 
being in difficulties, if he is truthful and resolute in medita¬ 
tion, he renders service to the Tirtha itself. 

55. Puskara in Krta Yuga, Naimisa in Treta Yuga, Kuruksetra 
in Dvapara and Prabhasika in Kali Yuga (are most important 
and sacred). 

56. A man may stand on a single leg for a thousand Yugas. 
Another performs the pilgrimage to the Prabhasika Ksetra. 
The latter may or may not be equal to the former. 

57. O lady of excellent countenance, after reaching the 
centre of this holy spot a man must leave off his vehicle and 
walk on foot. 

58. He should roll on where even the deities had rolled. 
Then as a true pilgrim, he should go to Lord Sopiesvara after 
visiting Kapardin. He should proceed ahead dancing, laughing 
and singing. 

59. On seeing such a man standing before Somesvara, the 
Pitrs always become pleased and the grandfathers shout for 

j°y- 



174 


Skanda Purana 


60. “Onp belonging to our family has set off towards Lord 
Somesvara, in order to redeem us.” O goddess, after going to 
Somesvara, a devotee should get himself (i.e. his head) shaved. 

61. In the TIrtha the requisite Upavasa (fasting) should be 
observed. Understand the procedure from me.' There is no 
TIrtha on a par with Ganga. There is no resort on a par with 
a Kratu (Yajna). 

62. There is no Japya (Mantra) like Gayatri; no Homa like 
that with the Vyahrtis (Om bhuh etc.). Within water there is 
nothing that quells sins more than the Aghamarsana (Mantra). 

63. There is no meritorious act like non-violence. There is 
nothing greater than Dana. There is no greater austerity (pen¬ 
ance) than observing fast or resorting to Tlrthas. 

64. O goddess of Devas, there is nothing superior to fast 
observed in a holy spot as a means of quelling sins and causing 
pleasure to the good. 

65. Fast has been particularly prescribed in holy spots of 
deities. In the case of a Brahmana abstinence from food i?, 
called the greatest austerity. 

66. Taking food once in three days is mentioned as the 
greatest austerity in the case of a Sudra. In the case of persons 
born as a result of mixture of castes, one day is glorified (as 
an interval between two meals). 

67. If at all anywhere a Sudra performs a penance greater 
than (taking food) once in three days, it should be known that 

there is loss unto the nation and a great danger befalls the 
king. 


68. A Sudra should perform austerity within his capacity by 
regularly taking food once in three days. A Sudra shall never 
pull out or uproot Darbha grass. He should never drink the 
milk of a Kapila (tawny-coloured) cow. 

^ e ^ ut,ful woman, he should never take food in the 
middle leaf of Brahmavrksa (Mulberry or Palasa tree). He should 
not utter th e Pranava Mantra (Om), nor shall he eat Purodasa 
(sacrificial oblation). 

should Sh ° U !f n0t haVC a tuft of hair on the head nor 
should he wear the sacred thread. He should not even utter 

Samskrta language. He should not read a Vedic passage nor 

should he resort to Trairdtra (fast for three nights) 

71. Certainly the fulfilment of the holy rites in the case of 


VII.1.28.72-83 


175 


a Sudra is with a mere, bow of salutation. If he does anything 
prohibited he sinks down (in hell) along with his Pitrs. 

72. One by whom the organs (of sense and action) num¬ 
bering eleven have been controlled obtains the merit of (pil¬ 
grimage to) TIrthas. The other one shall meet only with pain 
and distress. 

73. One should take the holy bath in the same TIrtha where 
Pitr Sraddha is performed. He shall be one doing what is ben¬ 
eficial to all living beings. He shall attain the benefit of the 
TIrtha. 

74. A person who is a religious impostor, who is always 
covetous and is enamoured of other men ‘s wives shall be a 
sinner even if he undertakes pilgrimage. 

75. O great goddess, one should know all these and then 
undertake pilgrimage in accordance with the injunctions. At 
the outset, he should observe fast at the pilgrim centre. He 
should be faithful and steadfast in his holy vows. 

76. If he wishes for his welfare he should not take food at 
all on that day. No Brahmana should ever take another man’s 
food. 

77. One may accept elephant, horse, chariot, other vehicles, 
plot of land, cow, gold etc. but shall not take food. 

78. Through uncooked food, one gets hundred times the 
merit of one who offers or takes food. Hence, O lady of ex¬ 
cellent countenance, one should observe Tirthopavasa (fast at 


a holy spot). 

79. O goddess, in the case of one who has undertaken holy 
vows, a pilgrim and a widow in particular, if food is taken from 
another persons the merit goes to that person whose food is 
partaken of. 

80-82 I shall mention the procedure of pilgrimage to be 
followed by a widowed woman. She has to eschew Kumkuma, 
sandal, betel-leaves, garlands, all red garments, bedsheets, 
conversation with the uncultured, taking meal two times a day, 
seeing men, engaging in jokes in darkness. She has to avoid 

creaky sandals, dance and music. , , . . 

83. She should not tie up tresses of hair nor should she 
apply collyrium to the eyes. No unguent is to be used. She will 
dissociate with unchaste women. She should not reve in 
much of scholarship (scholarly discussions). 


176 


Skanda Parana 


84. An ascetic, a religious student and a widow in particu¬ 
lar, should take bath everyday and wear white clothes. 

85. They (learned men) consider betel-leaves, honey and 
meat on a par with imbibing liquor. By avoiding these, O goddess, 
the merit of the pilgrimage will be complete. 


The Devi said: 

86. What are the austerities recommended in the holy place 
Prabhasika? What types of gifts are made? How? In what holy 
spot? 


Isvara said: 


87. Austerities are of a very great importance in Krtayuga. 
It is knowledge that is sought after in Treta Yuga. In Dvapara, 
performing Yajna is praised. Only Dana (is regarded so) in 
Kaliyuga. 

88. Sages and other people go to Prabhasika Ksetra and 
perform austerities called Krcchra Candrayana etc. in Krtayuga. 

89. In Kali Age, gifts are made over to Brahmanas duly. 
After reaching Prabhasa Ksetra the merit of the austerities is 
obtained. 


90-94. At Prabhasa, a king should make sixteen Mahaddnas 
namely: Tuldpurusa, Brahmdnda, Prthvi, Kalpa tree, Kamadhenu, 
Gaja (elephant), Vaji (horse), Ratha (chariot), Ratna (jewel), 
Dhenu(cow), Hiranya (gold), Asva (horse), Sapta Sdgara (seven 
seas) Mahabhuta (great elements), Ghata (pot), Visva (uni- 
verse) Cakra (wheel), and Kalpalatd (wish-yielding creeper). 

The following ten are remembered as Parvatas (mountains): 
Dhanya (gram), Ratna (jewel), Guda (jaggery), Svama (gold), 

(zheeTJ ySGe , S !’/ dTfidSa (COUOn)> ^ arkard ( su S ar ), Sarpis 
(ghee), Lavana (salt) and Rupya (silver). 

n a J!p e ^ n i Win ^ r are remembered as Dhen ^s (cows): Guda 

<w^rw>w ,7 r’’ Dadhi <CUrdS) ’ Madhu < hon 'y)' AMu 
Or°an e shol eS be 5 gtn “nee' CaCh S ' para "'>'' 

Sarasvati and the sea. P a ‘ COn,luence of 


VII.I.28.95-106 


177 


95. To a great- learned man should be given everything or 
a house with all the necessary paraphernalia; something whether 
it is much or little should be given to Brahmanas in a social 
gathering. 

96. Rites in the sacred fire are to -be performed in that 
TIrtha where Linga is obtained and where the waters are devoid 
of impurities. Thereafter the Dana is to be made. 

97. There is a definite injunction laid down that in every 
TIrtha, propitiation of the Devas, offering oblations of water 
to the Pitrs, Sraddha and Dana together with the monetary 
gifts and the gift of cows should be performed. 

98. In regard to the Lihgas well-known as extraordinary, 
Vrsadana (gift of a bull) is prescribed. Ablution, smearing of 
unguents and the adoration of the deifies should be performed. 

99. The Jagati (Precincts of a temple) should be devoutly 
plastered and then the worship performed. The palace (temple) 
should be made white with lime and if it is ruined, it should 
be renovated. 

100. A person who undertakes Vratas should keep the flower 
garden and the well for bathing pure and clean. Plenty of gifts 
to Brahmanas as well as the priest worshipping the deity (be 
given). 

101. In all pilgrimages everywhere, this injunction holds 
good. A TIrtha in ruins should be renovated and swept clean. 
The merit of such good work is to be mentioned (to all). 

102. In a well-known TIrtha, one should give Mahadana; in 
a medium type moderate type of gift. Gift of cows is made in 
all the TIrthas. Gold is the means of expiation. The gift of gold 
is the best of all gifts. 

103. By doing thus with devotion, a man’s birth becomes 
fruitful. I shall now explain the gifts in various TIrthas what 
should be given, where and on what lunar days. 

104. In Prabhasa Ksetra pure gold should be’ given on the 
first lunar day; garment on the second lunar day; a plot of land 
on the third day (should be given). 

105. On the fourth day, foodgrains are to be gifted and a 
Kapild (tawny-coloured cow) on the fifth day. A horse should 
be given on the sixth day and a buffalo on the seventh ay. 

106. A bull is to be gifted on the eighth day. It shall be 
blue-coloured and endowed with all characteristic features, n 


178 


Skanda Purana 


the ninth day, the devotee should give a house, a discus, a 
conch and a club. 

107. All types of sweet scents are to be gifted on the tenth 
day and pearl on the eleventh day. On the twelfth day cooked 
food etc. and corals are to be duly offered to a person of 
excellent Vratas. 

108. Women (slave girls) are to be given on the thirteenth 
day and wisdom (knowledge, learning) is gifted on the Bhuta 
(fourteenth) day. On the Amavasya day all Danas are to be 
made. 

109. By making these gifts one will get ten times more 
merit (benefit). 

The Devi said: 

110. Tell me the result experienced by those who have 
come to Prabhasa Ksetra without devotion and without making 
gifts and also those without holy baths and utterance of Man¬ 
tras. 

Isvara said: 

111. Irrespective of their being wealthy or without the ut¬ 
terance of the Mantras all those who meet with death at Prabhasa 
proceed to Siva’s abode. 

112. O my beloved, I allot a great chariot to those persons 
who die without utterance of Mantras and performance of 
sacred rites. 

113. Men obtain the highest status in a manner befitting 
the holy bath and Dana. Some men get it as a result of Snana 
and some men by means of Dana. 

114. Some get it by means of bowing down to the Linga 
and some by means of the adoration of the Linga; some as a 
result of the power of meditation and some due to the power 
of Yoga. 

115. O splendid lady, some (obtain these) due to the Jdpya 
(muttering) of the Mantra and some through penance; some 
as a result of renunciation in the Tlrtha and some in accor¬ 
dance with their devotion. 


VII.I.28.116-128 


179 


116. All these and many others, whether exalted, middling 
or the lowest, go to the city of Siva by means of chariots re- 
sembling the Sun. 

117. Their hands are marked by tridents. All of them have 
bulls for vehicle. By my power they sport about in the midst 
of divine groups of Apsaras. 

118. Thus, in accordance with their devotion 1 grant per¬ 
petual benefit. This holy place Prabhasa is stainless. It is not 
adversely affected by Dharmas or Adharmas. 

119. Whether they perform holy rites or unholy acts they 
undoubtedly go to Siva. 

120. O goddess, a man may be blind ever since his birth. 
Meeting with death in my Ksetra, he too, is honoured in the 
world of Rudra. 

121. O goddess, a man may be devoid of both of his ears 
ever since his birth but meeting with death in Prabhasa he 
shall be in my company (an attendant). 

122. Now I shall mention the rules regarding Sparsana (touch¬ 
ing or ritualistic imbibing)of the TTrtha waters. Charged with 
a Mantra a TIrtha comes near. 

123. At the outset the devotee touches the TIrtha, the 
pure water uttering the Pranava. Thereafter, he should take 
the plunge and take his bath uttering this Adhyatma Mantra 
(the Mantra of spiritual efficacy): 

124-125 “Om, obeisance to the Lord of Devas, to Sitikantha 
(Blue-throated Siva) holding a staff and having the discus in 
the left hand. Obeisance to Vedhas (creator). 

O Sarasvatl, O Savitri, O mother of the Vedas, O Vibhavar! 
(night), be present here in this TIrtha, O destroyer of sins”. 

In the case of all the Tlrthas, this same Mantra is cited. 

126. Uttering this Mantra, a pilgrim makes the salutation 
and takes the holy bath in accordance with the injunctions. O 
lady of holy vows, he should observe fast on that day. 

127. For a whole year, the devotee should observe fast on 
that lunar day. 

The Devi said: 

128. O great god, tell me in detail. After coming to Prabhasa 
Ksetra, in which TIrtha should the devotees take their holy 
bath? 


180 


Skanda Parana 


Isvara said: 

129. So, I shall tell you about the first Tirtha of great 
lustre, where men should take their bath at the outset. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 


Reason why Sea Water Is not Fit for Drinking 


Isvara said: 


1-3. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to Agnitirtha on the 
auspicious shore of the sea where the Badava (submarine fire) 
was released by Sarasvatl, O lady of excellent countenance. 

It is to the south of Somanatha and is destructive of all sins. 
It is the Tirtha well-known in all the three worlds by the name 
Padmaka. 

It is said that the Kunda is within the water at a distance 
of a hundred Dhanus from Somesa. It extends to a hundred 
Hastas and is destructive of sins. There the pilgrim takes his 
plunge into the sea and takes his bath. 

4. First of all he should shave off the hairs (of his head) 
near Somesvara. Meditating mentally on Sankara, he should 
cast off the hairs there. After casting off the hairs, he should 
take bath once again. 

5. O Daughter of the Mountain, whatever sin a man com¬ 
mits when in straitened circumstances due to want of suste¬ 
nance, all that sin remains on his hairs. 


6 ’ Hence one sh °uW assiduously cast off the hairs there 
If the same is carried out in front of Somanatha, the benefit 
is twofold. 

v 1* ™ e _P la ce in the vicinit y of Agnitirtha, in the centre of 

fSn.nT bC kn ° Wn 35 the P ,ace where the benefit 
is twofold. At other spots, the benefit is only single. 

is not 1 7 °f™ ceUent countenance, shaving off the hairs 

Listen to th dab e m the C3Se ° f WOmen With husband alive. 
Listen to the rite m regard to them from me. 

' H ° ld together the ent ire tresses of hairs and cut off two 


VII.I.29.10-22 


181 


finger-breadths (of hairs in the end). Then oblations are of¬ 
fered to gods and libations to the Pitrs duly. 

10. In regard to shaving off and observing of fast, this 
alone is the procedure in all the TIrthas. 

11. Shaving off (the head) is laid down on seven occasions. 
It should be done when visiting Gahga, in the holy spot of 
Bhaskara, at death of mother, that of father, that of preceptor, 
on impregnation and at the time of imbibing Soma juice. 

12. Even if one performs a thousand horse-sacrifices, one 
does not get that benefit which is obtained by shaving off (the head). 

13. O goddess, if one takes the holy ablution there without 
uttering Mantra on certain occasions, he may get benefit except 
the single occasion of the day of festival (Parvan). 

14. With the exception of Parvan occasions, O goddess of 
Devas, the great ocean should not be touched by men even 
with the tip of the Darbha grass without Mantra and without 
the rite of shaving off. 

15-16. After the holy ablution in accordance with the in^ 
junctions and the offer of Arghyas to the great ocean, the pil¬ 
grim adores through sweet scents, flowers, garments and holy 
unguents and places a gold bangle there within his capacity. 

17. After following this procedure, O goddess of Devas, 
the devotee ritualistically touches the salty ocean uttering this 
Mantra. Then (the deity) will grace the place with its presence. 

18. “Om, obeisance to Visnugupta (one protected by Visnu). 
to you in the "form of Visnu. O Lord of Devas, be present in 
the salty brine in the vicinity.” 

19. He should utter the following truthful statement and 
take the plunge in the Lord of rivers: “Agni is the Retas(semen). 
The body is through Mrda (the protecting deity). Visnu, the 
navel of Amr.ta, is the Retodha (who deposits the Retas)" 

20. “Om, obeisance to Ratnagarbha”. With this Mantra, O 
beautiful woman, the pilgrim casts off the bracelet there and 
then takes his bath as he pleases. 

21. Then he should offer libations to Devas, human beings 
and grandfathers with water mixed with gingelly seeds duly, 
and with great faith. 

22. By taking the holy bath once in the salty water of the 
sea, a man dispels the sins committed in the course of a hundred 
thousand births. 


182 


Skanda Purana 


23. When the rite of shaving off is begun, a bull is to be 
gifted there. So also, the gifts of a yellow garment and one’s 
own image (replica) should be made. 

24-25. By this procedure the pilgrim should perform the 
rite of holy ablution. He should also touch the submarine fire. 
Otherwise he will incur a fault since Brahmanas had formerly 
granted a boon and also imprecated him with a curse. 

The Devi said: 

26-28. O great god, I have a great curiosity as to why some 
evil effect is incurred by the bath in ocean water. Where (at 
what places) does a man get purity by watery bath? Why is 
defect (evil) incurred in the ocean? I have great curiosity: Why 
was the boon granted and curse hurled by Brahmanas formerly 
in the case of the ocean where all the rivers beginning with 
Gaiiga come to rest, where Visnu himself lies down and where 
Laksmi personally resides? Tell me everything in detail. I have 
a great doubt in this regard. 

Isvara said: 


29. Formerly, O goddess, the excellent Suras came to Prabhasa 
Tirtha and began a sacrifice of a long duration (Dlrgha Sattra), 
with perfect faith. 

30. At the close of the Sattra, they made gifts of many 
kinds and Saivasva (the entire possession) to the leading Brahmanas 
residing in the Prabhasa Ksetra. 


31. By that time, other native Brahmanas, residents of that place 
came there in hundreds and thousands for thesake of Daksina. 

32. Afraid of disappointing them in their expectations, those 
Devas including Vasava vanished. On seeing the Suras disap¬ 
pear, the Brahmanas pursued them. 

33. Formerly, O goddess, Brahmanas had the great power 
of moving through the sky. So they rapidly followed them to 
the place where the Suras had their abode. 

34. Becoming aware of their ability to go everywhere, the 
^ n e d aV s e ” d dwellers became lightened. They entered the ocean 


afraid We ^ Seeking refu 8 e in you. We are 

the it So" Br f mai?aS - We do not have the wealth to make 
tne gitt. So protect us. 


VII.I.29.36-49 


183 


36. On one s ,de are all the Kraus with all excellent monetary 
gtfts, gathered together, and on the other side is the promo 

non of d^e hfe of frightened living beings. Especially die protection 
of the Devas is highly meritorious.” 

Samudra (Ocean) said: 


37. O excellent Suras, you should not be afraid of the 
Brahmanas at all. I shall save you all. Enter my belly. 

38. Thereupon, all the Devas became delighted at his words 
They entered his bowels and remained fearless. 

39. The Ocean increased his size very much and held the 
aquatic creatures near the shore. 

40. Thereafter, he took steps to cause downfall of the 
Brahmanas. He cooked the meat of fish and got it concealed 
with Mahannci (meal for honoured guests). 

41-42. Then he bowed down to all the Brahmanas. With 
palms joined in verneration he said: “O Brahmanas, may it 
please you to accept my hospitality foe a short while. I am in 
distress and am bowing down to you. I have this perfect meal 
ready for you all. Have your meals and then go in pursuit of 
the Heaven-dwellers.” 

43. Those Brahmanas considered the Ocean to be very 
devout. “So be it” they said and partook of the food in gold 
vessels. 

44. As they were distressed with hunger they were not aware 
that the tasty meal was meat concealed. 

45. Once getting their hunger satisfied, the Brahmanas 
became contented. All these Brahmanas of praiseworthy holy 
rites offered their benediction. 

46. The anger of a Brahmana comes to an end with a 
hearty meal. That of Ksatriyas ends with death of the enemy. 
The fury of serpents is known to last only till the death of the 
person bitten. They let the Devas go saying, “You may go”. 

47-49. Then the Devas along with Gandharvas hastened 
through the sky while going.The Brahmanas were duly saluted. 
But all of a sudden the Brahmanas fell down. They had eaten 
prohibited food—they had taken in meat. 

On seeing the Suras going, they jumped up to follow them 
for the sake of Dahsina. 


184 


SkandaPurana 


50 They realized that it was roguery on the part of the 
Ocean. Highly infuriated, O great goddess, they became and 

hU 5i ed “Uiskiddown in the Smrti-texts that meat is a pro¬ 
hibited food unto Brahmanas. But that has been served to us 

well-concealed in regular foodstuffs. 

52. On one side are all the types of meat. On another side 
is the meat of fish. On one side are all the sms. On the other 
side is the (sin of) ravishing another man’s wife. 

53 We know fully well the evil result of (eating) meat. Yet 
all of us have been deceived. We did something without any 
test or probe whatsoever. 

54. Since, O ruthless fellow, we have been deceived by you 
by feeding us with meat, you shall become impotable. 

55-57. You shall become unworthy of being touched by 
leading Brahmanas as well as other men on the earth. Men of 
crooked intellect who take bath in your waters will undoubt¬ 
edly go to a terrible hell. 

By touching your waters, men on earth will fall into the 
worlds set apart for ungrateful persons, into those worlds intended 
for men of sinful activities.” 


Isvara said: 

58. Thus the Ocean was cursed by those Brahmanas, O 
Lady of excellent complexion. Then for a thousand years he 
remained untouchable. 

59-63. Then becoming extremely frightened, he said to all 
of them: “O Brahmanas, this is a work of the Devas. It has been 
carried out by me who am lacking in intellect. 

I considered that giving shelter to those who seek refuge 
was the greatest piety. If, out of love, anger, convetousness or 
even adherence to truth anyone forsakes a person who seeks 
refuge, he should be known as one committing a great sin. 

The Heaven-dwellers sought refuge in me because they were 
afraid of you. They were saved by me perfectly in accordance 
with my capacity but through a tricky means. 

Since I have been cursed by you angrily I shall dry myself 
up. Having been denied contact by you all, I am not interested 
enough to remain alive." 


VII.I.29.64-77 


185 


After saying this, O goddess, Ocean, the Lord of rivers, 
dried himself up. He had been so miserable. 

64. On seeing the great Ocean gradually turning into dry 
land, all the groups of the Devas became extremely terrified. 

65-69. They went to Pitamaha, the Lord of Devas, the Lord 
of the worlds and said: “The Ocean has been cursed by the 
Brahmanas on account of us. He is overwhelmed with great 
sorrow and is drying himself up. You know that it is from the 
Ocean that clouds take water and then shower again. Thereby 
the vegetation (food-grains) springs up. Thanks to the vegeta¬ 
tion, the work of Yajnas becomes possible. Through the Yajnas 
the Heaven-dwellers become (nourished and) satisfied. If the 
Ocean were to meet with destruction in this manner, it will 
result in our own destruction. So you do go and save him lest 
he should get dried up. See to this also, that those Brahmanas 
are also satisfied by a means you will be employing.” 

70. At the instance of the Devas, Brahma went near the 
Ocean and pleaded to the Brahmanas, residents of the holy 
spot, on behalf of the Ocean: 


Brahma said: 

71-73. O excellent Brahmanas, be pleased with the Ocean. 
At my instance do that, whereby it becomes pure once again. 
He will give you various kinds of jewels. You will come to be 
known as Bhumidevas (Devas on the earth) at my instance. 
Certainly the truth has been said by me. 


The Brahmanas said: 

74. O Lord of the worlds, we do not wish to defy what you 
say. Nor shall our statements be false. You are the sole judge 

in this matter. , 

75. Hence, O excellent one among Suras, whether benefit 

or evil results from our utterance, do something, O Lor ° 
the worlds, whereby there shall be welfare unto all he worlds 
and the Heaven-dwellers also and shall cause ene i 


76. Then Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, spoke to 
the Lord of rivers. “Do not dry yourself up. Listen to my en 


eficial words. 

77. By no other means can 
made inoperative. Certainly if 


the words of the Brahmanas be 
made furious the Brahmanas 



186 


Skanda Purana 


may reduce everything to ash by means of their refulgence. 

78-79. They may turn Devas into non-Devas. Hence one 
shall not infuriate them. For the same reason your touch shall 
be pure on three occasions viz. on Parva days, at the confluence 
of rivers as well as where there is a Setu (at Ramesvara?) and 
where you are in contact with other TIrthas. 

80. In all these cases and not during any other rite, one 
will get by your contact, the same benefit which results from 
all the TIrthas and all the Yajnas. 

81. By touching your water the merit of offering Sraddha 
at Gaya or meeting death at Gograha (death while protecting 
cows) will be obtained. 

82. Your impotability is only due to the (salty) taste.If a 
mouthful of water is drunk it is destructive of all inauspicious¬ 
ness. 


83. Your water shall increase the happiness of the men in 
the world. Listen to the meritorious benefit of a person who 
offers libation to the Pitrs with your water in accordance with 
the procedure laid down before. 


84. The ancestors who are propitiated by means of your 
nectarine waters will remain satisfied as long as you as well as 
the moon, the.sun and the stars continue to exist. 

85. If a devotee takes bath in your water every day in the 
month of Magha with great purity and fervour, he shall attain 
the merit of Paundarika Yajna. 

86. In the course of pilgrimage or on Parva days, or on a 
day of lunar eclipse, if a man takes his bath here in the salty 
ocean, he will obtain the benefit of a thousand horse-sacrifices. 

. Men who die in the place between the ocean and Sri 
Somesa will go to heaven with all their sins washed off. 

. ° pC T erful one * 1 assure you that everything will always 

SET* Give unt0 leading Brihraa ’ as 

89. Pleased thereby they will grant you your desire.” 


Isvara said: 


' h '.: 0rdS 0f the ^father (Brahma, 
and with faith 


VII.I.29.91-99—30.1 


187 


91. The entire suggestion of Brahma was carried ou, by 
the Brahmanas. All of them got the hairs shaved and per! 
formed the rite of ablution. F 


92. Thus the salt ocean attained sacredness and the status 

of a Tirtha. O great goddess, there are five crores of Lihgas 
within it. 6 

93. O goddess, the Lihgas in the ocean are not visible in 
this Manvantara. There itself there is the Agnikunda and an¬ 
other Padmaka lake. 

94. O my beloved, everything in the centre is concealed in 
this Manvantara. In between the Cakra and Mainaka is the 
southern quarter. 


95. There is a golden pot ten thousand Dhanus in extent. 
There in the centre of that pot is what is called Vadavdnala 
(submarine fire). 

96. It has pointed countenance (mouth). It has a huge 
body and it always drinks the water. Thus they call it Agni 
Tirtha. 

97. It is within it that the Vadava fire of great power is 
present. Its face is like that of a mare. It is to the south of 
Srlsomesa within a distance of a hundred Dhanus to the east 
of northern Manasa as far as Krtasmara. 

98. O beautiful woman, this should be kept as a great secret. 
It should not be given to anyone and everyone. On hearing 
this, even a Brahmana-slayer is rid of his sins. There is no 
doubt about it. 

99. Thus everything has been said as to how the curse was 
heaped by the angry Brahmanas before but afterwards a boon 
was granted when they were pleased. 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

Efficacy of the Worship of Somesvara 

The Devi said: 

1. Which is the deity to be worshipped first after taking 
bath in the Agni TIrthas? O Lord of Suras, it behoves you to 





188 


Skanda Purana 


explain the procedure of the pilgrimage whereby it shall be 
free from obstacles. 


Isvara said: 


2-3. After duly taking the holy bath, offering the Arghya 
in the great ocean and worshipping it with scented flowers, 
garments and floral unguents, the pilgrim should cast into it 
a golden bracelet in accordance with his capacity. Then he 
should offer libations to the Pitrs and go to Lord Kapardin. 

4. After devoutly worshipping with flowers, incense, scents 
and garments, the pilgrim should offer Arghya uttering the 
Mantra: “gananam tva" (RV.II.23.11) etc. 

5. For Sudras, O goddess of Devas, the Mantra prescribed 
by the Smrti is the eight-syllabled one. There he should go to 
the greatest sin-destroying deity Somesvara. 

6. After bathing (the deity) duly, he should perform the 

Japa of Satarudriya, the Rudra Mantras with five Angas and the 
other Rudra Samhitas. : 

7. The bathing should be done with milk and curds mixed 


with ghee. Then the deity is smeared with honey, sugarcane 
juice and Kumkuma (saffron). 

8. Thereafter, the adorable one is adored with sweet scents 
and sandalpaste, along with musk mixed with camphor and 
Ustra (fragrant root of a plant). 

9. The Lord is fumigated with different kinds of incense 
and duly wrapped with garments. Then the excellent Naivedya 
(food offerings) should be offered. 

10. Then Arartika (waving of light—Aratl) is performed. 
There should be a dancing programme as the devotee wishes. 

he deity is bowed down to in the Astahga manner (so that the 
eight limbs of the body touch the ground) and vocal and in- 
strumental music follows. 


11-13. A show should be arranged in front of the Lord, 
along with d i Scourses on Dharma, and charitable gifts are then 
distributed in keeping with the financial capacity of the devo- 
ee, among t e Brahmanas, ascetics, the disabled, wretched 

act ’ b ff M P !, OP ’ miserable on « and pilgrims. If a ruthless 
htooty samfice) * S mtended to be begun (}pravrtte 

t0 bC ° ffered - Then ’ ° beautiful woman, 
the devotee undertakes fast for that day. For one full year, men 


VII.I.30.14-20—31.1-3 


189 


of devout nature should observe fast on that lunar dav on 
which they first visited Somesvara. y ’ n 

14. By so doing with devotion, the man derives the fruit 
of his birth. In addition he acquires the entire benefit of oil- 
grimage to all the Tlrthas. ^ 

15-17. O beautiful woman, he redeems all the ancestors in 
the father’s and mother’s line. By visiting Somesvara, a man 
washes off all the sins committed during childhood, youth and 
old age. After viewing Lord Somesvara, no wretched, miserable 
or impoverished child is born in his family in sevengenerations. 
The devotee is reborn in a well-reputed family richly endowed 
with wealth and foodgrains. 

18. He will again have devotion towards Lord Somanatha 
further increased. The bathing is carried at the outset with 
milk and then by means of a continuous current (of water). 

19-20. During the first Yama, this takes place and the 
Maliasnana (great ablution at midday) thereafter. Men who 
view this Mahasnana of the Lord of Devas at midday and the 
Arartika at dusk are not reborn. O lady of excellent counted 
nance, considering the terrible nature of Kaliyuga with sins in 
plenty, it must be asserted that no man (will) avert wretched¬ 
ness and misery by any other rite. 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 

The Origin of the Submarine Fire: 

Devas Deposit Weapons at the 
Hermitage of Sage Dadhici 

The Devi said: 

1-2. O Sankara, my great doubt is in regard to the (Set 
of) five beginning with r?(S).How did they happen to occur 
here? How and from where did Sarasvatl originate? How was 
that Vadava created? At what time and how did it happen. It 
behoves you to explain all this in detail. 

Isvara said: 

3. Listen, O goddess, how Sarasvatl originated in that holy 


190 


Skanda Purana 


spot and from where the destroyer of all sins (i.e. Sarasvatl) 
came out.> 

4-5. She was formerly called by the five sages Hiranya, 
Vajrini, Nyahku, Kapila and Sarasvatl. Listen how she came 
into contact with Vadava fire. 

6. Formerly the fight that had broken out on account of 
Moon’s conduct ceased and at the instance of Pitamaha Candra 
surrendered Tara. 

7-8. Then the Suras went back to heaven looking at the 
earth with their faces turned down. Thereupon, the Devas saw 
on the earth something that was like another Svarga. 

It was the hermitage of the eminent sage Dadhici. It was 
well-known all over the world. It had flowers blossoming through¬ 
out the whole year. It shone with various kinds of trees. The 
fragrance from KetakT, Kutaja and Bakula rendered it very 
pleasant. 7 

9. After reaching that large penance grove all the Devas 
wanted to explore the whole of that charming region out of 
curiosity. 


10. They left their vehicles (outside) and entered that holy 
heirmtage like lay persons. They became humble and self- controlled 
and went in search of that sage. 

H All the Suras saw him who appeared like another Brahma. 
All of them were received and adored with Pad,a (water for 
washing the feet), Arghya etc. 

J!o t^ml includi "S Vasava sat on the seats pointed 

» the sage: St °° d “ P fr ° m the a " d a P° k e 

of ]t J 5kaas “ na < Indra > deposited all the weapons in front 

^ heT- To h' qU %“s“’.' YOUr "»* * Phased to 

14-17? ' 1° "" < Pakaa r a " a > Dadhici said: 

Sakra said ^him -IT‘ >P °" S with me and do go to heaven." 
should be returned to k" necesslt y arises, these weapons 
enemies in battle." ’ P ° U S ° that we can con quer our 

sage^thesethollld bfgive^to'ui" f ‘ h ' excellent sa « e: “° 

else." When he said so, L excellent * " 0t “ any ° ne 

be. I will give you 1 sa « e replied: “ So it shall 

give you everything especially at the time of war." 


VII.I.31.17b-18—32.1-9 


191 


17b. Sacl’s Consort (Indra) thought: The words of this 
sage will never be false. Thinking so, he left all the weapons 
with him and went- to heaven. 

18. A king who remains personally pure and with purified 
soul and listens attentively to this narrative of depositing the 
weapons, attains victory in batde and begets sons shining splendidly 
with the attainment of virtue, wealth and renown. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 

Vadavanala Outwitted 

Isvara said: 

1-3. When all the Devas had gone away, the sage remained 
there for a hundred years. Then the Brahmana set off for 
performing penance from the northern hermitage towards the 
divine northern quarter. 

He had a servant-woman, the highly esteemed Subhadra. 
That beautiful lady who could not carry the weapons said to 
the sage: “I am not able to lift and carry the weapons with my 
hand.” 

4. Thereupon, the sage drank the intrinsic power of the 
weapons along with water. After thus making all the divine 
miraculous weapons well-established within himself, the sage, 
the storehouse of austerities, went to the northern quarter. 

5. He saw Mount Himacala, bestower of happiness on all 
people like Siva. He held Ganga, he was white (in complexion 
of) his body and his form (region) was fullt of serpents. 

6. He also espied a hermitage surrounded by Asvattha trees 
by the side of Candrabhaga. It abounded in sacrificial twigs, 
flowers and Kusa grass. 

7. The tiger among the sages stayed there along with other 
sages and was accompanied by Subhadra like the Moon with 
Moonlight. 

8 Once, the servant-maid Subhadra who had her monthly 
course, set off from his abode to have herbathonthefourthday. 

9. As she was going ahead, she saw a loin cloth. Thinking 


192 


Skanda Purana 


that it had been dropped down by chance, she took it up (as 
fate would have it). 

10. The loin cloth was drenched with semen but she wore 
it secretly and went off to the river to have a bath as shepleased. 

11. The good woman found herself moving lazily due to 
heavy weight. As she looked down she found that a foetus had 
developed within her belly. 

12. She began to lament herself. “When I came here I did 
not have any foetus within. I am a luckless wretched woman. 
By whom have I been defiled?” 

13. Completely overwhelmed with shame she entered the 
grove of Asvattha trees. There she delivered herself of the 
foetus even without knowing where it had come from. 

14. Not aware of any misconduct on her part, she took 
bath once again. She then began to heap an unbearable curse 
on the (unknown one) who had caused the conception. 

15-16. “If I am a chaste woman loyal to my husband, may 
that person by whom this defilement was brought about know¬ 
ingly or unknowingly die today itself. 

If I do not love a person other than my husband even mentally, 

may that paramour face destruction, thanks to this truth of mv 
statement.” 7 


17. Thus the good woman cursed the person who caused 
the impregnation without knowing him. She began to return 
to the abode of Dadhlci. 

18. After casting off the foetus resembling the Sun there 

s e returned to the beautiful hermitage where the eminent 
sage was present. 

r 19 I" th c e meantime all the highly powerful Devas the 

for^heTak t f u QUarterS Came to lhe hermitage of the sage 
or the sake of the missiles. 

2°. Sakra said to the sage: “O sage of good holy rites 

~ b u ; r kly those miracu, ° us - <=pS 

main hi that*1? Sa * d: ^ ^ asava > those weapons still re- 

" »*"Srs - 1 - «■> 


VII.I.32.24t39 


193 


That being the case, O sinless one, if the miraculous weap¬ 
ons are to be given to you by me, I shall, O Lord of good holy 
rites, give my bones in the shape thereof.” 

24-29. On being told thus, the Thousand- eyed One (Indra) 
said to the excellent sage: “In nothing else is that terrific power 
which is vested in them. For the sake of the protection of the 
worlds Rudrasiva deposited a thousandth part of his refulgence 
and gave them to us. We therefore set up ourselves taking up 
all those weapons for the purpose of protecting the world. 
Hence our designation Lokapala (Guardians of the Worlds). 
Among all these weapons Vajra (thunderbolt) is the most excellent 
one. It is because we hold it that the kingship of the Devas is 
vested in us. Still more excellent than the Vajra is that discus 
which is in the custody of Visnu. The conquest of the groups 
of Daityas and Danavas depends thereon. Hence, O excellent 
sage, O foremost one among those who know their duty, think 
about the matter on hand and manage it so that we regain 
those (weapons).” 

30-32. When this was said, the sage spoke to Sakra stand¬ 
ing before him: “I shall suggest another means for getting 
them. 

Here are all my bones. Do fashion out all your weapons in 
their own shapes and sizes entirely out of these (bones). These 
(bones) have been strengthened thereby. They have more strength 
than they (had formerly). I wish that they will be more effec¬ 
tive in your battle.” 

33-34. Then Sakra spoke to that storehouse of austerities, 
Dadhlci: “I cannot cause your death which you (seem to) wish. 
We have no power to take your bones and yet prevent your 
death. Hence think about everything and say what is to e 

d °35-39. On being told thus the sage said: “I shall myself cast 
off this body of mine for the sake of realizing the cause of the 


f) pyoc 

Since this (body) is the seat of all miseries, censured by everyone 
and by no meanseternal or steady, it is but proper to abandon 

“ ty'casTng it off, I will not have the misery of 

ence, because everyone who is born m the next b.rth, dtes 


again. 


194 


Skanda Purana 


Wife, sister and daughter all these are reborn as a result of 
one’s own actions. Therefore, having keen attachment for them 
in the world is censured. 

Anyhow this body is going to be cast off certainly. So its 
voluntary casting off (on my part) should be welcomed by 
you." 

40. After proclaiming thus in front of Purandara, the great 
sage Dadhici hurriedly brought about his own death. 

41. Seeing him dead in this manner, the Devas thought 
how the body could be made free from flesh and blood. 

42. Then the Lord of Suras said thus for the sake of the 
purification of the bones: “The tongues of Gaurls (? from the 
context ‘Cows’) are hard and rough. Let them lick this clean.” 

43. Thereupon, Nanda stationed in the world (i.e. Goloka) 
was meditated upon by the Devas. She came there accompa¬ 
nied by her companions. 

44. Nanda, Subhadra, Surabhi, Susila and Sumana, the five 
cow-mothers, came there from Goloka. 

45. They said to all those Suras: “We shall carry out any 
job which is assigned to us as our duty. Think well and say.” 

The Devas said: 


46. Since his body has been abandoned by the sage him¬ 
self, may the skeleton be got rid of flesh etc. 


.' . . not touched. Hence i 



as impure. 


it is remembered 



is unholy and censured. The re- 
f all of them was made excellent 


52. They were told by Sarasvati: “You 


are slayers of Brahman as. 


VII.1.32.53-67 


195 


Otherwise, why was the mouth not touched by the immortal 
ones? 

53-54. Thereupon, Goddess Sarasvati was told by them: “This 
utterance of yours describing the mouth as such is not proper. 
It is our heart that has been burned by you through this utter¬ 
ance. Hence, ere long you will be subjected to combustion.” 

55. After cursing Sarasvati, those Surabhis (cows) honoured 
by the Suras went to Goloka. 

56. Summoning Visvakarman, the architect, the excellent 
Suras told him: “For the purpose of Fighting, prepare weapons 
for us.” 

57. On hearing this statement, he caused the weapons to 
be fashioned out of the sets of bones of Dadhici. 

58. He made them of the requisite shapes and sizes as 
demanded by the Devas. He also ensured that they should be 
invincible in the course of hostilities. While making them, he 
had that in view. 

59. He got ready all these perfect weapons: the Vajra for 
Indra, the Sakti for Vahni (Fire-god), the Danda (staff) for 
Yama, the sword for Nirrti and the noose for Pracetas (Varuna). 

60. Visvakarman made the Dhvaja (flagstaff) for Vayu, the 
Gada (mace) for Kubera and the Siila (trident) for Isana (Siva). 

61. The Devas took up these miraculous weapons and on 
the strength of those missiles, they proceeded to conquer Daityas 
and Danavas. 

62. In the meantime Subhadra performed the funeral rites 
of Dadhici and accompanied by those sages she went in search 
of that son. 

63. She saw that charming child in the grove of Asvattha. 
On seeing him alive, she quickly shed tears and cried. 

64-67. The child addressed her as “Mother” and said: “O 
lady of good renown, do not weep. What you and I reap is the 
fruit of what was done formerly. 

O illustrious lady, give up grief. An act, the manner in which 
it was done, the place where perpetrated by a person in a 
former birth must necessarily result in the enjoyment or suf¬ 
fering of the agent. 

Do not be ashamed because you were compelled to cast me 
off, O beautiful lady. What was perpetrated by me earlier should 
be borne by me alone. 


196 


Skanda Purana 


O mother, O lady of good renown, show your maternal affection 
to me as your son. By abandoning her son, a mother becomes 
guilty.” 

68-69. On being told thus by the child she meditated on 
Lord Janardana and said with palms joined in reverence: “Let 
it be firmly disclosed to me. I do not know the truth as to the 
person from whose semen this child has been born. Hence, O 
Lord of Devas, tell me your definite opinion.” 

70. On being requested thus, Krsnajanardana said to Mother 
Subhadra: “This is Dadhlci’s son born of the Ksetra (field, i.e. 
wife) of your husband.” 

71. On coming to know of his origin, Subhadra was de¬ 
lighted in her mind. She placed the child on her lap and 
lamented with words of distress. 

72-79a. The child born said: “Speak out the cause of sor¬ 
row.” Then he was told: “How were you able to sustain your 
life without breast milk? 


Four types of beings have been created by Brahma—ovipa¬ 
rous, viviparous, sweat-born and those that pierce through the 
ground and germinate. 

Among the viviparous ones, there are the different types 
such as men, women and eunuch. The four-legged animals are 
of two types, wild and domesticated. 

All the birds, fishes, tortoises and reptiles are oviparous. 
The sweat-born ones are the follpwing: bugs, lice, flies and 
mosquitoes. 


Those that pierce the ground and grow are the immobile 
ones such as grass, hedges, creepers etc. Thousands of other 

beings of similar nature can be included among these befit- 
tingly. 

The young ones of the egg-born creatures survive by flap¬ 
ping the wings. All the sweat-born ones live by heat and the 
ground-piercing ones by water. 

The Udbhija (ground-piercing ones) live by the collection of 

u,^ ementS ° n the earth ' The oviparous ones are inca- 
pa e o mng without breast-milk. Then, son, how could you 
sustain your life without it?” 

j. . Thereupon, he spoke to his mother whose eyes were 
dimmed with tears: 7 


VII.1.32.80-92 


197 


80-82. “The vital airs were retained by me through the 
juice of Asvattha fruits imbibed.” Then she had the idea in her 
mind that his name should be Pippalada for that reason. 1 This 
name of the noble-souled one became well-known. All the con- 
secratory rites of Pippalada as laid down in the Vedas were 
performed in due order by all the sages who had mastered all 
the Vedas and were present there. The Vedas along with the 
six Angas as well as the Upahgas were perfectly studied by him 
from the sages residing in the hermitage. 

83. In the course of his stay there he saw the children of 
the sages playing on the laps of their fathers. So he said to his 
mother of pure smiles: 

84. “O Subhadra, welfare unto you. Where is my father? 
Tell me clearly so that I can playonhis lap like theother children.” 

85. When his mother was thus asked, she fell into a piti¬ 
able nervous agitation. Without saying anything byway of reply, 
she began to weep. 

86. On seeing her crying, the son of the sage became furious 
and said: “Is he someone notoriously despicable and so you do 
not disclose him to me?” 

87. When this was uttered by the son, she said to him: 
“Your father has been killed by the Devas. Welfare unto you. 
Do not be angry. It is about Dadhici that I speak.” 

88. Blazing with anger he then said to his mother: “What 
offence did my father commit in regard to the Suras? Tell me 
about it.” 

Subhadra said: 

89. O (my son) of good holy rites, though the prominent 
sage offered them other weapons of the same shapes and sizes, 
he was killed by those deluded ones for the sake of the miracu¬ 
lous weapons. 

90-92. On hearing this statement, the sage of fierce aus¬ 
terities (said): “Since my father was killed by the Devas I will 


1. Similar birth of Pippalada from Yajnavalkya’s semen from his sister is told 
elsewhere. 



198 


Skanda Purana 


•create a very powerful Krtya (a female deity of destructive power) 
and make her fall over their head taking away their lives. 

If he does not deserve death I will spare Pitamaha (Brahma). 
I will thrash all the others collectively by means of this Krtya 
weapon. If the Devas out of fear from me seek refuge in me, 
I will yet kill them collectively.” 

93. Finding the sage furious thus, all the excellent Suras 
sought, refuge in Brahma out of great fright. 

94. On coming to know that the Devas had sought refuge 
in Brahma, the compassionate Lord Janardana himself has¬ 
tened to that place and said to the Devas: 

95. “The means of saving you all has been thought out by 
me now. Thereby I will get the Krtya that has come, enchanted 
and deluded.” 

96. In the meantime, Pippalada who continued to remem¬ 
ber the reason for avenging his father and so determined to 
find a means of killing the Suras, entered the Himalaya moun¬ 
tain. 

97. It was the unpleasant statement issued from the mouth 
of his mother, and heard by him which forced him to leave 
the place and go to Himalaya. 

98. He reached the snow-capped mountain which is like a 
staircase unto Svarga for people. It appeared like the sky that 
has become a veritable ground, and which resembled die extensive 
(white) physical form of Sesa. 

99. There he stood motionless like Sthanu (a fixed pillar) 
and vowed “I will kill those Caranas (heavenly choristers, spies) 
who caused the death of my father.” 

100-103a. Standing angrily in that courtyard of the temple 
of Siva (he vowed), I will kill all those who are proud of their 
immortality through the miraculous weapon of the Krtya . 

Standing here and thinking of her within my heart I will win 
over the Krtya. Either I will bring the Krtya under control or I 
will go to the abode of Yama. I will desist from food intake day 
and night, I will remain fearless and free of Dvandvas (mutually 
opposing pairs such as pleasure-pain). With my left hand I will 
massage and churn the left thigh and create the great Krtya. ” 

103b-106. Thus he remained motionless. When a year passed 
off, a Vadavd (a mare) issued forth from his body through the 
thigh. She was distressed due to heavy weight. She was followed 



VII.I.32.107-120 


199 


by Vadava (submarine fire). After issuing forth from the (left) 
thigh, she (Vadava) gave birth to a very powerful-foetus from her 
womb. After discharging the blazing foetus emitting flames all 
round in front of the sage, the Vadava went away. Even the sage 
did not know her (where she wen ts). Thus it was that the Vadavdnala 
(submarine fire) in the form of a man (lit. Fire from mare) 
issued forth from her womb. 

107-110. It looked like the end of the Kalpaunto the living 
beings. By means of its refulgence it resembled the Kdldgni 
(Fire at the end of a Kalpa). On seeing it in front resembling 
a mass of lightning streaks, he became surprised very much. 
“What is this?” he thought. Thereupon, sage Pippalada was 
addressed by the Vadava fire present in front: “I have been 
evolved by you through your power (of penance). Now your 
task, whatever has been thought of, should be carried out by 
me. Even if it were impossible to achieve, I shall achieve it. 
Dear father, I have been evolved by you in the course of a year 
through the churning of your thigh. .Hence, I am devoid of 
thighs. Yet I will carry out your wish.” 

111. On hearing his words, the infuriated sage said: “All 
the Devas have been offered to you by me. Eat them yourself.” 

112. The Suras were convinced that he had become very 
terrible because of his furious obsession due to the killing of 
his father. All of them gathered together immediately along 
with their womenfolk and resorted to the Purana Purusa (the 
Ancient Being, Visnu), 

113. Visnu consoled those Suras. Delighted within himself 
he approached (the Krtya), the fire of fury. On seeing it re¬ 
sembling a mass of suns, Visnu spoke these excellent words: 

114-120. “O Lord of Suras, I have been sent to your very 
presence by the Devas who are afraid. Listen from me to the 
words wholesome unto the Cdranas (Devas)as well as unto you. 

Your inconceivable and inordinate strength destructive of 
even self-possessed wise ones has become known certainly. This 
being the case, do as the Suras say. Everyday eat one of 
them. 

There are thirty crores of leading powerful Suras. How will 

you eat them at the same time? 

Hence, do eat them one-by-one. Then it is not impossible 
to eat them even if you are alone. (Read asakya for sakya) 




200 


Skanda Parana 


Further Hutabhuk (Fire-god) contracted the disease of jaundice. 
Overeating is not proper. So accept my suggestion. 

Moreover if they are all eaten simultaneously, everyday hunger 
will prompt you to worry for the means of the next meal. 

Thus, your vow can be successfully carried out. The state¬ 
ment of the sage will not be false even if you do like this. 
Further, your desire too will be fulfilled.” 

121. So said Janardana. The Vadava said: “I will do so.” 
The Vadava agreed to the suggestion that he should eat the 
Devas one by one. 

122-123. Then the Suras bowed down to Visnu, the Lord 
of Suras, of unmeasured prowess. “What is befitting and splendid 
has been accomplished by you. Further, you alone are compe¬ 
tent to avert this danger. No one else can be the saviour of 
the Heaven-dwellers. ” 

124. Thereupon, Madhava who wears yellow garments and 
holds the conch, the discus and the club told the Suras: “I will 
remove the cause of your fear.” 

125. On hearing this, all the Devas became happy and 
their eyes beamed with delight. 

126. Looking at the Devas Vadava said: “What should be 
done by me to you? May that be mentioned.” 

127. In the meantime the dignified and illustrious Lord of 
great prowess having the cosmic body enchanted that Jvalana 
(fire) by means of his (greater) intellect and said, “Eat up the 
AP (waters) created at the outset.” 

128. He who listens with concentration to this act of Visnu 
shall be rid of the excessive fear of spies and attain salvation 
and perfect knowledge. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 

The Story of Sarasvatl 

The Devi said: 

1-2. Everything has been listened to by me with concen¬ 
tration. I have heard everything that was performed earlier by 




VII.I.3S.3-10 


201 


the great sage, whose anger was justifiably aroused by the killing 
of his father. What the son of Dadhici, who wanted to take the 
revenge on Suras, did I have heard. It is now my curiosity to 
know similarly everything in due order that befell the Suras, 
which is of equal importance. 

Isvara said: 

3-5. When he was thus addressed by that noble-souled one, 
“Swallow first of all Water because it was created in the world 
at first and so it is the eldest of all Suras and Asuras”, he said, 
“O Suras, show me where it is stationed. After drinking it 
entirely, I shall carry out the task of eating the Suras. If you 
are able to take me to the place where the water has collected 
together (do so). I will not be one uttering falsehood. Even 
if the vital airs depart, I will carry out the behest of the sage”. 

6. When this was said, Pundarikaksa (Visnu) said to the 
Vadava Aurva, “O Vadava, by what vehicle can I take you to the 
place where the water is present?” 

The Vadava said: 

7. I am not eager to go there by means of horses and 
other vehicles. Excepting the contact with the hand of a virgin 
(no other means of transport is desirable). This is what I think. 

Visnu said: 

8. This means of transport is easily available to you. I shall 

bring that girl who is certainly able to take you to the reservoir 
of water. 

Isvara said: 

9. Sarasvatl who was distressed due to the curse of the 
(celestial) Surabhis and who suffered the result of the (false) 
step taken earlier, was turned into his (Vadava s) vehic e y 

Visnu. t , , . 

10. Then the Lord spoke to Ganga who was present by his 
side, “O highly esteemed lady, take this fire quickly to the 
great ocean. O sanctifier of the worlds, except you, no one is 
competent to take it.” 





202 


Skanda Purana 


Ganga said: 

11. O Lord, O master of the worlds, I do not have the 
strength to carry Aurva. He is huge and terrific in form. This 
Anala (Fire) burns excessively. 

12. Thereupon the liberal-minded Lord spoke to Yamuna 
first, to Sindhu thereafter, and to various rivers severally. 

13-15. They were asked by the excellent one among Suras 
and they proved unable to take (Aurva). Then Janardana, the 
Lord of Devas, spoke to Sarasvati: “O auspicious one, you yourself 
go over to the west of the briny sea. If this is carried out, all 
the Suras will be rid of their fear. Otherwise they will be burned 
by the Vadava through its refulgence. So, save Vibudhas (Suras) 
from this terrible fear. O lady of excellent waist, like a mother 
you alone can bestow freedom from fear on the Suras.” 

16-18. On being told thus by Visnu, the powerful one, she 
said: “I am not free. My father, the ancient one, is waiting. 
Being a daughter and having Vratas to be performed, I can 
only do what he orders. A daughter is never independent in 
the past, present and future. So learned men say. O Hari, 
without the specific command of my father, I will not move 
even a step, . So, may some other means be thought of.” 

19-20. Having known her attitude, Vasudeva approached 
Pitamaha (Brahma) and said: “This is the task of Devas. Carry 
it out. Excepting this virgin daughter of yours, without any 
apparent defect, no one else can carry the Vadava fire of great 
prowess.” 

21. On hearing the words uttered by Visnu, the Great¬ 
grandfather sniffed the head of his virgin daughter and said 
lovingly: 

22. O fair lady, do go. Save all the Devas caught in the 
midst of fearful danger. Take this Vadava with you and cast it 
into the salt sea.” 

On hearing her father’s words she said: 

Sarasvati said: 

23. At your instance, O dear father, I am now setting out 
undoubtedly. This Vadava fire is very horrendous. He will consume 
my body. 


VII.I.33.24-36 


203 


24. It is the advent of the terrible Kali Age now on the 
earth. O Lord, folks of evil conduct will be coming into contact 
with me. 

25. What can be more painful than contact with sinners! 
Brahma said: 

26. If you do not like the earth’s surface fully infested with 
sinful folks, do take the Vahni (Fire) to the great ocean con¬ 
fining yourself to the Patalatala (nether worlds). 

27. If you find yourself exceedingly over-burdened and weary 
and get scorched by the Vahni pierce through the ground, O 
dear daughter, and reveal yourself. 

28. O lady of wide eyes and excellent waistline, turn your 
face eastwards. Thereupon, the (other) Tirthas will approach 
you in that weary state of yours, O lady of charming smiles. 

29. O lady of excellent countenance, they will come to you 
for help. At my bidding thirty-three crores of them will render 
you help. 

30. Do proceed ahead, dear daughter. Do not be worried 
at any cost. Let your path be free from misfortune and loss. 
May there be no antagonists. 


Isvara said: 

31. On being told thus by Brahma, Sarasvatl got rid of her 
nervousness and trepidation. Delighted in her mind, she got 
ready to go ahead. 

32. At the time of her departure, the whole world was 
filled with the sounds of conch-shells and Dundubhi drums as 

well as similar auspicious sounds. , 

33-36 The divine lady had white garments. She had smeared 
herself with white sandalpaste. She resembled the autumnal 
cloud; she was adorned with pearl necklaces. Her f ^ ce ^ as ^ 
the full moon. Her eyes were large like the petals of a lotus. 
Like the renown of Jahendra, she Ailed all the «n quartern 

Shining with her own refulgence, she illununatj^ 
universe. O lady of excellent complexion (Gaun), G ^ f oUovnng 

her was addressed by her: “Dear friend, '^ere shall I see yo 
staying again?” On being asked thus by her, Ganga spoke m 

affectionate words: 



204 


Skanda Purana 


37-43. “As soon as you come to the east and espy me, O 
lady of excellent holy rites, I shall appear before you surrounded 
by all the Suras there. O lady of splendid smiles, cast off your 
grief.” She then took leave of Gahga saying, “May there be a 
meeting later on, O fair lady, go to your abode. O sinless one, 
I should be remembered by you.” 

Similarly Yamuna, the highly charming Gayatri and all friends 
including Savitrl were sent back by her. 

After sending them away, the goddess became the river SarasvatT 
and reached the mountain Himavan. There she came out of 
the Plaksa tree and descended on the surface of the earth. 
There she (the river) abounded in fish, turtles, crocodiles, 
Dindlras (cuttlefish), whales and groups of alligators. The great 
goddess (river) appeared to smile as she flowed with foams all 
round. 

The splendid divine river with sacred waters, was eulogized 
by twice-born ones. Holding the Vadava fire, she flowed on 
gallopping like a horse trotting swiftly. 

44. With the rapidity of her current, she pierced the ground 
and came to the surface of the Earth. Whenever she (the river) 
became weary and got scorched by the Vadava fire,,.the river 
became visible in the mortal world 1 . 

45-46. Thereupon, Praci (Eastern quarter) became scorched 
by the Vadava. Thereat all the Tlrthas glorified by the ancient 
seers, O beautiful woman, the Tlrthas of heaven, intermediate 
space and the earth asserted their presence there. On being 
consoled by them, the river Sarasvatl went over to the nether 
worlds and passed over to the ocean, the abode of sharks and 
crocodiles. 

47. O beautiful woman among the Suras, she (river) reached 
Khadiramoda and there saw the ocean. Afterwards she took up 
the Vahni and began to proceed onwards. 

48. She thought of the fact that it was at the behest of the 
Lord that she had herself taken up the burden and was there¬ 
fore delighted. With a clear conscience, she went ahead facing 
the South. 


1. This is to explain why Sarasvatl had no continuous How but appeared 
intermitently (at the time of this Puraria). Obviously the author has con- 
Prabhlsa C 1C arasvat * Sarasvatl which joins Arabian Sea at 



205 


VII.I.33.49-61 


49 . In the meantime, O great goddess, four sages who had 
mastered the Vedas reached the holy spot Prabhasa Rsetra. 

50. They were Harina, Vajra, Nyanku and Rapila. After 
stationing themselves there, they began to perform penance, 
with their minds engrossed in the self-study (of the Vedas). 

51. Sarasvat! was severally summoned by them for the sake 
of holy bath. Suddenly the Ocean appeared before her face- 


to-face. 

52. Thereupon, she began to reflect, ‘How can I attain 
some merit!’ Further the chaste lady (river) was afraid of the 
curse (of the sages). She then turned herself into one of Five 


channels. 

53 . O lady of excellent complexion (Gauri), she propiti¬ 
ated each of the sages. Then, she had five different names on 
the earth. 

54-56. They are: HarinI, VajrinI, Nyanku, Kapila, and Sarasvatl. 
The river Sarasvatl flowing in Five channels shall dispel all the 
five sins of men if they plunge into it or drink the waters. The 
sins are those of Brahmana-slaughter, imbibing liquor, com¬ 
mitting theft and ravishing the wife of the preceptor. The fifth 
sin accrues from contact with these sinners. Sarasvatl (flowing 
in five channels) accompanied by her friends dispels these sins. 

57. Sarasvatl flowing backwards dispels the terrible sin of 
Brahmana-slaughter entirely, through drinking her water and 


bathing in it. , . ,. .... 

58. The river Kapila flows dispelling the sin of imbibing 

liquor committed by the twice-born, if they had drun 

“L twice-born perform/oft and Horn, il: ob¬ 
serve fast and if they take their holy a atever they 

water, the river dispels the sin in seven ay - 
perform, shall be performed with fervour and devotion m the 

“‘ho.' By resorting to the river 

of the great sin committed by them y P 


mentioned. , , bath and drinking 

61. By observing fast, takmg the h^ y^ ^ ^ 

te holy waters Vajnni redeems ihilatcs the entire sin 

mctity of the preceptor’s bed. She anr* a 
F men despite its massiveness and tern 


206 


Skanda Purana 


62. The river HarinI dispels the sin resulting from having 
contact with other sinners. The river has sacred and merito¬ 
rious waters. By taking the holy plunge in her for seven days, 
the sin is removed. Hence the river is remembered as HarinI 
(the remover). 

63. Thus, O beautiful goddess, the river Sarasvatl with five 
channels dispels all the sins. It is the truth. 

64. Then,-further ahead, the fair lady (river) saw a beau¬ 
tiful mountain standing in her path near the ocean, as if to 
obstruct her way. 

65. 'So, here is this excellent mountain. It is the measuring 
rod for the whole Cosmic Egg. It has now come as an obstacle 
before me even as I was going ahead on the errand of Suras.’ 
(Thought Sarasvatl.) 

66 . The river Sarasvatl looked at the great lofty mountain. 
The chaste lady (river) became surprised, when the mountain 
held up the speed of her current. 

67. Even as she was contemplating on this miracle in her 
mind, Krtasmara, the mountain, woke up (became aware of it) 
through the auspicious sound. 

68-69a. She (the river) saw a being walking over a pair of 
peaks of the mountain. The mountain said to her (the river), 
the divine lady: “O lady of excellent holy rites, there is no way 
here. O fair lady, go somewhere else where you please”. 

69b. When this was said the divine lady (river) spoke to 
the being stationed on the top of the mountain: 

70. “O Mountain, I have come here at the behest of the 
Lord. I should not be hindered by you.” When this was spoken, 
the Mountain said to that charming divine lady (river): 

71-72. O fair one, haven’t you come to know that I am 
the Mountain Krtasmara. O sinless one, there is no fault in 
touching you because you are a virgin. So, O lady of excellent 
holy rites, I woo you. Become my wife.” 

Sarasvatl said: 

73. Since my father is alive and active I cannot be a Svayaihvara 
(a girl choosing her own groom) and become your wife. Leave 
the path free unto me now. 

74. On being told thus the Mountain said: “O fair one, I 


VII.I.33.75-87 


207 


will forcibly marry you, though you do not wish it. Who can 
come to help you now?” 

75-76. With her divine eyes, she came to consider him 
overwhelmed by Manobhava (Passion, Lord of love) and said: 
“There is no one to save me. I seek refuge in you. O highly 
powerful one, if I am to be certainly married thus, O Lord, do 
not marry me before I take my bath. Permit me to take my bath." 

77 . Then, the Mountain in the fullness of his pride of his 
rich assets said: “O fortunate one, O beautiful lady (river), you 
can find all pleasing amenities in me. 

78. Yonder where pairs of Kinnaras sing in an enchanting 
manner, another highly pleasing note of the musical instru¬ 
ment, the lute, is heard. 

79 . There the charming trees laden with fruits and flowers 


are seen— Talas, Tamalas, Pippalas and Panasas. 

80. All round, die Mountain shines well with Kutajas, Kovidaras, 
Kadambas and Kurabas. All of them are reverberating with the 
humming sounds of the swarms of inebriated bees. 

81. In some places, with the buds of Kutaja it appears as 
though the unguent of Hara (i.e. the holy ash) has been smeared. 
In some places it appears to have the lustre resembling that 
of the robes of Visnu, on account of the Karnikaras. 

82. Covered with the Tamala leaves in some places it has 
the lustre of Vaivasvata (Yama). In some places, its parts are 
smeared with minerals. So the mountain appears to have the 
body like that of Ganadhyaksa (Vighnesvara). 

83 In some places, with Haritdla (Yellow, Orpiment) over 
its body, it appears like the Four-faced Lord. ^ some places, 
with the Saptacchadas, the mountain appears to have t e y 


86-87. In some places, it shines^w with one 

elephants, boars and monkeys comi ere( j w j t h roasted 

another and rendering the sky pierced and covered 

meat sticking to pikes. 


208 Skanda Purana 

When this was said, Sarada (i.e. Sarasvati) replied to the 
excellent Mountain: 

88 . “I am alone and isolated. I lament. Still if you are 
inclined to marry me, hold this Vadava in your hands while I 
take my holy bath.” 

89. When this was said, Krtasmara, the excellent Moun¬ 
tain, seized the Vadava handed over by Sarasvati. Due to its 
contact, Krtasmara was reduced to (a heap of) ash insta¬ 
ntly. 

90. Ever since then all the rocks therein became soft. They 
are being taken by the artisans for use in (building) houses 
and temples. 1 

91. After burning Krtasmara and holding the Vadava once 
again, the divine lady (river) came near the sea and stood 
there with hairs standing on end due to delight. 

92. Stationed there, the great goddess (river) spoke to the 
Vadava fire: “O Vadava, see the roaring sea standing before 
you.” 

93. He saw the roaring sea lashing with its waves. He spoke 
to her, “What is this, O fair lady? The briny sea is afraid of me.” 

94. The girl (river) laughed and said: “O Fire, who is not 
afraid of you? O highly powerful one, it has been assigned to 
you by the Devas as your food.” 

95. On hearing her words the Fire was highly delighted.. 
1 -Ie said: “O fair one, I shall grant you a boon. Make a request 
as you please.” 

96. On being told thus by that Vadava fire, the divine lady 
(river) remembered the lotus-eyed Visnu, the soul that is the 
cause (of all). 

97. Immediately on being remembered by her, by Sarasvati, 
Lord Janardana, the great Lord of the three worlds, was seen 
by her as stationed in her own heart. 

98. Looking at Acyuta stationed within, by means of her 

imnd s eye, she said, “The Vadava wishes to give a boon. What 
shall I ask him?” 

99. Sarasvati, the goddess, was addressed by the Lord sta- 


1. Mythological explanation for the softness of local rocks thereof. 



VII.I.33.100-103—34.1-7 


209 


tioned in the heart, “O fair one, Suavaktratva (state of having 
a mouth like a needle) should be respectfully requested for.” 

100. Then (the Fire) was addressed by the goddess, “O 
highly powerful one, if you wish to grant a boon, then become 
Sucimukha (one with the mouth like a needle) and drink the 
waters.” 

101-103. On being told thus, the mouth was rendered 
like a needle by him. It was like the minute hole in the Ghatika 1 . 
That mouth drank the water. Thus the Vadava fire that 
attempted to devour Suras was deceived by Visnu. He then 
proceeded (to the holy spot) assiduously taking care of his 
intellect. He who listens to this holy Sarga (chapter) as it is 
being read attains Visnuloka and rejoices with him. 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

The Descent of Sarasvatt 


Isvara said: 

1. The noble- minded Sarasvatl received the excellent boon 
from Vadavanala and thereafter she proceeded ahead to hurl 
him into the ocean. 

2. Desirous of handing over the Vadava at the behest of 
the Lord, she stationed herself before the holy place of Prabhasa 
and invoked the ocean: 

3 “O Arnava (Ocean), you are the primordial one among 
Devas. You are the vital air of all living beings always. Do come 
and accept the Vadava at the behest of the Lord. 

4 When the Lord of waters was thus thought of b> 
divine lady (river), the ocean of great lustre, rose up from the 
water and came there. 

5-7. On seeing the highly fascinating Ocean like anoth 

, , .. j i nt „c eved divine Visnu the divine lady 

blue-complexioned, lotus-eyea, amu . • . ki ds 

was surprised. He had ornaments and garlands of v 


1. Ghatika: As the editor explains: For water! Water 

aperture fills the pot which indicates the 

period of one Ghatika. 



210 


SkandaPurana 


He had garments of diverse colours and (was smearedwith) 
unguents of various sorts. He was surrounded by the Apagds 
(Rivers) in physical forms like ladies. 

On seeing the Ocean of this description, the divine lady, the 
daughter of Brahma, spoke to the Ocean with pure smiles: 

8. “You are the eldest of all beings born in the world. You 
are the vital life of all the men born. Hence carry out the task 
desired by Suras. Receive the (Vadava) Vahni brought here.” 

9. In the meantime he too considered mentally everything 
to be carried out. ‘By accepting the Anala (fire) the task of the 
Suras will be carried out by me’. 

10. Contemplating thus Samudra (Sea-god) liked the ac¬ 
ceptance of the Vadavagni to stop the affliction caused to the 
Suras. 

11. Then the Devi was addressed by him as he stood in 
front, “O Sarasvatl, hand over this Vadava, the enemy of Suras.” 

12-13. Then Sarasvatl of variegated limbs (beautiful) im¬ 
mediately bowed down to Caranas standing in the firmament 
with Pitamaha as the leader. Then she spoke to the Vadava 
held in her hands: “You have been asked to devour the AP 
(Waters) by Suras. These are they (the waters).” 

14. After saying this the divine lady Sarasvatl handed over 
the highly powerful Vadavagni to the Ocean at the behest of 
Suras. 

15. After handing over the Fire to him, the divine lady 
Sarasvatl transformed herself into a river and entered the Sagara 
(Sea) along the path of Naradesvara (the deity of that name 
installed there). 

16. - In the vicinity of Daityasudana (Visnu) she offered Arghya 
to the Salt Sea and installed Arghyesvara to the west of Daityasu¬ 
dana. 

17. Then the great river of five channels entered the ocean. 
Already meritorious and holy in her own original form, she 
became now still more sacred. 

18. She became holier due to the contact of the Prabhasa 
K$etra and the confluence with the Ocean. After receiving the 
Vadava from Sarasvatl, Sagara (Ocean) thought in the manner 

of a poor man who suddenly got much wealth: ‘Where shall 
I place this?’ 

19. With that fire-held in the hand and blazing brightly 


VII.I.34.20-34 


211 


the Sagara appeared like another Meru with the fire held on 
the head. 

20. On seeing him in that position, all the aquatic beings, 
the sea monsters etc. howled loudly as they were afraid of 
being scalded. 

21-22. On hearing that terrific sound, Daityasudana (Visnu) 
came there and told all the aquatic beings, “O highly powerful 
ones, do not be afraid, since, at the outset, only the waters are 
to be taken in by this (Vadava Fire) and not those beings living 
therein. At my bidding, do not get afraid.” 

23. On being told thusbyKrsna, the aquatic beings kept quiet. 

24. When all the aquatic beings became silent, Acyuta said 
to the Lord of Waters, “Do hurl the Vadava in the midst of the 
waters.” 

25. The Vadava Anala was hurled into the deep waters. 
The highly powerful one remained drinking the water along 
with Varuna. 

26. That water shaken by the exhalation of the breath began 
to move about outside the ocean like a young woman who has 
set at nought all bounds and curbs of behaviour. 

27-28. As time passed on, O Goddess (GaurT), the water 
began to dry up and evaporate slowly. The Storehouse of waters 
(the Sea) became aware of the fact that the (store of) waters 
are getting dwindled. He spoke to the Lotus-eyed Lord: Do 
make the waters perennial. Otherwise, O Janardana, if all the 
waters disappear, this Vadava fire will at the very outset swallow 
me.” 

29-30. On hearing these awful, panicky words of the Ocean, 
the water was rendered perennial (by Acyuta). The Suras knew 
that the water thus rendered everlasting dispels their grief. 
They knew these activities (of Kesava) which bound the Krtya 
Fire to a tempting promise. They worshipped Kesava who moved 
about there tempting their enemy (i.e. the Vadava Fire). In 
this they kept the waters as their leaders. 

31. Thus, O great goddess (Gauri), from the world of Brahma, 
Sarasvati, the destroyer of all sins, reached the excellent Prabhasa 

t rzi 

32. The great goddess holding the Vadava fire stationed 
herself to the south-east of Somesa near the ocean. 

33-34. At the outset, a pilgrim should take his bath in t e 


212 


Skanda Pur ana 


Agnitiftha and then worship her in accordance with the in¬ 
junctions. He should feed a couple and give them garments 
along with bodice. Then he should worship the great Lord 
Kapardin. O goddess (Gauri) this incident happened formerly 
in the Caksusa Manvantara. 

35-37. This incident refers to the Vadava born in the fam¬ 
ily of Dadhlci. O great goddess, when this Vaivasvata Manvantara 
began, Aurva, the great Brahmana, was born in the family of 
Bhargava. The Aurva of great refulgence was controlled (within 
limits) by SarasvatT, the mother of Devas. Till the end of this 
Manvantara he will stay within the womb of the waters'. 

Thus, O goddess, the origin of SarasvatT has been narrated 
to you. If it is listened to, it dispels the sins of men. It gives 
reputation and increases merits. 


CHAPTER TI-IIRTYFIVE 


Greatness of Agni Tirtha 


The Devi said: 


1-4-. O holy Lord, an Aurva of the Bhargava family was 
mentioned by you. O Lord, do narrate his nativity in this Vaivasvata 
Manvantara. 

Isvara said: 


Brahmanas had been killed by Ksatriyas for the sake of wealth. 
They were entirely exterminated along with sons and children 
in the womb. 

Among the manywho were killed, there was a woman who 
concealed the foetus within the region of the thighs and pro¬ 
tected it. 

O beautiful lady (Gauri), .the foetuses of all other women 

were aborted by the base Ksatriyas for the sake of monetary 
gam. ’ 

5. At a later time, the highly refulgent foetus pierced through 
t e region of thighs (Read urudesam for kurudesam in the Text) 


K f h rfol ng nr°v M H bh ’^ 179 21 U W3S Aurva who *rew his fiery wrath in 
the form of Vadavanaia « the Sea. Au^a was not drowned in the Sea. 




VII.1.35.6-17 


213 


and came out with the head propped up. He was extremely 
terrible and his face (mouth) blazed. 

6. With the feelings of enmity cherished in his heart he 
performed penance and created a terrible Aurva fire that could 
devour water. With this he scorched the surface of the earth. 

7. O lady of excellent complexion (Gauri), Indra flooded 
him with incessant heavy downpour. When he was not success¬ 
ful in driving him away, Indra became quiet (ceased to shower). 

8. Then all the Devas and Gandharvas became excessively 
frightened. All of them sought refuge in Brahma and stood 
with palms joined in reverence. 

The Devas said: 

9. O holy Sir, a highly refulgent one is born of the family 
of Bhargava. In the form of fire, he has burnt the surface of 
the earth. 

10. O most excellent one, formerly attempt was made by 
us to destroy him. But his (destructive) power enhances with 
(shower) of water. Hence we are afraid. 

11. O Lord, if the terrestrial region is destroyed, Agnistoma 
and other holy rites will be stopped altogether. Thereby our 
destruction is certain. 

12. Hence, O Lord, do something urgently for the benefit 
of the three worlds. 

13-14. Thereafter, Brahma arrived there along with the 
Suras and the sages, Bhargava and others, and said: “O Aurva, 
O most excellent one among Brahmanas, why do you burn the 
earth. May this be stopped immediately for my sake." 

Aurva said: 

15-16. O most excellent one, O Lord, at your instance I 
have desisted (from burning). Let some means be found out 
so that the fire discharged by me reaches the vicinity of the 
ocean at your behest. 

17. The Lotus-bom Lord summoned his daughter, the goddess, 
and said: “O my highly refulgent daughter, take this fire-and 
go to the great ocean. My instruction should not be disobeyed. 
Go quickly.” 


214 


SkandaPurana 


Sarasvati said: 

18a. Here, O Lord, I am setting out undoubtedly at your 
instance. 

18b. When this was said the words “Excellent! Excellent! 
were uttered -by Brahma. 

19. Brahma, the grandfather, himself deposited the fire 
inspired by Mantras in a gold pot and handed it over to Sarasvati. 
After offering diverse kinds of benediction, he said thus again 
and again: 

20. “Do go, dear daughter. You need not strain yourself on 
any account. May you traverse the path without obstacles. Let 
there be no antagonists.” 

Isvara said: 

21-23. On being told thus by Brahma, Sarasvati reached 
Himavan. From the hermitage of Pippalada she proceeded ahead. 
The goddess (river) came out from beneath the (Plaksa) tree. 

There were Brahmanas at the place near the hollow of the 
tree, in their numerous huts. Their chanting of the Vedas was 
heard and their minds were engrossed in chanting in good 
taste. Lord Visnu, the excellent preceptor of Devas, was present 
there. 

24 1 . From that spot, the goddess (river) proceeded west¬ 
wards. After vanishing (for a while) she reached Kedara in the 
midst of snow. 

25-26. After flooding the peak of the mountain Kedara, 
she stood before it. Being burnt by that fire held in the hand, 
Sarasvati pierced the ground and entered beneath. Along that 
hidden path, she proceeded with face towards the west, with 
the gait of an elephant. 

27. After crossing the sinful region, she pierced the ground 
and came out. It became a well (Kupa) by name Gandharva 
there. 


L The Vedic Sarasvati has no continuous water flow. It disappears at some 
places. This intermittent course of the river as known to the Purana 
author is given here, as that of PracI Sarasvati. The confusion between 
two Sarasvatis is obvious. 






VII.I.35.2&-41 


215 


28-29. The great river became visible beyond that well. Six 
Upasikas (servants, tributaries) of Sarasvatl started therefrom, 
viz. Mati, Smrti, Prajnd, Medhd, Buddhi and Girddhard. Further! 
that river proceeded ahead from the pierced sector towards 
the West. 

30. She (River) came to Bhutlsvara where there was a great 
sage, a Siddha. There is a charming region near Bhutlsvara. 

31. It is stationed in the southern quarter. It contains a 
crore of Rudras. Then she reached the famous Srlkantha Desa 
(Kurujangala) abounding in all herbs. 

32. From that highly meritorious region Srlkantha, the noble- 
minded Sarasvatl came to Kuruksetra along with the fire. 

33. Then the charming river proceeded from Kuruksetra 
and vanished when nearing the city of Virata 1 She further came 
up at the place where the mountain Gopayana is situated. 

34. It was at this place that the sons of Pandu were con¬ 
cealed by Kesava, while they carried on their activities. They 
were not noticed (found out) by anyone. 

35. There the goddess (river), the destroyer of great sins, 
stayed in a Kunda. Again from Gopayana the goddess (river) 
reached a highly splendid holy spot. 

36-37. She (river) reached Kharjunvana where she became 
well-known by the name Nanda. Sarasvatl left Kharjunvana and 
came to Merupada (foot of the mountain Meru) and reached 
Markandasrama. At this place there is the Markandaka TIrtha 
situated at Merupada. 

38. From the splendid hermitage of Markandeya Sarasvatl 
proceeded to Arbudaranya (Mt. Abu) and went to the charming 
Vatavana. 

39. It was here that Vasistha performed a penance. From 
that meritorious Vatavana that had been resorted to by Vasistha, 
she came to Udumbara Vana. It was there that Tandi performed 
a penance on Merupada. 

40. From that Udumbara Vana, the great holy river Sarasvatl 
went ahead concealed and reached another peak. 

41. This Merupada too is very great and it is resorted to by 


1. 40 Miles north of Jaipur, Rajasthan. 



2 jg Skanda Parana 

Suras and Siddhas. It resembles split collyrium and it is remem¬ 
bered by the name Golarigulam (cows tail). 

42. It is a very fascinating spot. The lady of excellent middle 
line (i.e. river) rose up from the Vamsastamba (Bamboo clus¬ 
ter), spread widely and proceeded to the South. 

43. The Vata (holy fig tree) from which it came up is well- 
known as Udgamavata . Thenceforth, that goddess (the river) 
continues to be manifest with excellent lustre. 

44. She has now abandoned the state of concealment, due 
to her compassion for all living beings. On her beautiful banks, 
there are crores of TIrthas. 

45. In all those TIrthas, the spiritual character is derived 
from Sarasvatl. On this path, Rudravatara is remembered as 
the first and the foremost. 

46. The Kdka Tirtha of great refulgence designated as Tara 
-Taranga is a great Tirtha. There is a Tirtha remembered as 

Dharesvara. 

47. Another Tirtha beyond Dharesvara is remembered as 
Garigodbheda. It is the place where the waters of Sarasvatl and 
Ganga mingle together. There is another greater Tirtha be¬ 
yond it called Pundarlka. 

48-50. The highly meritorious Matrtlrtha is fully destruc¬ 
tive of all worries and fears. The Tirtha by the name Anaraka 
is situated not very far from Matrtirtha. It dispels the distress 
and fear caused by hell. Beyond that Anaraka Tirtha, the other 
Tirtha named Sahgamesvara is situated. It is very well-known all 
over the earth. Beyond it is again another Tirtha named Kotisvara . 

51. Beyond it, O great goddess, Saihbhukundesvara is re¬ 
membered among the TIrthas on the banks of Sarasvatl. So 
also is Siddhesvara. 

52. From Siddhesvara, the river (Sarasvatl) flows westwards 
in order to reach the Western ocean. There she remembered 
her companion and wept for her. 

53. The goddess (river) stood facing the east and lamented, 
Alas! Ganga, I am lonely without you! Unlucky and bereft of 

kinsmen, how shall I go?” 

54. Becoming aware that she was rendered lean due to 
grief and was lamenting, Ganga hastened from heaven along 
with a crore of TIrthas. 

55. Thereupon, PracI (Eastern) Sarasvatl gave up grieving. 







VII. 1.35.56-67 


217 


She stationed herself there accompanied by all the groups of 
Devas. 

There, in front of VQ.t6svo.TQ. is the TTrtha of Pitamaha 
named Siddhavata. It destroys all sins. 

57. Thrice every day, Rudra arrives there and stays. It is 
the holy spot of that great Soul and is called Mahdlaya . 

58. There is an excellent ancient TTrtha named Pindatdraka 
situated on the mountain Kumbhakuksigiri. It accords great 
Siddhi in rites connected with the Manes. 

59. It is well-settled in front of Lord Pradnesvara . What 
other thing need be sought after in a place where Praci Sarasvatl 
is present! 

60. When the Mahabharata war was concluded Kiritin 
(Arjuna) performed expiatory rites in that Tirtha on being directed 
by Visnu earlier. 

61. By that rite he became rid of that sin incurre earlier. 
Therefore, it is well-known as Naratirtha. It dispels all fears of 
sins. 

62. O my beloved, there is another Tirtha remembered as 
Pundarika different from Naratirtha. Hari came there along 
with Arjuna and took his holy bath. 

63. Beyond Pradnesa there is a great Tirtha (named) 
Valakhilyesvara. Beyond that great Tirtha there is another Tirtha 
of great efficacy. 

64-65. There is another Tirtha of great efficacy named 
Gangasamgama . On seeing the goddess (river) with a gloomy 
face and dejected in mind, Brahma created for her a compan¬ 
ion of wide eyes named Kapila. Hari hastily created Harini and 
the Lord of Devas (Indra) Vajrini. Hara gave Nyariku to Sarasvati 
in order to humour her. 

66. Thereupon, the goddess (river) Pracina Sarasvatl be¬ 
came happy. At the behest of the Lord, she, the destroyer of 
sins, proceeded to go. 

Isvara said: 

67. At the outset, the river flowed towards south and then 
turned westwards. Sarasvati, the great goddess continued to 
hold the Vadavanala. On her northern bank is the Tirtha re¬ 
membered as Ekadvara. 






218 


Skanda Pur ana 


68. It is so called because the army went to Svarga through 
Ekadvdra (single door) from that forest. There is another TTrtha 
beyond, where the deity is Guhesvara. 

69. Formerly it was installed by Guha, at the place where 
Lord Mahesvara is present. Not far from Guhesvara is the Tirtha 
named Vatesvara. 

70-71. It is a divine Tirtha on the banks of Sarasvatl. For¬ 
merly it was propitiated by Vyasa. The great Tirtha where the 
river AmardakI unites with Sarasvatl, accords benefit to all embodied 
beings. No one without merit can know the confluence of 
AmardakI. A Linga named Sahgamesvara has been installed 
there. 

72-73. It became famous over the earth by the name Mundisvara. 
In the vicinity of Mundisvara there is an east-facing Tirtha on 
Sarasvatl. It is situated on the banks of Sarasvatl. It is named 
Mahodaya. The Lord installed there is known by the name 
Mandavyesvara. 

74. There is another Tirtha named Pilukarnika on the banks 
of Sarasvatl. It is a great Tirtha resorted to by sages. 

75. There is another Tirtha on the banks of the river. It 
is remembered as Dvaravatl. O goddess (Gaurl), it is the fore¬ 
most of all Tlrthas and Hari is present there. 

76. Further, situated nearby is the Tirtha called Govatsa. 
It was here that the Consort of Ambika (i.e. Siva) descended 
in the form of a calf. 

77. The storehouse of refulgence stayed there in the form 
of Bhiilihga. On the south-west of Govatsa is seen a Lohayastika 
(Iron Post). 

78-80. Rudra himself is stationed there in the form of 
Bhulinga. 

By performing a single Sraddha there men obtain the ben¬ 
efit that is usually derived by devoutly offering rice-balls twenty- 
one times in Gariga. 

_ "^ len that great Tirtha, the river proceeds ahead along 
with her friends like-a child with its toys. Sometimes she flows 
southwards, sometimes northwards. Thus she flows backwards 
and forwards. 

After reaching Rulla, the goddess (river) becomes 
charming once again. It was here that the city Rulla was cre¬ 
ated by Lord Sambhu. He played for a period of a thousand 







VII.I.35.83-95 


219 


years with Parvatl and the Devas jetting out water from the 
Dhdrayantra (a pump like instrument from which water is jet¬ 
ted out against other players). 

83. Rulla is a whirlpool of great efficacy in Sarasvatl. Mahadeva 
is directly present there by the name of Anandesvara. 

84. To the west of the temple of Sambhu, on the southern 
foot-hill of Meru, there is a nail-like mark. It is highly glorified. 

85. Men who view this perfectly, become rid of sins. They 
certainly attain the benefit of a thousand horse-sacrifices. 

86. Beyond it is the great hermitage of Sage Kusmanda. 
The TIrtha called Kusmandesvara is famous all over the three 


worlds. 

87. It is there that the goddess Kolia is stationed. She dispels 
all sins and fears. The great river reached the vicinity of Kolia, 
by proceeding under ground (in a concealed manner). 

88. Again she became hidden (went underground) and 
reached a very charming tableland called Madana. It is a holy 
spot resorted to by Siddhas. 

89. Going under cover once again, she (the river) reached 
a snow-clad mountain named Khadiramoda. This place remarkably 
shines with the flowers of all the seasons. 

90. Mounting it she espied the highly fascinating Ksaroda 
(Sea) lofty like a clustre of clouds in the western quarter. 

91. On seeing this in this manner, the highly refulgent 
(river) became five-faced (five currents, mouths of the river) 
in her delightShethen got ready to accomplish the task of Devas. 

92. The five channels are HarinI, VajrinI, Nyanku, Kapila 
and Sarasvatl. On being told by the sage, Sarasvatl stood there 
with the five channels. 

93. The places where she stood dispelling the fatigue ot 

sages, are each called after the name of the sage concerned 
(the TIrtha of that sage). O lady of excellent countenance 
(Gaurl), these Tirthas dispels all the sins of the men desirous 
of (undertaking pilgrimage) to them. . , 

94. Reaching Khadiramoda and tarrying there she looked 
at the ocean. Then, O beautiful goddess, she took the fire and 

began to proceed ahead. . 

95. After burning Krtasmara, the goddess (river) took up 
the Vadava once again and stood in the vicinity of the ocean. 
In her delight, her hairs stood on ends. 




220 


Skanda Purana 


96. Then goddess entered deep into the salt sea. She took 
the Vadava fire and cast (Vadava) off into the middle of the 
waters. 

97. Then Hutasana (Fire-god) himself became pleased with 
her. On seeing that difficult task accomplished, he spoke these 
words: 

98. “O fair lady, I am pleased with you. O lady of excellent 
holy rites, choose your boon. That I shall gladly grant you even 
if it be very difficult to get.” 

Isvara said: 

99. She took off a bangle from her forearm and spoke 
these words: “O Vahni, this bangle of mine should always be 
worn round your mouth. 

100. Draw only that much water which can be drawn through 
this. Samudra, the Lord of rivers, should not be dried away by 
you.” 

101. After saying “So it shall be”, he entered the store¬ 
house of waters. It is thus, O great goddess, that Sarasvati came 
to Prabhasa taking the Vadava for the sake of the pleasure of 
noble-minded ones. 

102. O beautiful lady, that great river halted and rested at 
Kuruksetra, Bhadravarta and Sristhala. 

103. In this Manvantara, O goddess, formerly in the first 
Tretayuga she merged within the salty ocean in the form of 
Devamata (Mother of the Devas). 

104. This is what took place in the case of Sarasvati and 
Vadava fire. When this Manvantara passes off another Vadava 
will be born. 

105. It will be born of the fury of Rudra under the name 

Jvalamukha. Then the name of Sarasvati will become well-known 
as BrahmI. 

106. Now in the world, the name current is Sarasvati. Her 
name in the past was Kamandalubhava (‘born of the water- 
pot ). It is true that another earlier name of Samudra (ocean) 
was Ratnakara (‘storehouse of jewels’). 

t l°\ ° goddess - in this Manvantara it is glorified as Sdgara. 
It has been proclaimed, O goddess, that the future name is 
Ksaroda . 

108. Whoever knows it thus attains the benefit of the Tirtha. 





VII.I.35.109-122 


221 


In the holy spot Prabhasa Sarasvatl has become a ladder 
unto Svarga (heaven). 

109. The great river cannot be attained (reached) by per¬ 
sons without merit. O goddess, PracI Sarasvatl is everywhere 
very difficult of access, and especially so in Kuruksetra, Prabhasa 
and Puskara. 

110. That goddess (river) holding the Vadavanala has such 
efficacy. The goddess Sarasvatl stood very near Agni Tirtha. 

111. One who worships her at the outset attains the ben¬ 
efit of the Tirtha. That Sagara Tirtha is destructive of sins and 
it augments merit. 

112-113. By its mere sight, one attains the benefit of a 
great Kratu. An Agnicit (performer of Agnihotra), a Kapila (the 
tawny-coloured cow), a Sattri (one who performs a Sattra sac¬ 
rifice), a king, a holy mendicant and the great ocean—these 
sanctify on being merely viewed. Hence one should view them 
with purity. 

After taking the holy bath in Agnitirtha a man should cast 
into the holy fire a Bhara weight (twenty Tolas) of Guggula. 
He is honoured in Agniloka. 

114. Thus has been briefly described the prosperity aris¬ 
ing from Agnitirtha and the greatness of Sarasvatl that is de¬ 
structive of all sins. 

115. After taking the holy bath duly in Agnitirtha, O great 
goddess, one should cast into it a gold bangle as permitted by 
one's funds. 

116-119. Then after worshipping Sarasvatl, the devotee should 
adore Kapardin. 

Then the deity named Kedara and Bhimesvara thereafter, 
then the deity named Bhairavesvara and then Candisvara, there¬ 
after the man should duly adore Lord Somesvara. After wor¬ 
shipping Navagrahesvaras and the eleven Rudras, one should 
adore Lord Brahma in the form of a boy. Thus the Yatra (Pil¬ 
grimage) called Radri (Raudri ?) is accomplished. It is destruc¬ 
tive of sins. 

120-122. An excellent man who resides within the Ksetra 
and fully knows the greatness, obtains the benefit of-the Tirtha. 
After doing thus, the devotee goes to the great goddess Sarasvatl. 
Where else can the merit on a par with that of residence m 
Sarasvatl be obtained? Where else is pleasure on a par with 





222 


Skanda Purana 


that of residence in Sarasvati? Men who went up to heaven 
after reaching Sarasvati, will again remember the river. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 
Greatness of PracI Sarasvati 


The Devi said: 

1-2. It has been said by you that PracI Sarasvati is difficult 
of access everywhere, especially in Kuruksetra, Prabhasa and 
Puskara. How did this river destructive of all sins reach Prabhasa 
and halt there eventually? O Lord Mahesana, describe fully the 
greatness that is destructive of sins, of that PracI, if I am your 
beloved. 

Isvara said: 

3. O fair lady, you have said pertinently. PracI is difficult 
of access everywhere, in Kuruksetra, and Puskara and more so 
in the holy spot of Prabhasa. 

4. O great goddess, O goddess of Devas, no one devoid of 
merit obtains in Prabhasa, PracI the destroyer of sins and capable 
of rooting out (adverse) Karmas. 

5. It is the truth, (I repeat) it is true that men who drink 
the water of PracI Sarasvati should never be thought of as mere 
men, O lady of excellent countenance. 

6. Blessed indeed are those sages and meritorious ascetics 
who drink the waters of the Sarasvati everyday. 

7. They are gods. They are not human beings, but gods 
who drink the waters of the three rivers, namely Gaiiga, 
Candrabhaga (Chinab) and the divine Sarasvati. 

8. This can be after taking food or while abstaining from 
food. It may be by day or at night. In PracI Sarasvati there is 
no time restriction (for drinking water). 

9. Even those animals that drink PracI Sarasvati always will 
go to Svarga as in the case of excellent Brahmanas (who do 
so) through Yajhas. 

10. In the case of laymen, that excellent holy place serves 




VH.I.S6.11-19 


223 


the purpose of fulfilling all desires. There, Praci Sarasvatl is 
on a par with Cinlamani (the fabulous philosopher’s stone yielding 
everything wished for). 

11. Just as the Kamadhuk (wish-yielding) cows accord the 
benefit of achieving all desires, so also the divine Praci Sarasvatl 
through heavenly pleasures and absolute salvation. 

12. What else can. be regarded as superior to this (holy 
spot) where eighty-eight thousand sages of sublimated sexual¬ 
ity have stayed on, renouncing the idea of leaving for other 
holy spots? 

13. It is the place where Mankanaka attained Siddhi. He 
observed restrictions and self-control in Practna (a holy spot 
on the Praci river). O lady of excellent countenance, I per¬ 
formed the expiatory rite for (the sin of) Brahmana-slaughter 
in that place. 

14. When the Mahabharata war concluded, Kiritin (Arjuna) 
performed expiatory rite on being directed by Visnu (Krsna). 
He performed the rite in that Tirtha, the highly meritorious 
Tlrtha situated on the banks of Praci. 

15. Among all the TIrthas of the three worlds, that Tlrtha 
is remembered as the most excellent. It destroys the sins of 
living beings. It generates (confers) merits and it accords 
meritorious renown. 


Suta said: 

16 On this being told thus, the goddess spoke to Sankara, 
the benefactor of the worlds: “O Lord, how did Partha (Arjuna), 
the conqueror of the cities of the enemies, undergo the ex¬ 
piation? How did the sin caused by the killing of the kinsmen 

get dissolved?" . , _ . 

17. On being asked thus, Nllalohita, the Lord of the uni¬ 
verse, spoke of the manner in which he realized the expiation 
as obtaining there. 


Isvara said: 

18. O fair lady, listen with attention to the story that destroys 
sins. By listening to this devoutly, a man becomes one of purified 

SOU 19. O goddess, he who is called Kiritin and Svetavahana 


224 Skanda Parana 

(i.e. Arjuna) conquered all the Kauravas and slaughtered horses 
and elephants. 

20. Thereafter, with the help of BhTma he got Suyodhana 
(killed). This Nara along with Narayana set off homewards 
from the battlefield and reached the abode. 

21-23a. With a desire to meet the son of Dharma, the 
delighted Arjuna bowed down to him and stood ready with 
palms joined in reverence. On coming to know that both of 
them, Nara and Narayana were coming, King Yudhisthira spoke 
to the sentries at the entrance gate: “You who are at the gate 
should prevent these two from entering. Nara and Narayana 
are cruel. They are smeared with the mire of sins”. 

23b. They said, “It will be so”. When the two came near 
the gate, they were told thus: 

24. “The king does not wish to see both of you because you 

are guilty of misconduct.” Nara himself who was standing there 
asked the sentry: 3 

25. “What is the reason? Why does our king not wish to see 
both of us (who are) completely under his control?” Then the 
King who was bowed to, said to the sentry standing before: 

26. He also spoke to Nara who was dauntless of even hell 
and who was accompanied by Narayana: “Since all the kinsmen 
including Duryodhana and all the kings on a par with the 
parents were killed by you, you have incurred sins.” 

27. When this was spoken, he (Nara) looked at the face 
ofHari.Harisaid,“Whathasbeenutteredby the king is the truth." 

28-29. When this was uttered, Nara spoke to Janardana 
once again: O Krsna, say, how are we going to get free from 
the sin? O Krsna, tell me clearly how I will get purified through 
the holy bath in a Tlrtha viz. Gahga etc. which is destructive 
of sins," 

Krsna said: 

30. O Kaunteya, do not go to Gaya. Do not go to Puskara. 
O most excellent one among the scions of the family of Kuru, 
go to that place where Praci Sarasvatl flows. 

31. Brahmana-slayers, those who imbihe liquor as well as 
other sinners, become rid of the sins by taking the holy bath 
at the place where Praci Sarasvatl flows. 




VII.I.36.32-46 


225 


32. On being told thus by Narayana, Nara, immediately in 
compliance of his words, reached the excellent Praclna Tlrtha 
accompanied by him. 

33. He observed fast for three nights and took his holy 
ablution thrice a day with full self-control. Thereby he got rid 
of the sins accumulated earlier. 

34. On realizing that he had become pure, King Dharmaputra, 
accompanied by his brothers came there to see the leading 
Nara. 

35. Then Dharmaputra saw him in front bowing down. With 
a delighted soul, he embraced him and enquired after his 


health. 

36. Nara endowed with many good qualities, was surrounded 
by the group of elders. He was embraced by his delighted 
brothers Bhlma and others. 

37. Such is that great Tlrtha called Praclna. It is the pu¬ 
rifier of men and others through regular holy ablution. 

38. Even one who is a slayer of a Brahmana, but takes his 
bath in this Tlrtha and observes fast for three nights, becomes 


rid of that sin. He rejoices in heaven like Rudra. 

39. O goddess, O beautiful woman, I reside along with you 
in this great ancient holy spot Prabhasa. 

40. He who casts off his body, O beautiful lady, in the holy 
spot Praclna on the northern bank of Sarasvatl, does not come 
here again. 

41. If he takes his plunge he will get the full benefit of a 
horse-sacrifice. He should get his body dried up by means of 
restraints and fasts. 

42-43. There are ascetics of various kinds: some take m 
only water; some take in only air; others have leaves for diet. 
They observe many restraints such as always lying down on the 
dry bare ground. If the people who reside in the hermitage 
of Manki, meet with death, they are no longer men. They are 


Devas. I speak the truth. 

44. In this Tlrtha, if anyone offers a bit of gold with great 
faith to a leading Brahmana, he will obtain the benefit thereo 


on a par with Meru. ■; , 

45. Men who perform Sraddha in this Tlrtha will eertai y 

go to heaven in the company of twenty-one generations. 

46. Those propitiated with a single rice-ball in this ir 


226 


Skanda Purana 


that is a favourite of the Pitre, will go to Brahmaloka like those 
who perform Gayasraddha. 

47. Holy bath on the fourteenth day in the dark half is 
always laid down. If a devotee offers balls of Pinyaka or Ingudalia, 
the Pitre are eternally satisfied. The devotee goes to Pilrioka. 

48. If they offer much rice (food), they go along the path 
to salvation. 

49. He who offers excellent curds there to a Brahmana, 
reaches Agniloka and enjoys splendid pleasures. 

50. He who devoutly offers a woollenblanketto an excellent 
Brahmana attains great Siddhi very difficult for othersto acquire. 

51. If men enter the waters here forgetting rid of dirt, one 
can easily predict the benefit acquired on a par with the gift 
of cows. 

52. A man who takes the holy bath with ardent fervour, 
shall be rid of all sins and will be honoured in Brahmaloka. 

53. The Pitre detained in Narakas can be redeemed by an 
excellent son by means of libations and offerings of rice-balls. 
They go to Svarga. 

54. If anyone who has gone to PracI Sarasvatl turns to 
Himalaya, he forsakes what he has in his hand and begins to 
lick with the elbow (obscure). 

55. He who casts away his life thinking of anything what¬ 
ever before death, obtains it entirely, thanks to the greatness 
of the Tirtha. 

56-58. Another thing, O goddess. This has been said by 
Gangeya (Bhisma) to Yudhisthira: “It is true that we are born 
of Ganga, O Yudhisthira, but out of all the rivers in the world, 
Sarasvatl is the greatest and the most meritorious of all of 
them. Sarasvatl is the most meritorious of all the rivers. Sarasvatl 
always accords happiness to all the people. After reaching Sarasvatl, 
even a most miserable man never grieves here or hereafter. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 

Importance of Offering a Bracelet 

The Devi said: 

1-2. O Lord, what for is a gold bracelet thrown into the 




VII.I.37.3-13 


227 


Salt Sea? The merit acquired thereby has not been mentioned 
before. It behoves you to tell it exactly. What are the Mantras ? 
What is the injunction? At what time is it highly efficacious? 
What is the episode associated with the gold bracelet, O 'holy 
Lord? 

Isvara said: 

3. Formerly there was a king well-known as Brhadratha. 
He had a beloved wife, a chaste lady named Indumatl. 

4. O great goddess, neither among the Deva women nor 
in Gandharvls nor in Asurls nor in Kinnarls is (was) there a 
slender-waisted lady like her (in beauty.). 

5. She was endowed with good manners, beauty, and other 
qualities. She was always chaste. Like the chaste lady Arundhatl, 
she possessed all the womanly good qualities. 

6. She was the most important one among a thousand 
inmates. Naturally she was proud of her conjugal felicity. Without 
her, the king did not divert himself even for a moment. 

7. Once, she was occupying half the throne of the saintly 
king, when a sage named Kanva came near the saintly king. 
He was an ascetic of great refulgence and was a master of the 
Vedas. 

8-9. Seeing him coming, the king promptly got up. He 
duly adored him and offered excellent Arghya. Assured that 
the leading sage was comfortably seated and relaxed, the king 
enquired after his health and well-being and the sage con- 

gratulated him. . 

10. Then the sage held discourse on piety in the audience 

Wl *i\ th A^the end of the discourse, the wife of the king stood 
there with palms joined in reverence and spoke these nectar¬ 
ine words: 


Indumatl said: 

12 O holy Sir, O Lord, you know everything past and future. 

Urged by curiosity I am asking you. So it behoves you to excuse 

me i3. Do narrate to me all my Karmas done in the earlier 
bodies. Mine is such a great conjugal felicity. My husband 
comparable to a son of Devas. 


228 


Skanda Purana 


14. Due to my good fortune, I am having a husband as a 
Lord unto me whose good conduct is well-known all over the 
three worlds. Is this the result of any Vrata or that of a reli¬ 
gious fast? 

15. O leading sage, is this the efficacy of a Dana that I 
possess excellent conjugal felicity? The mighty king is under 
my control. He always acts according to what I say. 

16. Do explain this to me entirely. My curiousity is excessive. 

Suta said: 

17. On hearing her words, the sage meditated for a long 
time. Ultimately Kanva, the most excellent one among knowers 
of the Vedas, laughingly spoke these words: 

Kanva said: 

18. Listen, O queen. I shall tell the details of your previous 
birth. O lady of slender waist-line, you must not be angry. Nor 
is there any need to feel ashamed. 

19. In the previous birth you were a'cowherdess with five 
husbands in the land of Saurastra. When you became Hind (a 
widow devoid of husbands) you went to the deity Somesvara. 

20. Then, for your holy bath, you entered the salty sea. On 
being struck by a series of waves, you became agitated. 

21. From your forearm the gold bracelet slipped down and 
got lost in the waters of the ocean. You began to regret it. 

22. After a long time, you met with your death. Then, O 
beautiful woman, you were born in the abode of the king of 
Dasarna. 

28-24a. Thanks to the power of the gold bracelet (lost in 
the sea), you were married to Brhadratha. O splendid lady, no 
Vrata, penance or Dana was undertaken by you before. Here 

everything has been mentioned to you, all which you had asked 
me. 


24b. On hearing those words the large-eyed lady stood 
wit f ac e down due to bashfulness. On hearing those words, 
the fair lady remained silent. 


25. After intimating this to the wife of the king, O lady of 
exce ent countenance (i.e. Gauri), the sage took leave of the 
king and went to his abode. 




VII.I.37.26-28—38.1-6 


229 


26. Having understood that the benefit was a result of (offer 
of) gold bracelet by the power of the sage, she went to Lord 
Somesvara and took her holy bath in the salty ocean. 

27. O lady of great refulgence, every year she used to throw 
down a gold bracelet. Then she attained the state of Deva, 
thanks to its power, O lady of great beauty. 

Isvara said: 

28. This great power of (offering to sea) a gold bracelet 
has been described. O goddess, it accords all desires. It is 
destructive of all sins. 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 

Kapardi-Vinayaka 

The Devi said: 

1-2. In regard to your earlier statement that one should 
visit Kapardin at the outset, I have a doubt. It behoves you to 
clarify it. O Lord of Devas, O Sarhbhu, is he not your attendant 
though highly lustrous? According to a convention the honouring 
of a servant should take place only after that of the master. 

Isvara said: 

3. Listen, O goddess, I shall explain how Kapardin is the 
most adorable. He is the foremost of all the Devas. He is Lord 
Vighnesvara. 

4. O great goddess, Somesvara, Sadasiva who is stationed 
in Prabhasa Ksetra in the form of a Liriga is beyond the ken 
of sense-organs. 

5. On his left is stationed Visnu who is remembered as 
Varaha (the Boar). Brahma, the Prajapati (Lord of the sub¬ 
jects), is stationed on his right. Since he is angry with Savitri 
he has adopted the form of Kapardin. 

6. In Rrta Yuga, his name was Heramba; in Treta he was 
Vighnamardana . In Dvapara he was Lambodara and he is re¬ 
membered as Kapardin in Kali Age. 


230 


Skanda Purana 


7 Thus his incarnation is distinct in every Yuga. He is 
born again and again in accordance with the task on hand. 

8 At the advent of the twenty-eighth Caturyuga Kapardin 
was born there as Kdrandtman (in the form of the original 

cause). Listen how he was born so. 

9 Formerly at the junction of Dvapara when Kahyuga began, 
women barbarians, Sudras and those who were sinners used 
to go to Svarga quickly after viewing Lord Somesvara. 

10 There were no Yajnas, no austerity, no Dana, no study 
of the Vedas and no Vrata. Men who never performed any of 
these things, O goddess, used to go to the abode of Siva. 

11. As a result of this power of Somesvara, O goddess of 
Suras, all holy rites beginning with Agnistoma (sacrifice) be- 
came extinct. 

] 2. Thereupon boys, old men, sages who had mastered the 
Vedas, Sudras and even women used to attain the highest state. 

13. At a time when the festivities of Yajna were extinct, the 


whole of the earth became vacant and heaven became filled 
with persons of raised arms (Since there was no living space 
left in the crowded heaven, all could stand only with raised 


arms). 

14. Thereupon, the Devas beginning with Mahendra, be¬ 
came miserable on being attacked and defeated by human 
beings as it were. They sought refuge in Sankara. 

15-18. With palms joined in reverence all the excellent 
Suras beginning with Indra said: “O Sankara, due to your favour 
this Svarga has become over-crowded with human beings. 

They are boasting to one another, “I am the most excellent 
one, I am the most superior one” and move about everywhere 
as they please. O Lord, suggest some place for us to stay. 

Dharmaraja, the highly virtuous one, is reviewing their auspicious 
and inauspicious Karmas recorded by himself. He keeps quiet 
with extreme surprise. 

The extremely terrible Kurhbhlpaka, Raurava and Salmali 
hells had been kept ready by him for these sinners. But on 
seeing those very persons well-settled in heaven he felt embar¬ 
rassed. So he has abandoned his work. 


Sri 


Bhagavan said: 


19. When I was pleased with the devotion of Soma 1 had 




VII.I.38.20-29 


231 


promised him everything. My presence (proximity to Soma) in 
this holy spot was promised. 

20. What has been promised by me cannot be altered. Those 
who visit me there will thus go to Svarga. 

21. Agitated by fear, the Devas looked at Parvati present 
everywhere and spoke to her with palms joined in reverence, 
“Do be our refuge”. 

22. After saying so, they knelt on the ground. With joined 
palms kept over the head all those Devas eulogized her by 
means of this prayer. 

The Devas prayed'. 

23. Obeisance to you, O goddess of the chiefs of Devas. 
Obeisance to you, O mother of the Universe. Obeisance to you 
with eyes like lotus-petals. Obeisance to you, O goddess with 
golden lustre. 

24. Obeisance to you, O great annihilatrix and creatrix. 
Obeisance to you, O beloved of Sankara. Obeisance to you, O 
Kalaratri (Durga identified as the goddess of the night of 
annihilation) Obeisance to you, O daughter of the Mountain. 

25. O fair lady, O noble lady, O VisalaksI (large-eyed one)! 
Obeisance to you, to the most beautiful lady of the world. You 
are Rati (pleasure). You are Dhrti (fortitude). You are Sn (for¬ 
tune). You are Svaha. You are Svadha and Sati. 

26. You are Durga, you are Mati (intellect) you are Medha 
(retentive power of memory). You are everything. You are the 
earth, the repository of rich wealth. This entire range of the 
three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile beings has 
been pervaded by you. 

27-28. We have been looking for you in rivers, tops of 
mountains, oceans, caves, forests, altars and sanctuaries, battle 
fields, hermitages—all those places in the three worlds where, 
O goddess, you were not present. In view of all this, O Visa a *si, 
save us from the great danger. 

Isvara said: 

29. That goddess was prayed to thus by the Devas with 
Indra as their leader. Out of mercy you caused your own bo y 
to be massaged and pressed by those Devas. 


232 


Skanda Parana 


30. A great deal of dirt issued forth as you were being 
pressed and massaged. It was there that the four- armed charming 
Gajendrdsya (one with the face of a leading tuskci) appeared. 

31-33. You mercifully spoke to all the Suras: ‘This is the 
being created by me with a desire for your benefit. He will 
cause all obstacles to the living beings. Men overwhelmed with 
great delusion, with intellect overpowered by lust, will never 
see Somanatha. Hence they will fall into hell. 

34. All the Devas were delighted in their minds on hearing 
these words of yours. They went back to their respective abodes 
shedding off all fear arising from human beings. 

35. Then, O goddess, the Elephant-faced One spoke to 
you humbly: “O large-eyed one, what shall I do? May some 
command be given to me.” 


Sri Bhagavati said: 


36-38. Go to the holy place of Prabhasa where Hara is 
present and protect it. See that the Liiiga of the Lord of Devas 
which is installed by the Moon himself does not fall within the 
range of vision of human beings. 

On being commanded by you thus, he causes obstacles to 
men always. Kapardin begins to cause great obstacles to every¬ 
one on seeing him proceeding to Somanatha, the Lord. Hence 
Kapardin is highly adored by'people. 

39. He creates unto him the great infatuation of sons, wives, 
houses, fields, wealth and foodgrain. As a result the man does 
no see Hara. 

40. Or he may generate some illness like goitre, swelling 
in the neck etc. and the man afflicted with those illnesses 
becomes deluded and never sees Hara. 

41. Hence with a desire to (attain) Somesvara one should 
assiduously worship him (Kapardin) always and remember him 
day and night. 


42. Ganadhyaksa, the protector of Prabhasa Ksetra, should 
be propitiated, O goddess of Devas, by means of this prayer 
that destroys all obstacles. 


43. O great goddess, I shall proclaim to you that prayer 

which suppresses obstacles, the prayer to Kapardin. Listen with 
attention 




VI 1 . 1 . 38.44-55 


233 


Prayer (44-51): (Prayer to Kapardin) 

44. Orh, obeisance to the Lord of obstacles. O Kapardin, 
obeisance to you. Obeisance to the Lord of great and fierce 
fang-like teeth, to the resident of the holy spot of Prabhasa. 

45. After bowing down to Kapardin for the sake of free¬ 
dom from obstacles in the course of the pilgrimage, I shall 
eulogize Vighnaraja, the splendid lover of Siddhi and Buddhi. 

46. (I adore) Mahaganapati, heroic one, unconquered one, 
one who enhances victory, single-toothed one, double-toothed 
one, four-toothed one, four-armed one. 

47. (I adore) the three-eyed one, the trident-armed one, 
the red-eyed one, the bestower of boons, the invincible one, 
the pike-eared one, the fierce one, the leader of the army, one 
with iron staff held up, Hutavaktra (one in whose mouth the 
sacrificial articles are consigned), and Hutapriya (one fond of 
the performance of Homa). 

48. I bow down to that Ganadhyaksa, the terrifying and 
fierce son of Uma, who, if not worshipped, causes obstacles in 
all the activities of men. 

49. I bow down to that Vinayaka who is full of inebriation, 
who has uneven (three) eyes, whose lustre is befitting the 
elephant-faced deity, who is firm and motionless, and who is 
quiescent. 

50. With a previous physical form you adopted the guise 
of an elephant for the fulfilment of the tasks of Devas. You 
then terrified all the Danavas. 

51. You have revealed your leadership of the sages and the 
Devas. 

52-55. O son of Bhava, you are adored at the outset by the 
Suras after being eulogized thus. 

A devotee shall propitiate you, O Ganadhyaksa, having the 
lustre befitting the elephant-faced Lord. The devotee should 
eulogize the steady, motionless, quiescent Lord surrounded by 
the glory of victory. For the realization of any task the devotee 
should wear red garments and worship with red flowers and 
the waters (rendered fragrant) with red sandalpaste. He should 
restrain himself and restrict his food intake. He can worship 
once a day or twice a day. The Lord of all obstacles shall 





224 ShandaPurana 

control everyone, be it a king, king’s son, king’s minister or 
the kingdom. 

56. By remembering Lord Vinayaka, one obtains that ben¬ 
efit which results from visiting all the TIrthas and performing 
all the Yajnas. 

57 . He will never meet with difficulty. He will face no defeat 
or discomfiture, nor will he have any obstacle. The man shall 
become competent to remember the previous birth. 

58. He who recites this hymn shall be granted boons within 
six months. He will obtain Siddhi within a year. There is no 
doubt about this. 

59. Lord Somesvara favours him and comes within the view 
of that devotee. Since his belly has the shape of a Kaparda (a 
courrie used as a coin, a shell) the noble-souled one has come 
to be named Kapardin. 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 

Kedaresvara Liriga 


Isvara said: 

1-4. After duly adoring Kapardin, the Lord of Devas, O 
great goddess, a pilgrim should go to the Linga situated in 
Kedara and set up in its south-east sector. It is near Bhlmesvara. 
It is self-born Kalpalinga, O great goddess, and is my favourite. 
This Vrddhilihga of great lustre was worshipped by me, O goddess. 
If any devotee abstains from food and keeps vigil on the night 
of the fourteenth lunar day, his worlds shall be eternal. But 
the name of this Lord in the earlier Yuga was Rudresvara. 

5. When at the advent of this Tisya (Kali Yuga) the Lord 
became afraid and agitated about contact with barbarians, he, 
Lord Kedara, got merged into this Linga in the vicinityofthesea. 

6 - 8 . Hence, the name of the Lord became well-known as 
Kedara. 

In the month of Magha, the pilgrim should restrict his diet 
and take his holy bath in the great Padmaka Kunda within the 
salty sea. It is situated at a distance of ten Dhanus to the south 
of Rudresa. 




VII.I.39.9-21 


235 


O goddess, after taking the holy bath in accordance with the 
injunctions he should adore Rudresa. Thereby he shall derive 
the benefits of the perfect performance of the pilgrimage to 
Kedara. 

9-10. By adoring the Lord, the sins of Brahmana-slaughter 
etc. shall be dispelled. 

Now, O beloved of Suras, the ancient legend of the same 
Lord is being told. It yields the fulfilment of all the cherished 
desires unto men. 

Formerly, O goddess, there was a king well-known as Sasabindu. 

11. He was born during the junction of Kali and Dvapara. 
He was an emperor and Lord of all kings. He was competent 
to slay all antagonists and their hosts. 

12-14. He had a chaste wife dear to him more than his 
own life. O beautiful lady (Gauri), neither a Deva lady nor a 
GandharvT, neither an Asuri lady nor a PannagI was as beau¬ 
tiful as this lady of splendid eyes, the queen of the king. He 
had a hundred-petalled charming lotus moving through the 
sky. It was a fast vehicle of that noble-souled king. O goddess, 
he wandered over all the worlds as he pleased by means of that 
(lotus-vehicle). 

15 Once O lady of excellent countenance, on the four¬ 
teenth lunar day in the bright half of the month of Phalguna, 
he arrived at the excellent Prabhasa Ksetra. 


ne auivcu tu tuv. ... - - _ . T , at( 

16 He saw all the sages gathered before Snsomesa. T ) 
were engaged in Japa and Homa at night for the purpose ot 

keeping awake. , c 

17. After viewing Somanatha and making the bow of ven¬ 
eration in accordance with the injunctions, he adored all o 



20-21. Sages Cyavana, 
Raibhya, Jaimini, Krauiica, 
with eager curiosity. Kee 
approved him. 




236 


Skanda Purana 


22. They conducted diverse kinds of discourses mostly in 
mythology and old legends. After remaining thus for some 
time, they asked the excellent king: 

The sages said: 

23. O king, why did you ignore Lord Somesvara and per¬ 
form the rite of keeping awake before Lord Kedara? Do tell 
us this. Certainly you know the efficacy of this Lihga, in con¬ 
ferring prosperity. 

The King said: 

24. May all the Brahmanas listen to the details of mine in 
the other body (i.e. earlier birth). Formerly I was a man of 
Sudra caste, venerating Brahmanas. 

25. It was in the splendid land of Saurastra in a family 
possessing much wealth and foodgrains. Then, O Brahmanas, 
on another occassion a state of drought overran it. 

26. Then I came to the Prabhasa Ksetra. I was afflicted 
with hunger. Then I espied a splendid lake situated near the 
HarinI river. 

27. The name of that lake was Ramasaras. It was adorned 
with clusters of lotuses. It resembled the Ocean of Milk. As I 
was tired, on seeing it, I took my bath there. 

28-29. After offering libations to the Pitrs and Devas, I 
drank the clear water. Then my wife told me thus: “Take these 
lotuses. Here, nearby an excellent charming holy spot is seen. 

We can sell these after going there so that, O dear Lord, we 
shall get our food.” 


30. Thereupon, I got down into the water, O Brahmanas, 
and plucked plenty of lotus flowers. Then I started towards the 


city. 


31-32 O excellent sages, in order to sell the lotuses in full 
oom, went along the roads and places where three roads 
and four roads met. No one came forward fr> ttv.* n ower ) 



und of music. My wife 
me that certainly the 


went 





VII.1.39.35-46 


237 


ritual of keeping awake was on, in a certain temple and that 
I shall go there to the temple with the lotus flowers. If anyone 
buys them, we can have our means of sustenance (food). 

35. O leading sages, I got up and came to this place and 
saw this Linga adored with splendid flowers. 

36-38a. This Vrddha Linga is a self-born one and is named 
Rudresvara. 

A harlot named Anahgavati was celebrating Sivaratri. With 
songs, dances and other festivities she kept awake before the 
deity. 

I saw someone (and asked him): “Is this the ritual of keep¬ 
ing awake? Who is this lady seen here very ardently engaged 
in songs, dances and festivities?” 

38b-42. He replied: “This is the ritual of Sivaratri men¬ 
tioned in the scripture as Sivadharma. It yields great merit. 

This is the harlot named Anahgavati. She is very pious. She 
keeps awake at night after performing the splendid Sivaratri 
Vrata. 

A man who perfectly celebrates this Sivaratri Vrata never 
meets with misery or poverty. Nor does he get into bond¬ 
age. 

He does not suffer due to malefic position of Planets, illness 
or anything fearsome. The man becomes richly endowed with 
good luck and happiness and is born in a good family. 

He becomes refulgent, famous and recipient of everything 
by way of welfare. With the favour (of this deity) all this happens, 
so say learned men. 

The King said: 

43. Then I became finally inclined to perform that Vrata, 
O excellent Brahmanas. I thought thus in my mind. 

44. As there was no food I was compelled to observe fast. 
Then I took my holy bath in the Padmaka Tirtha in the salty 

ocean. _ 

45. I thought, I shall worship Lord Mahesvara by means of 
these lotuses. Then Rudresa was duly adored by me along .with 

my wife. , 

46. The Lord was worshipped devoutly by means of the 
lotuses. Further, my wife had accompanied me in the adora- 



Skanda Purana 
238 

don. Throughout that night, I had kept awake along with my 

W1< 47-48 After the day had dawned and the disc of the sun 
had risen, that harlot told me: “Take the three palas of silver 
as the price of the lotuses.” But I did not accept it, O excellent 
Brahmanas. A Sattvika feeling arose in me and in my wife. 

49 Then I began to beg for alms and thus I sustained my 
life. Then after a great deal of time, O leading sages, I met 
with my death. 

50. This chaste wife of mine who is dearer to me more 
than my own life, entered fire along with my dead body. 

51. Thanks to its power, I was born as an emperor. Along 
with my wife I could remember the earlier birth. O excellent 
Brahmanas, this is the truth. 

52. It is for this reason that my devotion is concentrated 
on this Liiiga permanently along with my wife too. I am speaking 
the truth to you. 

53. O excellent ones, this Vrata was performed by me who 
(as a Sudra) had been excluded from all holy rites and devo¬ 
tional fervour. This is the great benefit yielded by it. 

54. Now I am fully endowed with devotion and I have all 
essential requisites. What benefit is in store for me in the 
future, I do not know, O leading sages. Therefore, I have 
ignored Somesvara and became devouted to this deity 
(Kedaresvara). 

Isvara said: 

55. On hearing this, those Brahmanas wondered much. 
With their eyes beaming, they said: “Excellent!Excellent!” They 
praised the king. 

56. They always worshipped that self-born Linga. Thanks 
to the favour of this Linga, the most excellent king attained 
great Siddhi inaccessible even to Devas. 

57. Thanks to the favour of the holy Sivaratri and the greatness 
of that Linga, the harlot became the celestial lady Rarh- 
bha. 

58. Hence a sensible man should adore that Linga with all 
means and efforts, if he desires Purusarthas viz. virtue, love, 
wealth and salvation. The deity bestows everything. 




VII.I.40.1-9 


239 


CHAPTER FORTY 

Bhimesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-2. Then, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to the 
Linga of great power installed by Svetaketu. It was propitiated 
earlier by Bhlma. 

It is in the vicinity of Kedaresvara and is installed not very 
far therefrom. 

One should worship it in accordance with the injunctions 
in due order, by means of bathing with milk etc. The pilgrim 
desirous of getting the benefit of the pilgrimage (here) and 
the benefit of heavenly pleasures after death, should do so. 


The Devi said: 

3. O Lord, you have mentioned about the Linga of Svetaketu. 
How did it come to be named Bhimesvara also? 

4. How was it evolved before? What is the benefit of view¬ 
ing it? 


Isvara said: 

5. Formerly, in the course of the Svayambhuya Manvantara 
in Treta Yuga there was a king well-known as Svetaketu. The 
saintly king had performed a very severe penance. 

6. He came to Prabhasa, installed Mahesvara and.P^ ed 
a very severe penance on the splendid shore of the oceam 

7 This continued for fourteen years. During the sum 
he practised the Pancagni <i.e. four fires 
sides and the sun blared above when he 
ance). During rainy season he rematned under the open ) 

During winter, he remained in hi hly pleased with 

8. In the fourteenth gUdess, .1 told 

his penance and observance o boon.” 

him, “O sage of good holy ntes,dm ^ ^ # steady devo . 

tion. If^heLordis pleaTed! do stay behind in this holy spot. 


240 


Skanda Purana 


10-11. After saying "So be it”, I vanished there. Later on 
Svetaketu of great refulgence propitiated this Linga and at¬ 
tained highly prosperous state. Thereupon, It became well- 
known by the name Svetaketvisvara. 

" 12-14. It was in the highly meritorious Agnitirtha that is 
destructive of all sins. Thereafter, when Kali Yuga 1 (?) arrived, 
in the course of his pilgrimage the mighty Bhimasena, the son 
of Vayu, born of a part of mine came to Prabhasa. Realizing 
that the Tlrtha is highly meritorious, he installed his own deity 
Jagesvara near the sea, but adored that Linga. 

15-16. Ever since then the splendid name of the Linga was 
Bhlmesa. O beautiful lady, if that Linga is viewed even once, 
all the sins committed in earlier births perish. So also those 
(committed) hereafter. 


CHAPTER FORTYONE 

Bhairavesvara 




Isvara said: 

1-3. To the east thereof and to the south-east of Somesa, 
there is a Linga of great power, installed by Sarasvati. 

The Vadava fire kept in a pot in the form of Bhairavesvara, 
was brought by the goddess near the sea. 

She left it for a moment to take rest and then the Linga was 
installed. After worshipping it in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions, she took the Vadava fire and cast it into the Sea with 
a desire for the welfare of the Devas. 

4. Thereupon, the Devas became extremely pleased. They 
adored the goddess with showers of flowers and filled the sky 
with the sounds of Sahkha and Dundubhi drums. 

5-6. The Suras named her Devamald (Mother of the Devas) 
and said to her: “You have accomplished a terrific task that 
cou d not be accomplished by Devas and Danavas and installed 


1. Ii must be Dvapara Yuga when Pandavas lived and ruled. 





VII.1.41.7-9—42.1-6 


241 


here the Linga of great power. You are the most excellent of 
all rivers and the destroyer of all sins. Hence this Linga will 
become famous by the name Bhairava.” 

7-9. On being told thus, the goddess stationed herself in 
the form of an image to the south-east of Bhairavesvara on the 
charming shore of the ocean. 

A pilgrim should worship her as well as Bhairavesvara in 
accordance with the injunction on the MahanavamI day with 
great effort. After duly bathing and worshipping Sarasvati, one 
becomes rid of all defects of speech. 

If the Linga is adored after bathing it with milk, uttering the 
Aghora Mantra duly, one will get the benefit of the pilgrimage. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 

Candlsa 


Isvara said: 

1. Then a pilgrim should go over to the excellent Lord 
Candisa, O great goddess. It is situated within a distance of 
seven Dhanus to the north-east of Somesa. 

2. It was installed by Candrformerly not far from the abode 
of Dandapani. It was then adored by Canda. 

3. After performing a very difficult penance, O goddess of 
Devas, Canda, a Gana of mine, propitiated it. Therefore, the 
Linga became well-known all over the earth as Candesvara. 

4. The pilgrim should at the outset bathe the Linga with 
Payas (milk, water), then with curds mixed with ghee, then 
with honey and sugarcane juice. He should smear it with Kumkuma 

(saffron). . 

5. Then he should apply the liquefied musk mixed with 
camphor and Usira (Khus). Sweet-scented sandalpaste is then 
applied. The pilgrim should then adore it with flowers. 

6. O goddess, incense and agallocham should be fumigated 
before the Lord. Thereafter, garments are offered during the 
worship in accordance with one s wealth. 


242 


Skanda Purana 


7 The “best cooked rice”' (sweet rice pudding) is offered 
as Naivedya along with a lamp. Thereafter, the pilgrim should 
give monetary gifts to Brahmanas within his capacity. 

8 O beautiful lady, the pilgrim should face the southern 
quarter. Whatever is offered then to Candisa, shall become 

everlasting in its benefit. , 

9 If the pilgrim performs Svcidclhci on the right side of 

Candisa, O beautiful lady, the Pitps become satisfied for the 
period of a Kalpa. 

10. In the course of the Utlardyana (northern transit of the 
Sun) the pilgrim should perform the rite of Ghrtakambala (wool¬ 
like thick application of ghee over the idol or Liiiga). He will 
never again take up the terrible worldly birth. 

11. Thus, the pilgrim performs the Yatra (pilgrimage) of 
the Trident-bearing Lord. Thereby the creature becomes rid 
of various sins such as those caused by overstepping the rem¬ 
nants of the adoration of Siva, eating unwittingly the prohib¬ 
ited food etc. All the entanglaments due to earlier Karmas 
perish (get dissolved). 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 

Adityesvara 


Isvara said: 

1. Then, O beautiful lady, a pilgrim should go to the shrine 
named Adityesvara, destructive of all sins. The Liiiga was installed 
by Surya (the Sun god) himself. It is situated within a distance 
of seven Dhanus to the west of Somesa. 

2. O beautiful woman, O my beloved, O great goddess, 
the Linga was worshipped by the noble-souled Ocean in Tretayuga 
for a period of ten thousand years. 

3. Therefore, now it is well-known over the earth by the 
name Ratnesvara. The deity should be bathed with Pancamrta 
and worshipped with five jewels. 


1. Paramanna - Rice boiled in milk and mixed with sugar. 





VII.I.4S.4rlO—44.1-2 


24S 


4. Then the man should duly worship it with all royal 
offerings of services. If it is done so, O great goddess, one shall 
obtain the benefit of Merudana (gifting the great mountain 
Meru). 

5. There is no doubt in this that he will get the merit of 
performing all Yajnas and Danas. 

6. He shall get the fruit of (pilgrimage to) all TIrthas and 
he will derive ever)' merit on the earth. The man will redeem 
all the generations on his father’s side as well as on the mother’s 
side. 

7. By viewing Ratnesvara, a man shall wash off all the sins 
committed during childhood, youth and old age. 

8. Great sages praise Dhenu Dana (gift of cows) at that 
holy spot. The donor of cows redeems ten preceding and ten 
succeeding generations certainly. 

9. He who worships the Lihga duly and performs th cjapa 
of the Satarudriya on the right side of the deity is never bom 
again. 

10. Thus, the great prosperity arising from Adityesa has 
been succinctly spoken. It should be listened to attentively and 
retained carefully. The pilgrim is rid of the bondage due to 
his Karmas. 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 

Somesvara 


Isvara said: 

1. After adoring Adityesa, a pilgrim should once again go 
to Somesvara and worship the deity duly with all five ancillary 

2. After viewing Somesvara, the pilgrim prostrates (before 
the deity) and then circumambulates (it). Agam he should 
view the Lord repeatedly. A pilgrim who, with purity 
circumambulates the Linga of (installed by ^Sun “d >he 
Moon gets the same benefit as when Ag^foma rite has been 

performed by him. 


244 


Shanda Purana 


3-4. Then the pilgrim proceeds to goddess Uma in the 
vicinity of Somesvara. He should also proceed to a second 
image of the goddess in the vicinity of Dailyasudana (Visnu). 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 

Arigaresvara 


Isvara said: 


1-4. Then, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to the 
excellent Arigaresvara established by the Son of the Earth (or 
Mangala) on the north-east of Somesa. 

Formerly, O lady of excellent countenance, I was desirous 
of burning down the Tripuras. Due to anger, tears came out 
of all the three eyes. They fell down and therefrom arose 
Bhumiputra (Mars). 


He went to Prabhasa and ever since his childhood, he pro¬ 
pitiated Sankara for many years, by means of his penance. 

O my beloved, Mahadeva was pleased with him. With his 
soul extremely delighted he granted him a boon. 

5. He said: O Lord, O Bull-emblemed One, if you are 
pleased, grant me the state of being a planet. O Lord of all, 
I am not eager to have any other boon." 

6-9. He (the Lord) promised: “So it shall be” and again 
spoke to him these words: “A man who comes here and de¬ 
voutly adores me will never get afflicted by you at all. The 
devotee should perform Homa with many red flowers soaked 
in honey and ghee with great devotion before the deity. With 
the mode of offering the five types of services, he should strenuously 
worship you. For the whole of that life, he will never get troubled 
by you. Further, through the gift of a piece of coral, he will 
get the desired benefit.” 

, x }°\ ^ fter saying thus the Lord vanished here itself. Bhauma 
(Mars) shines amongst the Planets by means of the aerial chariot. 

us, the excellent greatness of Bhauma has been 
succinctly spoken. On being listened to it dispels sins and 
yields freedom from illness. 




VII. 1.46.1-7—47.1-3 


245 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 

Budhesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Then, O great goddess, a pilgrim should proceed to¬ 
wards the Lihga of great efficacy well-known as Budhesvara. 

It is situated to the north of it (Angaresvara) not very far, 
say within a couple of Dhanus in distance, O beautiful lady. 

This Lihga dispels all sins by its mere vision. O goddess of 
Devas, Budha (Mercury) performed a great penance there and 
this pure Lihga was installed. He then propitiated Sadasiva. 

4. Worshipping the Lord for forty thousand years in accor¬ 
dance with the injunctions, he kept his mind quiescent without 
straying into anything else. He had the direct vision of Bhava 
(Siva). 

5. Pleased with him, the Lord granted him the status of 
being a Planet. The devotee who worships the deity installed 
by the son of Soma (i.e. Budha) especially on a Wednesday 
coinciding with the eighth lunar day derives the fruit of (per¬ 
forming) Rajasuya sacrifice. 

6. Due to the favour of the deity, no one in the family of 
the devotee becomes wretched or separated from near and 
dear ones. He will never have any cause to fear from enemies. 

7. Thus, the greatness of the deity installed by Budha has 
been succinctly spoken. One who listens to it, delights in it and 
remains pure attains the greatest region. 


CHAPTER FORTY5EVEN 
Brhaspatisvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Then, O great goddess, a devotee should go over to 
the Lord resorted to by Guru (Jupiter). It is situated to the east 
of Uma and south-east of Siddhesa. 

This great Lihga was installed by the Preceptor of Devas. 


246 


Skanda Purina 


With great devotion, he propitiated the Linga for a thousand 
years and pleased Sarva, the consort of Uma, the Lord oi the 
Devas. He attained all the cherished desires inaccessible to 

those who have no self-control. 

4. Now he has the knowledge pertaining to Isvara and the 
state of being adorable by Devas. He has attained the status 
of a planet.' He rejoices in heaven only. 

5-7. A man who views that Lord, never meets with a dis¬ 
tressed condition. The affliction brought about by an adverse 
Brhaspati will never torment those excellent men who view the 
Linga installed by Brhaspati. 

O my beloved, one who duly worships the Linga with royal 
attendance and service, or with devotional fervour, on the 
fourteenth lunar day in the bright half coinciding with a Thursday 
attains the greatest region. 

8. The man who ritualistically bathes the deity with a thousand 
Palas of Pancamrta devoutly, is rid of the three types of indebt¬ 
edness. 

9. O goddess, he becomes purified of all sins inherited 
from or pertaining to his mother, father or preceptor. He is 
rid of all Dvandvas (mutually opposed pairs such as pleasure- 
pain) and he attains salvation. 

10. Thus, the greatness of the deity pertaining to (i.e. resorted 
to by) Guru has been succinctly described. He who listens to 
thiswithdevotional fervour. Guru will become pleased with him. 


CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 

Sukresvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Then, O Great Goddess, a pilgrim should go towards 
the Linga installed by Sukra, to the west of Vibhutlsvara. 

It dispels all sins. It is not far off and it has been created 
by Sukra himself.. At this holy spot, thanks to the power of 
Rudra, he obtained the Vidya (secret formula) called Sanjlvanl. 
The wise one performed a very severe penance for a thousand 




VII-I.48.4-11—49.1-3 


247 


years and propitiated the Odd (three)-eyed Lord. He then attained 
the status of a Planet. 

4. He was swallowed by Sambhu for the sake of accom¬ 
plishing some task of the Devas. Even as Sukra was held inside 
the belly, he performed a very severe penance. 

5. When more than ten thousand years elapsed Mahesvara 
was pleased. Thereafter, he was discharged quickly by Sambhu 
through the seminal path (tube). 

6-7. Thereupon, the noble-souled Bhargava got the name 
Sukra. The devotee shall keep his mind steady and propitiate 
the Liiiga. He shall repeat the Mrtyuhjaya Mantra (death-defy¬ 
ing formula) one hundred thousand times. He shall (thereby) 
obtain what is desired. 

8. By viewing him and touching him, O beautiful woman, 
a man becomes rid of all sins committed from birth till death. 

9-11. A person whose devotion is highly steady shall un¬ 
doubtedly obtain the power of Mrtasaiijivana (resuscitating the 
dead) and Anima (becoming as small as an atom) and other 
supernatural powers (Siddhis). 

A devotee who bathes the deity installed by Sukra with Pancamrta 
and worships with sweet-smelling flowers, will never have semi¬ 
nal affliction. 

Thus the greatness of the deity installed by Sukra has been 
fully described to you, O lady of excellent buttocks. On being 
heard, it dispels the fear resulting from sins. 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 

Sanaiscaresvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. From that Sukresvara shrine, O Goddess, a pilgrim 
should go to the highly lustrous Liriga named Sanaiscaresvara. 

It is destructive of all great sins. 

It is to the west of Budhesvara and to the south-east of 
AjadevI from which it is not very far. It is situated only Five 
Dhanus away. 

It is a Kalpa Liriga (i.e. existing ever since the beginning of 


248 


Slianda Purana 


the Kalpa), O Great Goddess, worshipped by Devas and Danavas. 
A very severe and most difficult penance was performed by the 
Son of Chaya (i.e. Saturn or Sani). 

4. The Lord without beginning or death was brought down 
to the Linga by him. Due to his devotion to Sambhu, he gained 
his favour and the status of a Planet. 

5-7. The great community of Devas and Asuras is afraid of 
his (adverse) look. In the whole of the Cosmos consisting of 
mobile and immobile beings, there is no living being, Deva or 
Danava who is not afflicted by Sauri (i.e. Saturn). 

The devotee should worship Saurisvara Siva devoutly on 
Saturdays with Sami leaves and rice cooked with gingelly seeds, 
black gram and jaggery. After offering libations in accordance 
with the injunctions, he should offer a black bull to a Brahmana. 

8. The deity may be eulogized with hymns of diverse kinds 
taken from the Puranas and Srutis. Or it is possible to propi¬ 
tiate the Lord of Devas with a single hymn. 

9. Lord Saurisvara should be eulogized with a single Stotra 
composed by the powerful King Dasaratha. The Lord should 
be eulogized for the sake of subduing all afflictions. 

The Devi said: 

10. How did King Dasaratha compose the hymn of Sanaiscara? 
How did Lord Sanaiscara become pleased with him? 

Isvara said: 

11. There was a very powerful king named Dasaratha in 
the dynasty of Raghu. He was a very well-known emperor, a 
former overlord of the seven continents. 

12-13. When Sani was at the extremity of Krttika the king 
was informed by astrologers: “Now Sani will pierce through 
RohinI and go beyond. This is what is called Sakatabheda 1 which 
causes fright even to Suras and Asuras. There will be an ex¬ 
tremely disastrous famine lasting for twelve years.” 

14-15. On hearing the words of the astrologer-sage he in 
the company of his ministers saw the entire world including 


1. The shape of the constellation RohinI is like a cart (Sakata). 





VII.I.49.16-28 


249 


the citizens and rural folk got agitated. People said: “This always 
occurs regularly. The lands, cities, and villages become terri¬ 
fied all round”. The king asked the sages beginning with Vasistha: 

Dasaratha said: 

16. O most excellent one among Brahmanas, what is the 
solution of this problem? 

Vasistha said: 

17. When the constellation pertaining to Prajapati (i.e. RohinI) 
is pierced, how can the subjects (survive)? This combination 
(of planets etc.) has no remedy to be devised by Brahma, Indra 
and others too among the Suras. 

18-19. The king pondered over it and decided to take a 
great risk. He took up his divine bow fitted with divine missiles. 
He got into his divine golden chariot and hurried towards the 
stellar zone. 

20. His chariot was adorned with jewels. It was decorated 
with banners, Camaras, umbrellas and tinkling bells. There was 
a lofty flagstaff there. It was fitted with swan-coloured horses. 

21. Dazzling with great jewels and refulgent with coronets, 
he shone in the sky like another Sun. 

22-23. He bent the bow as far as his ears after fitting it 
with a Samharastra (destructive missile). He saw that Sani had 
already come to the extremity of Krttika and was about to 
enter RohinI. Dasaratha stood before him with knitted eye¬ 
brows. Sani looked at the Samharastra that could suppress Suras 
and Asuras. 

24-26. After laughing (to himself), Saturn spoke these words 
(as though) out of fear for it: “O great king, your manliness 
is terrifying to your foes. I looked at the Devas, Asuras, human 
beings, Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Uragas etc. and found all of them 
terrified. I am now pleased with your bravery and the power 
of penance, O great king. Tell me what boon you will like to 
have. I shall grant you whatever you desire. 

Dasaratha said: 

27-28. O Sani, as long as the rivers and oceans are in 




250 


Skanda Pur ana 


existence, as long as the moon, sun and earth are present, you 
must not pierce through Rohini and go beyond. 

O Sauri, no other boon is desired from you by me. 

On being told thus, Sani granted him a boon of permanent 

29 After receiving this boon, the king became gratified. 
Sauri once again told him, “O king of excellent holy rites, 
choose your boon.” 

30-31. (The king) delighted in his mind requested for this 
boon from Sani: “O son of Bhaskara, the Sakata (Cart-shaped 
constellation, Rohini) should not be pierced through by you. 
Never should the famine lasting for twelve years be caused. 
This fame of mine shall spread all over the three worlds.” 

Isvara said: 

32-33. The king experienced horripilation on receiving the 
two boons. He put the bow in the chariot and stood with palms 
joined in reverence. Meditating on Goddess Sarasvatl and Vinayaka, 
the leader of Ganas, King Dasaratha composed this prayer of 
Sauri (Sani). 

The king said: 

(King Dasaratha 1 s prayer to Saturn) 

34. Obeisance to the blue-rayed one, to the one resem¬ 
bling a blue lotus. Obeisance to one with the body bereft of 
flesh, to one with long beard and matted hairs. 

35. O dry (lean)-bellied one, O terrible one, obeisance to 
the one with large eyes. Obeisance to the rough-limbed one. 
Obeisance to the thick-haired one. 

36. Obeisance to one, always distressed with hunger. Obei¬ 
sance to one who is satisfied always. Obeisance to one in the 
form of Kalagni (Black fire i.e. Fire at the end of the world). 

37. Obeisance to the long one, to the dry one. O black- 
eyed one, (I offer) obeisance to you. Obeisance to the hollow- 
eyed one. Obeisance to one very difficult to look at. 

38. Obeisance to the frightening one, to the terrible one, 
to the awe-inspiring one, to the appalling one. Obeisance to 





VII.I.49.39-49 


251 


you the all-consuming one. Obeisance to you, O wrinkle-faced 
one. 

39. Obeisance to you, O son of the Sun-god. O Bhaskari, 
the frightening one. O one with downcast eyes, obeisance to 
you, O one black in body, obeisance to you. 

40. Obeisance to you, O slow-gaited one. Obeisance! Obeisance 
to the pitiless one. Obeisance to you, the fierce-formed one. 
Obeisance to you fierce in refulgence. 

41. Obeisance to the one always burnt with penance. Obeisance 
to one always sitting in Yogic posture. Obeisance to you with 
vision of knowledge, the offspring of the son of Kasyapa (Sun- 
god). 

42-45. When pleased, you grant a kingdom; when angry 
you deprive one of it in and instant. 

Devas, Asuras, and human beings, beasts, birds and reptiles 
looked at (adversely) by you, O Sauri, immediately become 
wretched. 

Brahma, Sakra, Yama, the seven redeeming sages—all these 
become ousted from their kingdoms on being glared at by your 
eyes. 

The lands, cities, villages, continents, and mountains—when 
looked at with horrible eyes perish in an instant. 

46. Be favourable to me, O Sauri, I have resorted to you 
for the sake of boons. O Sauri, forgive my fault for the sake 
of the welfare of all living beings. 


Isvara said: 

47. On being eulogized thus by King Dasaratha, Sani, the 
son of Sun, the king of Planets, spoke these words with hairs 
standing on ends: 


Sani said: 

48. O great king of good holy rites, O scion of the family 
of Raghu, I am pleased with this prayer of thine. Tell me what 
boon you will like to have; I shall grant that voluntari >. 


Dasaratha said: 

49. O tawny-eyed one, from now onwards no one should 



2^2 Skanda Purana 

be afflicted, none among the Devas, Asuras and human beings, 
among beasts, birds and reptiles. 

Sani said: 

50. I should be known as an evil Planet among all the 
Planets. 1 cause affliction as a Planet. O king, something that 
should not be given has been requested for. I am ready to 
grant something which is appiopiiate. 

51-53. To men or women who recite the hymn composed 
by you on me after being afflicted with fear of mine, to Devas, 
Asuras and human beings, to Siddhas, Vidyadharas and Uragas 
I shall grant permanent welfare. I may be staying in the House 
of Death or I may be in the House of Nativity (in their horo¬ 
scopes), they should recite the hymn once or twice a day, the 
devotee should worship me and repeat the Stotra in all rever¬ 
ence with palms joined together. 

54. I will not cause affliction to him at any time whether 
I am present in the House of Nativity or in the House of Death 
(in his horoscope). 

55. I shall always grant him protection from other Planets 
too and their affliction in the Constellation of Nativity or Lagna 
or in the Darns (aspects of Planets) or sub-Dasas. 

56. In this manner he shall be rid of afflictions. Thus the 
boon asked for by you has been granted by me, O scion of 
Raghu’s family. 

Jsvara said: 

57. After acquiring the pair of boons formerly. King Dasaratha 
considered himself blessed. He bowed to Sanaiscara with rev¬ 
erence. 

58. After eulogizing Sani and on being permitted by him, 
the powerful king got into his chariot and went back to his 
abode. He was duly honoured by the Heaven-dwellers. 

59. If any man gets up early in the morning on a Saturday 
and recites this Stotra he will never suffer from affliction caused 
by any Planet. 

60. One should always remember Lord Sanaiscara with 
great devotion. One should recite the Stotra after adoration. 
The Son of Bhaskara (Sani) becomes pleased with him. 

61. Thus, O goddess, the greatness pertaining to the deity 




253 


VII-I.50.I-8—51.1-3 

Sani (or deity installed by Sani) has been told to you. It sup¬ 
presses all sins. It yields all the desired benefits. 


CHAPTER FIFTY 
Greatness of Rahvlsvara 


Uvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, the pilgrim should pro¬ 
ceed to the Lihga well installed by Rahu to the north-west of 
Sanaiscara. 

It is situated within a distance of seven Dhanus to the north 
of Ajadevl. It is also in the vicinity of Mahgala, not very far off. 

The Lihga installed by Saimhikeya (Rahu) is of great effi¬ 
cacy. Vaipracitti (Rahu) performed a penance there for a thousand 

years. 

4-5. That mighty and great Asura, Svarbhanu, adept in 
crooked Fighting propitiated the great Lord by means of his 
wonderful penance and caused Mahesvara, the light of the 
Universe, to come down in the Lihga. 

He who worships it with devotion and views it clearly shall 
get his sin reduced to nothing, even if it be the result of 
Brahmana-slaughter. 

6. If he is viewed, the devotee, the man, never becomes 

blind, deaf, dumb, sick or poor. 

7 He becomes handsome and richly endowed wi P 
piness and conjugal felicity. With all his desires richly realized, 

Hp reioices like 3. Dcvzi in heaven. 

8. Thus, O goddess, the greatness of the deity installedby 

Rahu has been spoken to you. One listening to this, c 
of delusion and becomes free from sins. 


CHAPTER FIFTYONE 
Greatness of Ketvlsvra 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Then, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to Ketuhnga 


254 


Skanda Purana 


of great lustre. It is on the north of Rahvlsana ancl the south 
of Marigala. 

It is situated not very far off, say, within a few Dhanus. This 
Linga is of great efficacy and is destructive of all sins. 

The Planet named Ketu is extremely ferocious but sanctified 
by means of Sivasadbhava (good feelings towards Lord Siva). 
He is extremely terrible with round large eyes. 

4. He resembles in colour smoke emitted by burning straws, 
dispels the afflictions caused by evil Planets, and O my be¬ 
loved, he performed a severe penance there for a hundred 
years according to divine reckoning. 

5. Mahadeva was pleased with him and granted him the 
status of a Planet and also the overlordship of eleven hundred 
Grahas (Planets). 

6-7. At the time of the terrible rise of Ketu, especially 
when he is seen, and also during the horrible afflictions caused 
by evil Planets, one should worship the deity in accordance 
with the injunctions. 

The devotee should adore the deity with flowers, sweet scents, 
incense and splendid Naivedyas of various kinds. 

8. Heshouldduly propitiate Lord Ketu, the destroyer of sins. 

9. Thus Ketulinga granting great prosperity has been succinctly 
mentioned. It suppresses the afflictions caused by the Planets 
and destroys all sins. 

10. Thus the nine Lingas of the Planets have been spoken 
to you. If a man views them all everyday, whence can he have 
the fear of afflictions? 

11. O goddess, wretchedness never occurs in his family. No 
sick or miserable one is born in his family. The great Planets 
protect him like a son. 

• Thu !’ ° m y beloved, the fourteen shrines beginning 
with Vighnesvara and ending with the shrine installed by Ketu, 
have been described to you. 

13. The greatness of the deities of the nine Planets is 
destructive of sms. So also is that of the five Lirigas. By listen¬ 
ing to it, one is rid of all sins. 

nit k A man dCVOid ° f merits never knows th e five Mudrd 

£ 5 eginning with Kapardin and ending with Candandtha. 

with Sn °,° neese °ws the Lingas of the nine Planets beginning 
with Suryesvara and ending with Ketulinga. 



VII. 1-51.16—52.1-7 53.1-4 


255 


16. Thus the fourteen types of shrine setting have been 
described. He who attentively knows this, attains the benefit 
of (visiting) the holy spots. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTWO 

Greatness of Siddhesvara 


Isvara said: 


1-2. O glorious lady, I shall describe to you the five Siddha 
Lingas, which on being seen make the pilgrimage of men fruit¬ 
ful or perfectly accomplished. 

Lord Siddhesvara is stationed to the east of the deity re¬ 
membered as Vararoha situated to the north-east of Somesa. 
A man who visits with devotion this great Siddhesvara shall 


acquire supernatural powers like Anima etc. 

3. By devoutly viewing the Linga installed by Siddhas, a 
man is rid of all sins. He goes to the Siddhaloka. 

4-6. All obstacles of the residents of those holy spots are 
destroyed. The obstacles are lust, anger, fear, covetousness, 
passion, rivalry, jealousy, hypocrisy, lethargy, drowsiness, delu¬ 
sion and egotism. These are obstacles to the achievement of 

(SP By worshipping °the Siddhesvaras there all these obstacles 
disappear. One should undertake the pilgrimage strenuously 

a T“o iS g o V drf-the great rise and prosperity 
of Siddhesvara has been spoken. U yields 
sires unto men. If listened to (attentive y), i 
sins. 


CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 

Greatness of Kapilesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Then, O great goddess, a pilgrim 


should go to the 


256 Skanda Purana 

excellent shrine of Kapilesvara. It is stationed not far from it 
(i.e. Siddhesvara) in the eastern quarter. 

This Lihga is of very great power. It destroys sins by its very 
sight. A saintly king named Kapila performed a great penance 
there after installing Mahesvara. He attained great Siddhi (spiritual 
achievement). Hari always worships Isana in the presence of 
the Devas in that Lihga. 

Especially on the fourteenth lunar day in the bright half of 
a month, he worships, Mahadeva seven times, for the sake of 
the welfare of all the worlds. 

One who remains pure and clean and visits Somesa named 
Kapilesvara shall attain the merit of gifting cows. 

5. O my beloved, one who is mentally pure and offers 
Tiladhenu (cow made of gingelly seeds) in that holy spot, remains 
in heaven for as many Yugas as there are gingelly seeds. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 

Greatness of Gandharvesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Then, O great goddess, one should go to the excel¬ 
lent Gandharvesvara. It is situated very near, to the north of 
the abode of Dandapani. 

It was here that the king of Gandharvas well-known as Ghanavdha 
(ruled). His daughter well-known as Gandharvasena was highly 
lustrous. 

She was arrogant due to her beauty and so was cursed by 
a Gana named Sikhandin. Thereupon, blessings were given to 
her by Sage Gosrnga. 

4-5. He directed her to propitiate Somesa by means of the 
Somavdra Vrata. Thereafter, the king of Gandharvas himself 
came to the holy spot and performed very difficult penance 
and installed a Lihga. Another Lihga was installed by his own 
daughter. 

6 7. O goddess of Devas, one who scrupulously worships 
the Lihga named Ghanavahesvara there itself in the vicinity of 
Dandapani and/or visits the deity, himself being clean and 




VII.I.54.8-9—55.1-5—56.1-3 


257 


pure, attains Gandharva world. Thus, O goddess, the excellent 
Gandharva Linga has been spoken to you. 

8-9. It is the third Linga (in this context). It is destructive 
of all sins and it increases merit. A man who bathes in the 
Agnitlrtha and worships the Linga adored by Gandharvas at 
the time of the northern transit of the Sun, attains salvation. 
By listening to and approving the greatness of it, one is rid of 
great danger. 


CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE 

Greatness of Vimalesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Then, O great goddess, one should go to Vimalesvara 
(stationed) to the east thereof. It is very near, not far from 
Gaurl’s shrine. 

It is situated on the south-west of Guru (Jupiter). It is de¬ 
structive of sins. Even after committing a great sin, a devotee, 
be it a woman or a man, becomes pure. 

Even one who is afflicted with pulmonary consumption, attains 
the destruction of all miseries by adoring the deity with devo¬ 
tion. He shall attain the region devoid of impurities. 

4. It was there that Gandharvasena who was afflicted with 
phthysis got rid of impurities. That Linga has become famous 
all the world over by the name Vimalesvara. 

5. Thus the greatness of Vimalesvara has been entirely 
spoken to you, O beautiful lady of Bhava. It is the fourth 
(Linga) destructive of all sins. 


CHAPTER FIFTYSIX 
Greatness of Dhanadesvara 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Henceforth I shall describe the fifth Siddha Linga of 


258 Skanda Purana 

great lustre. It is situated on the south-western side of Brahma 
at a distance of about sixteen bows. 

The Lihga installed by Dlianada (i.e. Kubera, the bestower 
of wealth) is near Rahulinga. Here he performed great pen¬ 
ance and attained the status of Dhanada (Giver of wealth). 

He installed the Lihga and duly worshipped it for a thou¬ 
sand years. With the favour of Sambhu, he became the Lord 
of Alaka. 

4-7. He remembered his previous birth and knowing the 
merit of supplying a wick for lamp and the power of Sivaratri, 
came to Prabhasa. 

Knowing the great power of it he installed Sankara. By means 
of penance, he made Sankara manifest. O great goddess, by 
means of his great devotion he caused Sankara to come down 
in that Lihga. A man of devotion should visit it and perform 
worship duly observing the five Upacdras (varieties of service) 
and offering scents, incense and unguents with great devotion. 
Never will a destitute person be born in his family. 

8-9. Those men who with devotion worship the Lihga be¬ 
come invincible to enemies whose arrogance they will destroy. 

Thus the greatness of Dhandesa has been fully spoken to 
you. By listening to this and approving of it, one shall avert 
poverty. 


CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN 

Greatness of Vararoha 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Thus, O my beloved, five Siddhalingas have been spo- 
ken to you. He who understands this convention is called Ksetravasin 
(a resident of holy spot). 

Henceforth, I shall describe in detail the three Saktis of 
u to y° u - They are: Iccha (Volition), Jnana (Knowledge) 
and Kriya (Action) of the Lingas mentioned to you previously. 
Listen to the sequence of their worship. A devotee duly wor¬ 
ships fourteen, five, four, three or one in accordance with his 
capacity and thereafter adores the three Saktis. 




VTI.1.57.5-18 


259 


5. The deity stationed on the north-east of Somesa and 
remembered as Vararoha is the digit Amd of Soma (Moon). It 
is later glorified as Uma. 

6. The deity is to be known as Iccha Sakti. She is stationed 
in Prabhasa Ksetra, O goddess, for the welfare of all the living 
beings on the earth. 

7-9. Now I shall fully narrate the greatness of that deity 
to you. O lady of excellent countenance, a penance was per¬ 
formed by the twenty-six wives ignored and abandoned by Soma. 
For many years according to the divine reckoning, Gauri was 
propitiated in the splendid holy spot of Prabhasa. ParvatT, the 
great goddess, became manifest to them and said: “I am the 
bestower of boons. Do tell me what has been thought of in 
your minds.” 

10-11. Then they said: “O goddess Parvati, if you are pleased, 
grant unto us the utmost conjugal felicity and excellent love¬ 
liness. O splendid goddess, though guiltless, all of us have 
been deserted by our Lord and master. We have been scorched 
by the fault of unluckiness and afflicted by adverse fate.” 


Gauri said: 

12. From now onwards the Lord of the Night (Soma) will 
treat all of you alike, with my favour. O ladies of exquisitely 
beautiful limbs, this will never be false. 

13-16. On account of this granting of the boon, my name 
will be Varada. If any woman comes here and adores me, the 
splendid one, the women in her family will never meet with 
bad luck. 

A woman of excellent hips who observes fast on the third 
lunar day in the month of Magha and views me, will be on a 
par with me. 

A woman who scrupulously offers garments to sixteen coup es 
and feeds them with fruits and various foodstuffs as well as 
sixteen types of sweetmeats will definitely become Uma. 

17. A woman of ill-luck and one who has not yet given 
birth to any child, should perform this holy rite named Gaunvrata 
on the third lunar day. 

18. A man who performs this Vrata frequently shall obtain 
the desired things. 


260 


Skanda Parana 


After saying this, that goddess of beautiful eyes stood by. 

19-21. The Lord of the Night began to treat all of them 
as he treated Rohini. Another woman scorched by misery and 
blighted by misfortune worshipped Goddess Uma and she became 
happy and lucky thereafter. 

Thus the greatness of Sakti has been succinctly described. 
The name Vararoha of thine, has been mentioned in the holy 
spot of Somesvara. It causes the destruction of all sins and of 
poverty of all sorts. 


CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT 


Greatness of Ajapalesvari 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Henceforth, O goddess, I shall describe unto you the 
Sakti of the nature of Kriya (Action). It is stationed in Prabhasa 
as the great goddess bestowing pleasure on Devas. 

The deity is situated within a distance of sixty Dhanus in the 
north-west direction of Somesvara. O great goddess, the ped¬ 
estal there is honoured by groups of Yoginls. 

At that spot, O goddess, there is a great Pdtala Vivara (the 
great crevice leading to the nether worlds). In that highly 
lustrous spot, she is stationed for protection and security. 

One engaged in adoring that deity shall obtain excellent 
medicines and valuable treasures of Patala, present in the centre 
of the holy spot. 

5. The earlier name of that goddess was Bhairavl. 

There was a king named Ajapala in the beginning of the 

Treta Yuga of the twenty-eighth set of four Yugas (Caturyuga) 
in this Manvantara. 

6. O beautiful woman, he was afflicted by diseases. So he 
came to this holy spot. Goddess Bhairavl was adored by him 
in this Ksetra for five hundred years. 

7- The goddess who was pleased said to that excellent 
king. Do not strain yourself, O saintly king, I am pleased with 
your devotion.” 




V1I.I.58.8-21 


261 


8. On being told thus, the wise king joined his palms together 
With his eyes dimmed with tears of joy, he bowed down and 
said to the goddess: 

9. “O goddess, if you are pleased with me and if I deserve 
boons, may all the ailments in my body be destroyed and expelled.” 

10. On being told thus the goddess said to the king again: 
“O great king, all will happen as mentioned now.” 

11. As soon as it was uttered by the goddess, all the ail¬ 
ments came out severally from the body of the king in the form 
of goats. 

12. These were definitely five thousand fifty of them. When 
this happened, the king was again addressed by the goddess: 

13. “O king, take full care of these ailments in the forms 
of goats. They will be your servants carrying out your behests. 

14. Your name will become well-known in the world as 
Ajapala and after your name, my name Ajapalesvari shall spread 
over the earth till the Caluryuga is complete. 

15. When pleased, 1 shall undoubtedly grant eightfold Aisvarya 
(prosperity and power) to the person who adores me here on 
the eighth and fourteenth lunar days. 

16. On the eighth lunar day in the bright half of the month 
of Asvayuj, the devotee should circumambulate Somesa three 
times. He should keep me in the centre, bathe me and adore 
me separately. No fear or sorrow shall befall him, O king, for 
three years. 

17. A barren woman, a sick one and an unlucky one should 
perform worship in front of me on the ninth lunar day of the 
half andmonth mentionedbefore. Itshall enhance her pleasure. 

Isvara said: 

18-19. After saying this, the goddess vanished there itself. 
Staying in the middle of the holy spot of Prabhasa Ksetra, that 
king of unequalled valour righteously reared those transforma¬ 
tions of ailments into goats. He fed them with various kinds 
of medicinal herbs causing their nourishment. 

20. The goats were nourished thus for more than a hun¬ 
dred years. A big place for storage was built by Ajapala. 

21. Then due to her (the deity’s) favour the king became 
extremely valorous. An ornament unto the solar race, he became 
the Lord of all the seven continents. 


262 


Skanda Pur ana 


The Devi said: 

22-23. O Lord, this origin of the goddess Aja is wonderful. 
I wish to know further the great, miraculous story of tiat king. 
O Lord of Devas, how did that king rule the earth consisting 
of seven continents by himself alone? How were those Ail¬ 
ments kept? 


Isvara said: 

24 Formerly there was a saintly king well-known as Dilipa. 
His son was DTrgha (?) and Raghu was born of him 1 . 

25. Aja was the son of Raghu. He excelled him in valour. 
By propitiating Bhairavl, he transformed the ailments into groups 

of goats. „ - , i 

26. With great delight he reared them. Therefore, he be¬ 
came Ajapala. Ravana was the king of Raksasas at that time. 

27. Residing in Lanka, he employed groups of Suras in his 
own service. He made the Moon of complete disc, his own 


umbrella. 

28. He made Indra the chief of his army, Vayu, the sweeper 
of dust particles, Varuna, one engaged in carrying messages, 
and Dhanada cashier in-charge of monetary affairs. 

29. He employed Yama for curbing and controlling his 
enemies, and Manu as counsellor. Clouds vomited (showered) 
and smeared (?). The trees scattered flowers. 

30. The Saptarsis (seven sages) of quiescent disposition 
were appointed as the Brahmanas, speaking pleasing things. 
Nagas (Serpents) were put in the guardroom and Gandharvas 
were made to attend musical performance. 

31. The group of celestial damsels was engaged in dra¬ 
matic performance. Vidyadharas were assigned musical instru¬ 
ments. Ganga and other rivers were made in-charge of prepa¬ 
ration of beverages. Hutasana (Fire-god) was given the charge 
of Garhapatya (culinary duties). 

32. The divine architect Visvakarman was engaged by him 
in Arigasamskara (the duties of a barber for massage etc.). All 
the kings stood before him ready to serve him. 


1. Dilipa was the father of Raghu according to VR and Mbh. “Dirgha" is 
a new name not traceable (as Dilipa’s son) both in VR and Mbh. 





VII. 1.58.33-46 


263 


33-34. They faltered in their steps due to their dazzling 
jewels. On seeing them, Ravana said to Prahasta, his door¬ 
keeper: “Tell me, who have all come to my place in order to 
render service?”. 

The demon-attendant armed with his staff bowed before 
him and said: 

35'-36. “This is Kakutstha, this is Mandhata, this Dhundhu- 
mara, this Nala, this Arjuna, Yayati, Nahusa, Bhlma, Viduratha 
the scion of the family of Raghu—these and many other kings 
have come here to your place for rendering services. But Ajapala 
has not come here.” 

37. The furious Ravana said: “Send a messenger quickly.” 

After being told thus, the Raksasa named Dhumraksa was 
sent as messenger: 

38-40. “O Dhumraksa, go. Tell Ajapala at my behest: O 
king, either come to render service or pay tribute. If not I will 
make you headless by means of my sword Candrahasa.” 

On being told thus by Ravana, Dhumraksa flew like Garuda, 
reached that beautiful city and entered the royal abode. There 
he saw Ajapala coming alone but surrounded by his goats. 

41. His hairs were dishevelled. His robes were loose. He 
was having a golden blanket round his body. There was a staff 
on his shoulder. He was dust-covered and surrounded by the 
ailments. 

42. He was like a murderous (ferocious) tiger ready to 
destroy and resist all onslaughts. He was killing the groups of 
enemies simply by writing down their names on the earth. 

43. He appeared to have had his bath and food. He was 
seated in his place blessed and contented like Manu. On see¬ 
ing him, Dhumraksa was delighted in his mind. He spoke out 
what was spoken by Ravana. 

44. After a defiant reproach and a suitable reply Ajapala 
dismissed Dhumraksa back and attended to his duties. 

45. The king summoned Jvara (fever) and spoke thus. Go 
to the abode of the king of Lanka and do as you are ordered. 

46 Directed by Ajapala, Jvara went through space. After 
going (to Lanka) he made the Raksasa king Ravana tremble. 


1. Fictitious big names. None of them was a contemporary of Ravana. 




264 


Skanda Purdna 


47. Ravana realized that it was the highly terrible Jvara and 
said: “Let the king stay away. I don’t have anything to do with 

him.” , ,. /n _ 

48. Then the younger brother of Dhanada, the king (Ravana), 

became free from fever. Thus there are millions of his other 
activities. 

49. O goddess of Devas, there are innumerable such acts 
of Ajapala having a crown resplendent like the sun. This goddess 
was propitiated by such an intelligent king Ajapala. The deity 
suppresses all ailments. She destroys all torments. 

50. If a man is desirous of enjoyment of pleasure, he should 
worship her in accordance with the injunctions, devoutly of¬ 
fering scents, incense, ornaments, garments and other things. 

51. Thus the origin of AjadevI has been fully narrated to 
you. It suppresses all miseries and destroys all sins. 


CHAPTER FIFTYNINE 

Greatness of AjadevI 


Isvara said: 

1-2. Henceforth, I shall describe unto you the third deity 
Jnanasakti (power of knowledge), identical with Siva. She res¬ 
ides in the holy Prabhasa Ksetra and is destructive of poverty 
in abundance. 

The goddess is named Aja. She is stationed to the south of 
Rahvlsa. She has issued forth from my sixth mouth/face adored 
by Visnu. 

The Devi said: 

3. O my Lord, O Lord of Devas! Five faces of yours are 
well-known. What may be the name of the sixth face, O Lord? 
How did the deity well-known as AjadevI issue forth therefrom? 

Isvara said: 

4. O goddess, what has been asked by you is pertinent. I 




VII.I.59.5-16 


265 


shall describe unto you what should be kept as a secret even 
from one’s own sons. It was (originally) narrated in an Agama 
(scriptural text) which is not (so) well-known. 

5. Earlier, even at the outset, O goddess of Devas, I had 
seven faces. Five are Sadyojata' etc. The sixth one is remem¬ 
bered as Aja (Unborn). 

6. The seventh one was named Picu. Thus I had seven 
faces. Of them Aja was given to Brahma and Picu to Visnu. 

7. Hence, O great goddess, I now become Five-faced. Aja 
became Brahma and Picu became Visnu. 

8. From the face Aja, O great goddess, (the Deity) Aja of 
great lustre was born. O beautiful lady, it was at the time of 
the terrible Fight with Andhasura and that too due to my anger. 

9. The goddess held a sword and a shield. Riding on a 
lion, she had a splendid form. She was accompanied by crores 
of other goddesses. She crushed the great Daityas. 

10. A few Daityas fled to the southern sea out of fear of 
her. The lion-riding goddess chased them closely behind. 

11. Running here and there, they were slain by her Ganas. 
In the course of their destruction, they proceeded towards the 
great sea and reached Prabhasa. 

12-13. Some of the Daityas were slain there. Some went to 
Patala (nether worlds). On seeing that they were all killed, the 
goddess riding a lion realized the sanctity of the place. The 
splendid deity haltred at that place, stationing herself to the 
north-east of Somesa and to the north of Saurisa. 

14. Whoever, whether a man or a woman, views her sta¬ 
tioned there, shall become endowed with Sattva quality and 
conjugal felicity for the duration of seven births. 

15. If a man arranges for vocal music, instrumental music 
and dance there, there shall be no wretchedness in his family, 
due to her favour. 

16. O great goddess, if any woman offers a lamp with ghee 
(clarified butter) with a red wick there, she will attain conjugal 
felicity in the course of as many births as there are threads 
there in the wick. 


1. This is tiic Pratika (first word) of the first of the five Mantrasj 

Aranyaka XVII. 1-5. There five Mantras constitute the five heads of Siva. 






266 


Skanda Purana 


17 He who reads this daily, especially on the third lunar 
day, or listens to this devoutly, shall obtain all cherished desires. 

18-19. Thus it has been described succinctly how, in what 
order, the three Saktis of Rudra are to be woishipped. 

After adoring these Saktis the devotee should worship Somesa, 
if he is desirous of the full benefit of the pilgrimage. Or he 
may worship one Sakti who is the bestower of boons. 


CHAPTER SIXTY 
Greatness of Maiigala 


Isvara said: 

1-3. O my beloved, one of excellent complexion, I shall 
describe the three Dutis (lady-messengers) of the holy spot of 
Prabhasa. Listen with an attentive mind. 

The First one is goddess Maiigala. The second one is Visalaksi 
and goddess CatvaradevI is glorified as the third one. 

O lady of excellent countenance, those Saktis are to be 
worshipped in this order, if a man is desirous of attaining the 
benefit of the pilgrimage to Prabhasa. 

The Devi said: 

4. O Lord, at what spot did those Dutis , the guardians of 
the holy spot, halt and stationed themselves. Of whom are they 
the Saktis ? How are they to be propitiated? O Lord of the 
universe, how are they to be adored? 

Isvara said: 

5. Maiigala is said to be of Brahma; Visalaksi is of Visnu. 
The deity Catvarapriya is the Sakti of Rudra. 

6. O lady of excellent countenance, Maiigala who is sta¬ 
tioned to the north of AjadevI and to the south of Rahvlsa, 
not very far, should be worshipped first. 

7. When Somesvara was installed and the rite of Yajha was 
started, she had come there along with Soma (the Moon) with 
a desire to see the Devas. 



VII.I.60.8-11-61.1-7 


267 


8. O Uma, since she gave auspiciousness unto Brahma and 
others, she is called Mangala. She is the bestower of all aus¬ 
piciousness. 

9. Inauspiciousness and miseries due to it, shall entirely 
perish in regard to that person, be it a man or a woman, who 
adores her on the third lunar day. 

10. Feeding a couple and offering them fruits along with 
a bodice at that site is laudable. Feeding of Prsadajya (ghee 
mixed with curds) is destructive of sins. 

11. Thus the greatness of Mangala has been succinctly 
spoken. It is conducive to great fortune and great benefit as 
a result and it is destructive of all sins. 


CHAPTER SIXTYONE 

Greatness of Lalitomavisalaksi 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Then a pilgrim should go to the great goddess Ksetradevi 
of Visnu, O goddess. She is stationed to the east of Sridaityasudana 
and within a distance of seven bows (Dhanus) to the north-east 

of Yogesvarl. ... . 

She has established herself as the medicine (balm) unto 
those who are burned (by the fire) of great wretchedness 
In the Caksusa Manvantara, O goddess, when the excessive y 
powerful Daityas proceeded towards the southern quarter on 
being slain by Visnu, they fought for more than a hundred 
years in a great battle there with Visnu. O goddess of Devas, 
they fought with wonderful missiles of various kinds 

5 Knowing that they could not be killed easily, the lotus¬ 
eyed Visnu remembered Bhairavi Sakti, the Mahamaya of great 

1US 6 rC ' On being remembered by Visnu, the all-powerful one, 
the great goddess came there within a moment with her eyes 

shining with great delight. , A . v ;j e 

7. At the sight of Visnu, the eyes became large and wide 

(Visala). Hence the goddess stationed there who 
stroyer of Daityas, became (known as) Visalahsi. 




268 


Skanda Purana 


8. In this Kalpa, O lady of excellent countenance, she is 
called Lalitoma. Thus there are two Umas mentioned, one in 
Somesa and the other in Daityasudana (Visnu). 

9. The pilgrim should view (Uma) at the outset in Somesvara 
and t..en in Daityasudana thereafter. By worshipping the two 
Umas, one will derive the full benefit of the pilgrimage. 

10. If a devotee duly worships her on the third lunar day 
in the month of Maglia, he shall never be devoid of progeny. 
His line will extend to ten millions. 

11. He who is endowed with great devotion and visits her 
everyday, shall be always blessed with health, happiness and 
conjugal felicity for a long time. 

12. Thus the greatness of Lalita has been succinctly spo¬ 
ken. If listened to, it becomes conducive to the destruction of 
sins and increase of piety. 


CHAPTER SIXTYTWO 

Greatness of Catvaradevi 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the third goddess 
Catvarapriya. O great goddess, she is stationed on the eastern 
side of Lalita within a distance of ten Dhanus. 

She is the great and terrible KsetradutI, the Sakti of Rudra 
possessing great lustre. She was left there in the centre for the 
job of guarding the holy spot by me. 

She is accompanied by a crore of Bliutas (goblins). She is 
huge-bodied and highly lustrous. Surrounded by crores of Bhutas, 
the goddess wanders at night in dilapidated houses, gardens, 

palaces, attics, paths, courtyards—everywhere within the holy 
spot. 

5-6. ^ If a man or a woman duly adores her on the great 
Navami day, with all types of service-offerings, the splendid 
goddess becomes pleased with him or her and grants all cher¬ 
ished desires. Feeding of couples must be performed by those 
who wish for the benefit of the pilgrimage. 




V1I.I.62.7—63.1-5—64.1-3 


269 


7. Thus the greatness of the third KsetradutI has been 
succinctly spoken. On being listened to it she bestows prosper¬ 
ity and destroys sins. 


CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE 

Greatness of Bhairavesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the excellent Bhairavesvara. It is stationed not very far from 
Yogesvarl to the south. 

It is destructive of sins. It bestows supernatural prosperity 
and glory. Formerly when the goddess made effort for the 
destruction of Daityas, she summoned Bhairava and employed 
him as a messenger. Then she became well-known as Sivaduti 
and thereafter as Yogesvarl. 

4-5. The place where Bhairava was employed as a messen¬ 
ger by the goddess, has the Liiiga called by the name Bhairavesvara. 

It is installed by Bhairava and is adored by Devas and Daityas. 
A man who devoutly adores it duly on the Karttikl day or 
continuously for six months, obtains the desired benefit. 


CHAPTER SIXTYFOUR 

Greatness of Laksmisvara 


svara said: 

1-3 To the eastern side of the same is the shrine well- 
mown as Laksmisvara stationed within a distance of ten Dhanus. 
t is destructive of series of impoverished states 
At the place where Laksmi was brought by the Supreme 
>evi « the Daityas, is the idol natned Laltym,svara 

accordance with the 



270 


Skanda Purana 


injunctions on Srlpancaml day (i.e. the fifth lunar day in the 
bright half of Miigha) is never separated from LaksmT (for¬ 
tune) till the end of the Manvantara, O my beloved! 


CHAPTER SIXTYFIVE 

Greatness of Vadavesvara 


Uvara said: 

1-4. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the shrine of 
Vadavesvara Lihga to the northern side of Laksmlsa and to 
south of Visalaksi. 

It is stationed there. It has great efficacy. It was installed by 
Vadava at the time when the mountain Krtasmara was burnt 
by the Vadava fire. 

The Lihga was installed by him after levelling the entire 
spot. After bathing Lord Sankara with curds, the pilgrim should 
worship him in accordance with the injunctions. 

The pilgrim should offer curds there to a Brahmana who 
has mastered the Vedas. Thereby he attains the Agniloka and 
obtains the full benefit of a perfect pilgrimage. 


CHAPTER SIXTYSIX 

Greatness of Arghyesvara 

Isvara said: 

1-4. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the great Lihga 
well : known as Arghyesvara. It is situated to the north of Visalaksi 
not very far from there. 

Worshipped by Suras and Gandharvas, this Lihga is highly 
powerful. The goddess (river) reached Prabhasa Ksetra hold¬ 
ing the Vadava fire and when she saw the great ocean there, 
she offered Arghya 'in accordance with the injunctions to the 
great ocean. 




VII.I.66.5-6—67.1-5—68.1-3 


271 


After installing the great Lihga and worshipping it in accor¬ 
dance with the injunctions, O goddess of Devas, she entered 
the great ocean for the sake of holy ablution. 

5-6. Since the Arghya was offered earlier and the Lord is 
installed later, the Lihga is well-known as Arghyesa. 

It is destructive of sins. O goddess of Devas, one who bathes 
the Lord with Pancamrta in accordance with the injunctions 
and worships him, acquires learning in seven births. He will 
be a perfect expounder of the scriptures. He will have perfect 
knowledge, enabling him to clarify all doubts. 


CHAPTER SIXTYSEVEN 

Greatness of Kamesvara 


Isvara said: 


1-4. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the shrine of the 
great Lihga well-known as Kamesvara. It is to the west of 
Daityasudana and was worshipped by Kama. O goddess, it is 
stationed within a distance of seven Dhanus and is highly 


refulgent. , . , , . cc 

When Kama was reduced to ashes by my third (eye) of Fire, 
he propitiated Mahesvara. The disembodied one propitiated 
Mahesvara for a thousand years and attained a creative form 

as he desired. it , 

Therefore, the Lihga became well-known all oyer thet earth 
by the name Kamesvara. O goddess, it is destructive of all sms 

and it bestows all the desired benefits. . . 

5 One who worships the Lihga according to injunctions 
on the thirteenth lunar da, in the bright half of the month 
of Vaisakha, shall become one like Kama unto women. 


CHAPTER SIXTYEIGHT 
Greatness of Gaurl-Tapovana 


T svara said: 


272 


Skanda Purana 


forth, I shall describe the holy spot where there is the penance 
grove of GaurT. It is highly powerful and is resorted to by Suras 
and Siddhas. 

It is situated within a distance of sixty Dhanus on the eastern 
side of Somesa. It is the place where penance was performed 
by goddess Sat! in her earlier birth. 

Due to offended love, she was angry with me, O lady of 
excellent countenance, and she came to Prabhasa Ksetra and 
remained here performing penance. 

The Devi said: 

4. Why did Sat! forsake you and resort to penance? At 
what place did the goddess establish herself? Do tell me all this 
in detail. 

Isvara said: 

5. O great goddess, formerly you were a lady of exalted 
mind but of dark complexion. While (we were in a splendid 
spot) you were called Kali by me simply for fun (Read: narmartham 
for namartham). 

6. On hearing the surprising statment, she (you) became 
highly furious. Knitting her (your) eyebrows crookedly in the 
face, she (you) spoke harsh words: 

7. “Since I was called “blackie” (Kali), O Sarhbhu, with 
great malice, 1 shall go away to a place where I will become 
Gaun (fair-complexioned).” 

8. After saying thus, the highly esteemed lady surrounded 
by groups of companions went to Prabhasa Ksetra. She in¬ 
stalled Mahesvara, later famous as Gaurlsvara, and adored in 
accordance with the injunctions. 

9. Closely standing near the Linga on a single foot, the 
chaste lady propitiated the Linga and performed a very great 
penance. 

10. Engaging herself in Japa, the goddess practised pen¬ 
ance in the midst of five fires in summer. During rainy season, 
she remained lying down under the open sky. During Hemanta 
(early winter) she stood under water. 

11. As her penance advanced, the excessive refulgence of 
her body assumed whitishness (fair complexion). 




VII.I.6S. 12-25 


273 


12. After a great deal of time she became Gaun (fair-com- 
plexioned) in all her limbs. Thereupon, the Moon-crested Lord 
laughed and said: 

13. He uttered the epithet (Gauri) many times—“O Gauri, 
get up. Come on to the mansion. O auspicious lady, choose 
your boon, whatever may be in your mind.” 


Gauri said: 


14. A person whether a man or a woman, who may view 
me stationed here, shall become endowed with sons and good 
fortunes for seven births (in succession). 

15. Due to your favour, let there be no wretchedness in 
the family of a person who makes arrangement for vocal and 
instrumental music as well as dance in front of me. 

16. He who adores the Liiiga installed by me at the outset 
and then devoutly adores me, shall attain the highest region. 

17. O Lord, let the name of the Lord be GaurTsvara and 
be well-known. 


I promised, “So it shall be’’and stationed myself at that holy spot. 

18-19. O great goddess, I stationed myself there in the 
company of the goddess with a delighted mind. Even today, 
during the transit of the Sun in the northern as well as the 
southern direction I go to the holy spot of Gauri accompanied 
by groups of Devas. He who offers excellent fruits to Brahmanas 
on that day, will have sons. 

20. A woman without a son, who offers a coconut fruit 
there, shall soon obtain a strong son endowed with all good 
features. 

21-22. If, O great goddess, a woman offers a light with 
ghee and red wicks, she shall attain conjugal felicity in as many 
successive births as there are threads in the wick. 

23. One who performs a dance there full of great devo¬ 
tion, shall become blessed with freedom from ailments, hap¬ 
piness, and conjugal felicity for a long time. 

24. There, at the boundary, there ,s a great pond. “ 18 f 
holy Tirlha filled with clear water. One who takes his holy ba 

there becomes rid of all sins. 

25. He who performs Sraddha there with the Pitrs m view 


274 


Skanda Purana 


devoutly attains the highest region along with the Pitys. He will 
he a meritorious person. 

26. Hence by all means a devotee should perform Sraddha 
there. He should keep vigil at night amidst songs, instrumental 
music and dances at night. 

27. Garments should be given to couples there along with 
Daksina. He who reads this everyday, particularly on the third 
lunar day, O goddess, in front of Parvatl shall obtain good 
fortune and conjugal felicity. 

28. Or one who listens to this fully endowed with devotion 
shall also undoubtedly attain conjugal felicity as long as he 
lives. 


CHAPTER SIXTYNINE 

Greatness of Gaurisvara 


Devi said: 

1. The Lihga of great renown that has been mentioned by 
you as Gaurisvara is very excellent. Where is that Lihga situ¬ 
ated, which when adored bestows great benefit? 

Isvara said: 

2-3. Listen, O goddess, I shall explain the sin-destroying 
greatness of Lord Gaurisvara, the bestower of all cherished 
desires. 

This penance-grove of Gaurl is well-known, O goddess, and 
is highly lustrous. On the whole, it extends to an area of fifty- 
five Dhanus. 

4-5. There, in the middle, is stationed the goddess stand¬ 
ing on a single foot as she is engaged in penance. To the north 
thereof and within four Dhanus distance is stationed the Lihga 
that dispels fear from sin. 

A man who adores, with devotion, the Lihga especially on 
the eighth lunar day of the dark half, shall become rid of sins. 

6. Gifting cows to a eminent Brahmana here is highly com¬ 
mended. So also is gifting gold. Especially, gifting of cooked 
food (is recommended) for quelling all sins. 

7. By visiting that Lihga, one is rid of all sins whether one 




VII. 1.70.1-11 


275 


is a slayer of cows, murderer of a Brahmana or perpetrator of 
evil crimes. 


CHAPTER SEVENTY 

Greatness of Varunesvara 


Isvara said: 


1. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the excellent shrine of Varunesvara. It is situated within a 
distance of twenty Dhanus to the south-east of Gauri’s penance- 
grove. The Liiiga that was installed by Varuna possesses great 


power. 

2-3. Formerly, O goddess, when the ocean was quaffed off 
by Agasti (the Pot-born One), Varuna, the Lord of rivers, be¬ 
came furious. 

After realizing that the Prabhasika Ksetra is a bestower of 
desires, O goddess, he performed a severely difficult penance. 

4. He installed a great Linga and worshipped it devoutly. 
The Bull-emblemed Lord was worshipped for more than ten 


thousand years. 

5. Pleased thereby, O goddess of Devas, the Lord filled 
the empty ocean,the lord of aquatic animals,with the waters of 
his own Gaiiga. 

6. He gratified him by means of diverse kinds of boons 
granted through the Linga. Ever since then all the oceans 


became full. , . 

7. Ever since then, that Linga came to be known by the 

name Varunesvara. . . . 

8. O beautiful lady of Suras, what is the use of visiting 

many Lingas, when one obtains the merit of all the Tirthas on 

V,S r 8 T V ha r t “ n Brf hm a„a who bathos that Linga with curds on 
the eighth and fourteenth lunar days, becomes a master 
all the four Vedas. There is no doubt about *' ' h as 
10-11 o lady of excellent countenance, all the Brahmanas 
Ksatriyas Vaisyas, Sudras and others, dumb, blind and deaf 
peophbchildren, women and even eunuchs go to heaven after 


276 


Skanda Purdna 


visiting the deity. O goddess, they shall be abiding by piety. 

If holy ablution,/a/w, oblation, adoration, eulogy and dance 
are performed there, all those activities shall give everlasting 
benefits. 

12. A man who keenly desires for the benefit of a perfect 
pilgrimage and also for the heavenly pleasures should make 
there gift of golden lotus, pearls etc. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYONE 

Greatness of Usesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the shrine of the Linga situated there itself to the south of 
Varunesa within a distance of three Dhanus . 

O Lady of excellent countenance, the wife of Varuna named 
Usa, performed a terrible penance when she was sad over her 
husband and installed that great Linga, the bestower of all 
Siddhis (supernatural powers). It is well-known as Usesvara and 
is adored by all the Siddhas. 

4. He who worships that sin-destroying Linga with devo¬ 
tion shall attain the highest goal even if he be contaminated 
by a series of great sins. 

5. It accords the benefit of conjugal felicity to women. It 
is destructive of miseries and bad luck. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYTWO 

Greatness of Jalavasaganapati 

Isvara said: 

1-3. For the sake of destroying all obstacles and for the 
accomplishment of all tasks, one should visit Vighnesa called 
Jalavasas (Having water as robes) stationed there itself. 




VII.I.73.1-7—74.1-3 


277 


O great goddess, he was adored by means of lotuses with 
devotion by Varuna for averting obstacles to his penance. Therefore 
he is remembered as Jalavdsas. 

A devotee should propitiate him devoutly with scents and 
flowers along with sweetmeats on the Calurthi day (fourth lunar 
day) as much as the devotion allows. Ganadhipa becomes pleased 
with him. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYTHREE 

Greatness of Kumaresvara 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the excellent shrine 
of Kumaresvara. The Lihga is highly powerful and is destruc¬ 
tive of great sins. 

O goddess, it is stationed within thirty Dhanus to the south¬ 
west of Varunesvara. O goddess, it is stationed on the southern 
side of Gauri’s penance-grove. O great goddess, after perform¬ 
ing a great penance there, the great Lihga was installed by the 
Six-faced Lord. Therefore, it became Kumaresa. 

4-5. If a devotee worships (the Lihga) duly, he gets much 
merit in a single day by adoring Kumaresa once. He gets the 
entire merit of six months of adoration by worshipping for a 
month continuously. 

6. If a person eschews lust, anger, avariciousness, passion 
and rivalry, it is enough if the devotee worships him once. He 
should be celibate and shall conquer the sense-organs. 

7. If he is worshipped thus, O goddess, a pilgrim gets the 
entire benefit of a perfect pilgrimage. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYFOUR 
Greatness of Sakalyesvara 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 


278 


Skanda Parana 


the excellent shrine of Sakalyesvara. It is situated within a 
distance of thirty Dhanus to the north-west of Daityasudana. 

It is the bestower of all desires, O great goddess. It was 
worshipped by Sakalya. It is the spot where the saintly king 
named Sakalya performed great penance. By piopitiating the 
great Lord Bhava, he made him manifest to himself. He made 
the delighted Mahesvara descend into the Lihga. 

4 O beautiful lady of elegence, when the Lord is visited 
sins committed in the course of seven births get dissolved quickly 
like darkness at sunrise. 

5. A pilgrim should bathe god Siva there with milk on the 
eighth and fourteenth lunar days. He should duly adore with 
scents, flowers etc. in the proper order. 

6’. Gold should be offered there by those who wish the 
benefit of a perfect pilgrimage. Listen, as I enumerate the four 
names (of the deity). 

7. At the outset, in the Krta Age, O goddess, the Lord was 
glorified as Bhairavesvara. Then, O my beloved, he was per¬ 
fectly propitiated by Manu named Savarni. 

8. The name of that Lord in Treta was Savarnikesvara. 
Then in Dvapara, O goddess, the Bull-emblemed Lord in the 
form of a Lihga was perfectly propitiated by the noble-souled 
Galava. 

9-10. The third appellation of the Lord was Galavesvara. 
When Kali Yuga set in, the sage named Sakalya attained Siddhi 
there and acquired the great powers of Anima (minuteness) 
etc. Therefore, the fourth name is well-known as Sakalyesvara. 

11. Thus the names of that Lihga in all the four Yugas 
have been glorified. They are destructive of sins. They confer 
merit on men. They have been glorified as the bestowers of 
all cherished desires. 

12. O my beloved, listen from me the origin of the holy 
spot of the same Lord of Devas. 

13. The area all round, O goddess, extends to eighteen 
Dhanus. It is destructive of all great sins of the residents of the 
holy spot, O goddess. 

14. There the water in the wells etc. is remembered as 
Sdrasvata (belonging to river Sarasvatl). It accords salvation 
unto even worms, insects, locusts—unto all lower creatures. 

15-18. A man may take his bath anywhere. He is honoured 




VII.I.74.19-20—75.1-5 


279 


in the heavenly world. By visiting that Linga, one attains the 
entire benefit of a thousand horse-sacrifices and a hundred 
Vajapeya sacrifices. 

During lunar Parva (i.e. New-Moon and Full-Moon) a devo¬ 
tee should remain pure and self-controlled and perform the 
Japa of Aghora Mantra along with the perfect Ajyahoma (con¬ 
signing ghee to fire). He should remain all the while in the 
vicinity of the Linga. O my beloved of excellent complexion, 
he attains all excellent Siddhis even if he has been defiled by 
major sins or minor ones. 

19. That Linga is remembered as Kamika, that is the bestower 
of all the desired benefits. The face of the Lord there is (called) 
Aghora (benign). It is highly terrible (Bhairava). 

20. It was well-known formerly by the name Bhairavesvara 
on the earth. After the advent of this Yuga, it has been named 
Sakalyesvara. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYFIVE 

Greatness of Kalakalesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the Linga called Sakalakalesvara. It is situated within a distance 
of sixty Dhanus to the south-west of Sakalyesvara. 

It is also remembered as having different names in the four 
Yugas. It is destructive of sins. Formerly (in Krtayuga) its name 
was Kamesvara. In Treta, it was Pulahesvara. In Dvapara it was 
Siddhinatha and it is remembered as Naradesa in Kali age. It 
is also known by the name Kalakalesa. 

4. At the time when the highly esteemed river Sarasvau 
entered the extremely meritorious ocean, the most excellent 
one of the rivers became delighted, and satisfied by the soun 
of the waters (waves) of the big ocean. 

5. Thereupon, Devas sages, Siddhas and Caranas along 
with Gandharvas raised a melodious, tumultuous sound that 
was exciting and thrilling. 


2gQ Skanda Parana 

■ 6. Due to that loud sound, my idol (Lihga) rose up. Therefore, 

the Lihga was named Kalakalesvara. 

7. Thus a former incident which caused its name has been 
stated to you. Now recently it again became Kalakalesvara. How 
it was brought about, I shall explain, O my beloved. Listen 
attentively. 

8. Formerly at the junction of Kali Yuga and Dvapara, Narada 
came to the splendid Prabhasika Kselra and performed a se¬ 
vere penance there near the Lihga. 

9. Then for a hundred years, he propitiated the Bull-emblemed 
Lord, O goddess of Devas. He obtained Gandharva (proficiency 
in music) embellished with the seven Svaras (Notes). 

10. Thereupon, he became delighted in his mind and 
performed a great Yajna well-known as Paundarlka in the vi¬ 
cinity of that Lihga. 

11. With his soul always kept pure, he performed the Yajna 
for pleasing the Lord of Devas. He invited thousands of sages 
from Brahmaloka. 

12. Equipped with all the requisite (for die Yajna) he gathered 
together various provisions. Having prepared the Kundas etc. 
he began the Kratu (sacrifice). 

13-14. O lady of excellent countenance, as the Kratu con¬ 
cluded, the Brahmanas residing in the Ksetra came there, 
O great goddess, in hundreds and thousands for the sake of 
Daksina. 

15. In a sporting way, to make them fight among them¬ 
selves, he scattered pieces of gold and jewels on the ground. 

16. With the intention of seizing maximum of the valuable 
things, those Brahmanas noisily fought with one another. 

17. O goddess, some of them were denuded of their gar¬ 
ments. Some lost their sacred threads. Some were seen de¬ 
prived of hair. Others were bleeding profusely. 

18. A few others hit one another with kicks and fists for 
securing the valuables scattered by Narada in this manner. 

19-22. Nothing of value remained there. Some of the poor 
Brahmanas, very learned and humble to the utmost, got wounded 
and disabled by other Brahmanas. Yet they remained quies¬ 
cent. They saw (Narada) laughing incessantly. They said to 
him: “O Sage, you had excluded the learned ones. The gift 
that you made brought about only quarrel. Thereby you have 






VII.I.75.23-24—76.1-5 


281 


flouted the conventions of Yajnas, O excellent Brahmana and 
sage. The name of this deity shall be Kalakalesvara. This Lihga 
will become well-known by this name.” 

O goddess, that was why the deity became (known as) 
Kalakalesvara. 

23. A man who bathes the Liiiga devoutly and circumambulates 
thrice, shall with your favour, go to Rudraloka undoubtedly. 

24. He who adores it with devotion by means of sweet scents, 
flowers and unguents and offers gold to Brahmanas shall attain 
the highest status. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSIX 

Importance of the Pair of Lakulisa Lingas 


Isvara said: 

1-5. In the vicinity of the very same Lord of Devas, shines 
a pair of Lingas of excessive merit, installed by Lakulisa. 1 

The name of both the Lingas is Lakullsvara. By visiting this 
most excellent pair of Lingas, one is rid of all the sins com¬ 
mitted between birth and death. 

O my beloved, a pilgrim should observe fast there on 
the fourteenth lunar day in the bright half of the month of 
Bhadrapada, and keep awake during the night. At the outset 
the highly resplendent Lakulisa present in the idol 2 should be 
worshipped. Then the pair of Lingas should be separately wor¬ 
shipped in accordance with the perfect injunctions regarding 
adoration with the recitation of eulogies and Mantras in the 
proper order. He goes to the great region where Lord Mahesvara 
is present. 


2. 


Lakulisa is a historical person. He was born at Karwan (Baroda Dist., 
Gujarat) in the 2nd Century AD. He is the founder of Pasupatism. The 
Pdsupala-Sutra is attributed to him. Puranas regard him as the 

incarnation of Siva in Kali Yuga. . c a 

Icons of Lakulisa armed with a heavy stick (Lakuta, Lakuta) are foun 
in many parts of India. 'Lakuta' (a big stick) being his characteristic, he 
is called ‘Lakulisa’. 





282 


CHAPTER SEVENTYSEVEN 
Greatness of Uttarikesvara 


Skanda Parana 


Isxtara said: 

1 2 Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the excellent 
Uttahkesvara shrine, O great goddess. It is situated not very 
far from the same deity (i.e. Kalakalesvara) on the southern 

side 

It was devoutly installed by the noble-souled Uttahka 1 him¬ 
self. O great goddess, by visiting it, and touching it with great 
mental purity and concentration and by worshipping it de¬ 
voutly and duly, one is rid of all sins. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYEIGHT 

Greatness of Vaisvanaresvara 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Thereafter, a devotee should go to the shrine of Lord 
Vaisvanaresvara, O great goddess. It is stationed within a dis¬ 
tance of five Dhanus of the same deity (i.e. Uttahkesvara) in 
the south-east corner. Through visiting and touching it de¬ 
stroys the sins , of all creatures. 

O goddess, formerly a parrot had built its nest there. He 
stayed for a long time in the mansion (of the temple) along 
with his wife. The couple circumambulated it everyday not at 
all due to any special devotion but because their nest hap¬ 
pened to be there, O goddess. After a long time, they met with 
their death. 

5. It is mentioned that they were born on the earth with 
the power to remember previous births. They became famous 
by the names Lopamudra and Agastya. 


1. An ideal disciple of Veda, the disciple of Apoda-dhaumya (Mbh,' Adi. 
3.83-184.) 








VII.I.78.6-10—79.1-6 


283 


6. There is a couplet (a verse) formerly sung by the noble- 
souled Agastya who recollected the previous birth with the 
wonder arising from his own experience. 

7. “After circumambulating perfectly if anyone visits Vahnlsa, 
he shall certainly attain renown thereby like me formerly.” 

8. Thus, O goddess, the greatness of the deity of Fire has 
been stated to you. On being listened to, it dispels the sins of 
men and bestows all desired benefits. 

9. An eminent Brahmana should bathe the deity with ghee 
and adore him duly. With perfect faith he should offer gold 
loo. 

10. After doing this in accordance with the injunctions 
one shall attain full benefit of the pilgrimage. He attains Vahniloka 
and rejoices there for an endless time. 


CHAPTER SEVENTYNINE 

Greatness of Lakullsvara 


Uvara said: 

j _5 Then, a pilgrim should go to the shrine of Lakulisa 
of great lustre, O great goddess. It is situated within a distance 
of seven Dhanus on the western side thereof (i.e. of Vaisvanaresvara). 

It had arrived there in the great Ksetra from Kayavarohana . 
It is destructive of the sins of all creatures. The Lord is sta¬ 
tioned in the Murti (idol). Lakulisa (the sage) performed a 
severe penance there. He initiated his four disciples Kusaka 
etc., and taught them many Astras (Scriptures) such as Nyaya, 

Vaisesika etc. Thereafter, he attained the , greate . S ^f^ord 

A man (devotee) should realize this and worship the Lor 
perfectly, particularly in the Uttarayana (northern transit o 
fhe Sun) and on the Karttiki day. The gift of learning should 
he offered to a Brahmana of good habit. 

6 He will be repeatedly born as highly intelligent wi 
exaUed mind and prosperity of wealth, in the excellent family 
of rich Brahmana! in the course of seven successive births. 

Karwah in DabhorTchsil of Baroda Disc h was the birth place of Laku.isa. 

(For details, Supra Ch. 76. 1-5.) 





284 


CHAPTER EIGHTY 

Greatness of Gautamesvara 


Skanda Purana 


Isvara said: 

1-5. To ihe east thereof (i.e. Lakulisa) and to the west of 
Daityasudana, there is a sin-destroying Linga Gautamesvara by 
name. O goddess, it is stationed within a distance of five Dhanus. 
It bestows all desires. O beautiful lady, it was propitiated by 
Salya, the king of Madra 1 . After propitiating Mahesvara, a se¬ 
vere penance was performed by him. 

Any other man who propitiates that deity thus will attain the 
greatest Siddhi like Salya, a king of exalted mind. 

He who bathes the deity with milk on the fourteenth lunar 
day in the bright half of Cilra and with scented water too, 
attains the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. Further, he must wor¬ 
ship the deity duly with excellent flowers with great devotion. 

6. O goddess, by visiting that Linga all the sins committed 
mentally, verbally and physically perish. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYONE 

Greatness of Sri Daityasudana 


Isvara said: 

1-6. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the shrine of Daitya¬ 
sudana, the Lord of Devas, O great goddess. The deity destroys 
the sins of all the creatures residing in Prabhasa Ksetra. 

It has been there for ages and is beginningless. It is splendid 
and it bestows all desires. For the sake of crossing the terrible 
ocean of worldly existence, it is stationed like a boat. 

At the end of a Kalpa, i.e. a day of Brahma, O goddess of 
Devas, all other things perish excepting these. They are: Nyagrodha 
(holy fig tree) that lives for seven Kalpas, Kalpa Vrksa (Wish- 
yielding Kalpa tree), the Agara (Mine) of Vaidurya (gem) and 
the excellent mountain of Vaidurya, Lord Srldaityasudana and 
the great sage Markandeya. 


1. Maternal uncle of Nakula and Sahadeva (Pandavas). 



VII.1.81.7-17 


285 


O beautiful lady, these are everlasting and immutable for 
seven Kalpas. O goddess, of what avail is saying too much and 
describing repeatedly? 

There is no other deity on the earth, O goddess, superior 
to Srldaityasudana. His holy spot is of the shape of a Yava 
(barley) and it is sin-destroying. 

7. It is resorted to by Sages (Rsis), Siddhas, Yaksas, Vidyadharas 
and Uragas, O beautiful lady. I shall tell you the borders of that 
holy spot of Visnu. 

8. In east the holy spot extends upto Yamesvara; in west 
upto Srlsomesa, In the north, the limit is VisalaksI and in south 
it is the Lord of rivers (Sea). 

9. This holy spot of Visnu, of the shape of a barley grain, 
is destructive of sins. 

10. Even sinning men who die here in the holy spot all go 
to heaven like good men of meritorious deeds. 

11. O my beloved, donations as charity, Homa or Japa and 
penance performed here, and whatever is done is said to be 
everlasting, for a period of seven Kalpas. 

12. O goddess, if a devotee feeds even one Brahmana with 
Visnu in view there in accordance with the injunctions, it is as 
good as feeding ten millions. 

13-14. A devout man should observe fast with great devo¬ 
tion. Even from a single Upavasa (fast) the benefit of ten thousand 
JJpavasas is obtained. The man shall take his holy bath in the 
Cakra Tirtha and observe fast fully controlling all the sense- 
organs. On the twelfth lunar day in the month of Karttika, he 
should offer gold to Brahmanas after duly adoring Visnu. He 
is rid of all sins. 


The Devi said: 

15. O Lord of Devas, why does he have the name Daityasudana? 
And at what time? Tell it to me in details 


Isvara said: 

16 Listen, O goddess, I shall describe his demon-destroy¬ 
ing (Daityasudana’s) greatness. The previous activities of Lord 
Daityasudana are conducive to great prosperity. 

17 His names are different in the different Kalpas, O goddess. 
Though beginningless and deathless, they appear repeatedly. 


286 


Skanda Purana 


18. In the earlier Kalpa it was Sriyavrtta. In the second 
Kalpa it is Vamana. In the third it is Vajranga and in the fourth 
it is Kamalapriya. 

19. He is remembered as Duhkhaharta (Destroyer of Mis¬ 
eries) in the fifth Kalpa and in the sixth it is Purusottama The 
Lord is remembered as Sri Daityasudana in the seventh Kalpa. 

20 I shall correctly tell his name and its origin. 

2L Formerly'in battle, all the Devas were conquered by 
the Danavas, the thorns unto Devas. They sought refuge in 
Hari, the resident of the Milk Ocean. They eulogized him and 
stood by bowing down. 

The Devas said: 

22. Hail unto you, O Lord, O Lord of the worlds! O sup¬ 
pressor of the Daityas, be victorious. After assuming the form 
of Boar, the earth was raised up by you. 

23-24. Adopting the form of Fish, the Vedas were lifted up 
by you from within the ocean. You became one in the foim 
of Tortoise and churned the Milk Ocean. O Lord of the worlds, 
Sri (LaksmI) was then lifted up. Obeisance to you, O Loid, 
O consort of Sri. O supporter of Sri, you are the destroyer of 
the distress of distressed ones. 

25. Bali was kept bound by you in the form of a dwarf; by 
you, the enemy of Asuras, the great Daitya Hiranyaksa and 
Hiranyakasipu were killed. 

26. He was held in the space by you in the form of a Man- 
lion. O great Lord, O origin of the Devas, the universe is raised 
up by you. 

27. Without you, O Lord of the worlds, the Cosmos is rendered 
lustreless. When the universe is over-run by Danavas as though 
by darkness, you showed your exploit like the Sun. 

28. On hearing this prayer, O goddess, the lotus-eyed Visnu 
spoke to the Devas beginning with Brahma when he was wak¬ 
ened up from the Milk Ocean. 

29. “Give up your fear, O Devas, of Danavas in every re¬ 
spect. Ere long I shall slay the Danavas.” 

30. After saying thus, Janardana came down along with 
them. With his discus, he slew the Danavas one by one. 

31. All the Danavas began to flee in their distress due to 


VU.I.81.32-43 


287 


fear. They reached the holy spot of Prabhasa and stood face 
to face with the Sea. 

32. The destroyer of the Daityas (Visnu) saw them ready 
to perish. With his discus he killed all the Danavas without 
leaving anyone behind. 

33. When all the Daityas had been killed, the whole uni¬ 
verse along with the Devas, Brahmanas, and ascetics came to 
normalcy without agitation. 

34. Ever since then, the deity came to be known by the 
name Daityasudana. O beautiful lady, his greatness has been 
spoken to you entirely. The greatness of Lord Daityasudana is 
conducive to great fortune and prosperity. 

35. On seeing him no one is ever born dullard, blind, poor 
or miserable for seven successive generations. O lady of excel¬ 
lent countenance, this is the truth. I repeat, this is the truth. 

36-37. Men should assiduously observe fast in the pres¬ 
ence of Daityasudana on the twelfth lunar day in the month 
of Sravana, the meritoriously splendid Astami (eighth lunar 
day) coinciding with Rohini and on the eleventh days of Asadha 
and Karttika (Sayana and Utthapana). By means of a single 
fast, the merit of ten thousand fasts is obtained. There is no 
doubt. 

38. Even a dog-cooking Candala, a creature of the low status 
and strata attains the world of Acyuta on the cessation of life 


therein. _ 

39. Persons in the holy spot of Daityasudana should have 
perfect faith. They should observe fast for the whole months 
of Karttika and Vaisakha. 

40. By the power of the holy spot of Visnu, they obtain the 
merit of crores and crores of fasts for each of the fasts. 

41. If anyone offers a lamp there for a month or even a 
fortnight, he shall get the fruit of a crore of lamps on account 

of the offer for everyone of the lamps. 

42 The devotee abstaining from food on the eleventh lunar 
day shall bathe the Four-armed Lord of Devas with Pancamfta 
and worship him. He shall become Acyuta himse f. 

43 Kesava becomes pleased with one who regularly spends 
CaCunnasya (the period of the four mouths of «te)r 

the presence of Daityasudana >n accordance Mh the tnjunc 

tions. 


288 


Skanda Purana 


44. By visiting Daityasudana, one obtains that ft uit entirely 
which one obtains by performing crores of Caturmasyas in the 

other holy spots. . 

45. By visiting Daityasudana one gets that meritorious fruit 

which one may obtain by offering the entire Cosmic Egg (as 
a charitable gift). 

46. A man who performs the rile of Jdgara (keeping awake 
at night) there on the eleventh lunar day along with songs, 
instrumental music, dances and dramatic presentations of various 
kinds goes to the world of Visnu; He does not return after 
going there. 

47. Bhadrd (the twelfth lunar day), by means of Jdgara during 
the night, dispels all the sins committed by anyone formerly 
and held pending such as ten thousand crimes of murder and 
innumerable thefts of gold. 

48. If the night of Bhadrd is spent in Jdgara men do not 
see evil dreams of the pathways of death, City of Death, Yama’s 
messengers and the forest of Khadgapatra (sword-leaved trees) 
hanging from the sky. 

49. One may duly offer a thousand virgins after adorning 
them with jewels considering that it is his pious duty; another 
may offer a thousand cows in Kurujangala. But the benefits of 
all these are obtained by means of Jdgara of Visnu. 

50. After observing fast one should eat the Naivedya (food 
offered to the deity) mixed with Tulasi leaves. This destroys 
the sin of crores of murders. 

51. Thus, O goddess, the sin-destroying greatness of Lord 
Daityasudana has been described to you. What else do you ask? 

52. One shall offer yellow garments, cows and gold to the 
deity after taking holy bath in the excellent Cakra Tlrtha. One 
is thus rid of all sins. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYTWO 

Origin of Cakratirtha 

The Devi said: 

1. O Bull-emblemed One, what is that Tlrtha mentioned 


VII.I.82.2-15 


289 


by you by the name Cakratlrtha? Where is that Tlrtha situated? 
What is its power? Do tell me. 

Isvara said: 

2. Formerly, in the battle between Devas and Asuras, Janardana 
killed the Daityas and thereafter washed his blood-stained discus 
there. 

3. I-Iari brought there himself, eight crores of excellent 
TTrthas and set them up in this Tlrtha. After cleansing Sudarsana, 
he gave the name Cakratlrtha unto it whereby it became well- 
known. 

4. There is no doubt, O great goddess, that in Cakratlrtha, 
there are altogether eight crore eight hundred thousand TTrthas. 

5. An excellent man who takes his holy bath there with 
single-minded attention, attains the full benefit of ablution in 
all the TTrthas. 

6. O lady of excellent countenance, eight crores of (ex¬ 
tra) TTrthas remain there particularly on the EkadasT day as 
well as during solar and lunar eclipses. 

7-8. O great goddess, by taking the holy bath there, one 
obtains the benefit of a crore of Yajnas. Listen to its own 
names in different Kalpas. I shall enumerate them to you. It 
was Koti tlrtha in the earliest Kalpa, SrTnidhana in the second, 
Satadhara in the third, and CakratTrtha in the fourth Kalpa. 

9. Thus all the previous Kalpa names have been told to 
you. In a similar manner, other names should be understood 
by learned men in the proper order. 

10. There is no limit unto the Dana that is offered there. 
Visnuksetra is said as extending to half a Krosa (3 Kms.). 

11-14. It is the truth that has been mentioned by me. The 
Sin (Demon) of Brahmana-slaughter does not approach him. 

A person can perform all these rites there: monthly fasts, 
Agnihotra, observance of holy vows with self-control, self-study 
of the Vedas, performance of Yajnas, Tapas, Candrayana etc., 
offering libations to the Pitrs, performing Sraddha unto them 
with due observance of regulations, single-night rites, three- 
night rites of Krcchra and Santapana and other holy, rites 
Whatever a man does after coming to the Daityariksetra shall 
yield merit a crore times more than in the other holy Ksetras 

15. One who desires the benefit of perfect pilgrimage should 


290 


SltandaPurana 



strata, meeting with death in 
world of Acyuta. Thus the gr< 


briefly told. It is destructive 


benefits. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYTHREE 
Greatness of Yogesvari 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the shrine of the great goddess Yogesvari stationed to the east 
thereof (Daityasudana). 

The deity bestows the fruit in the form of Yogic powers. I 
shall describe its origin. Listen to it with faith. 

Once, there was a mighty demon named Mahisa, a tiger 
among Danavas. O goddess, he was the chief among them and 
highly terrible and frightening unto all the Devas. He could 
assume any form he pleased. Subjecting all the three woilds 
under his control, he remained happy. 

4. On a certain occasion, a charming girl unparalleled in 
beauty in heaven was created by Brahma, the creator of the 
worlds. 

5. She performed a very severe penance. O lady of excel¬ 
lent countenance, once that chaste girl of excellent beauty was 
seen by Narada. 

6. He was struck with great wonder, O goddess, at once 
when he thought: ‘Oh, what an excellent beauty! Oh, what an 
excellent fortitude! Oh, what a great splendour! Oh, what a 
youthful age!’ 

7. Thinking thus, he spoke to the lady these words: “O fair 
lady, offer yourself to me. I have not yet taken a wife unto me. 
I have been afflicted by the arrows of Rama on seeing you.” 

She said: 

8-9a. O venerable one,I have nothing to do with the dallying 



VII.I.83.9b-21 


291 


of love. I have taken up the vow of celibacy. I shall accomplish 
what I desire. Do not be offended in this matter nor be sorry 
for it. 


9b-10. On hearing her words, O my beloved, Sage Narada 
went to the wonderful city ruled by Mahisa within the ocean. 
Indeed the sage was honoured by that noble-souled Mahisa. 

11. O goddess, after offering the excellent Arghya and 
enquiring after his health, he stood with palms joined in reverence. 
He spoke: “O Narada, what may be the reason for your visit? 
What are your intentions? I shall do everything (necessary for 
them).” 


12-13. Thereupon the sage said to Mahisa, the Lord of 
Danavas: “O great Asura, a jewel of a girl has been born in 
Jarhbudvipa. Neither in heaven nor in the mortal world nor 
also in the nether worlds, a beauty such as she, has been seen 
or heard about by me. I have now been victimised by the darts 
of the god of Love due to her.” 

14. On hearing his words which generated a great deal of 
lust in him too, the demon went to the Prabhasika Ksetra 
where that chaste lady was staying. 

15. 1-Ie was accompanied by a great army. The demon pleaded 
before her: “O timid lady, be my wife. Enjoy charming plea¬ 
sures. O highly esteemed lady, the penance that you are en¬ 
gaged in is antagonistic to your youthful charms.” 

16-17. On hearing those words of that demon, the lady of 
excellent complexion laughed. O goddess of Devas, hundreds 
and thousands of terrible women holding weapons in their 
hands issued forth from the exhaled breath of the goddess, as 
she laughed. The army of the evil-souled Mahisa was destroyed 

by them. , 

18. When the army was being destroyed, the most excel¬ 
lent one among Danavas became furious and rushed quickly 

towards her. , r 

19-20. The great Asura shook vigorously and frequently 

his terrible, sharp-pointed horns and fought a great battle with 
her. He caught hold of the goddess with his horns Standing 
above him, she trampled on the demon under her feet. Then 
the leading Daitya was killed by means of her widen . 

21. When his head was cut off with a sword, a person of 
the same form as his, issued forth from it. Thus thoug e 


2^2 Skanda PuTQ,n& 

Daiiya was terrible, he went to Svarga on being slain by the 
weapons of the goddess. 

22. On seeing Mahisa defeated all the groups of the Devas 
beginning with Mahendra, eulogized the goddess with delighted 
minds. 

The Devas said: 

23. O highly esteemed goddess, O majestic one of terrible 
appearance, O three-eyed goddess, abiding by good means for 
achieving the ends, O goddess with faces all round, obeisance 
to you! 

24. O subduer of Mahisa the Asura, O omnipresent god¬ 
dess identical with Vidya and Avidya, O victorious one worthy 
of being meditated upon by Japa, O controlling deity of all 
lores, O goddess with universe as your form! 

25. O eternal goddess devoid of sorrow, O goddess with 
long eyes like the petals of lotus, O goddess of pure Saliva 
quality, O goddess observing Vratas, O goddess of terrific form 
like the night! 

26. O goddess, O bestower of prosperity and superior powers, 
O goddess engaged in Kdlanrtya (dance of destruction), O 
goddess fond of fortitude, O Sakti of Sankara, O Brahmanical 
power, O Sakti of Brahma bowed down to by all the Devas! 

27. O subduer of big Mahisa, O goddess armed with Ghanta 
(bell) and Sula (trident), O goddess of frightful form, O goddess 
Siva with hideous eyes, O great Maya, O nectarine goddess! 

28. O omnipresent goddess, O bestower of everything, O 
origin of all living beings and one identical with them, O mother 
of Vidyas (lores), Puranas and Salyas (darts), O supporter of 
Bhulas (living beings)! 

29. O splendid one among all the esoteric doctrines of the 
Devas and all those who possess Sattva quality, O goddess, you 
alone are ourrefuge.O Vidya, O Avidya, O Sri, O AsrI (non- Sri)! 

30. On being thus eulogized by the Devas and the Sages 
after due obeisance, the goddess spoke laughingly: “Choose an 
excellent boon.” 

The Devas said: 

31. O goddess, may those excellent men who eulogize you 


VII.I.83.32-44 


293 


by means of this prayer have all their desires fulfilled and 
continuously get showers of boons. 

32. O goddess of pure smiles, you shall stay in this holy 
spot for ever. 

33. O lady of excellent countenance, that goddess said to 
the Devas, This will be so. She sent away the groups of sages 
too and remained engaged there. 

34. O lady of excellent countenance, a devotee should observe 
fast on the ninth lunar day in the bright half of the month of 
Asvayuj and devoutly visit the deity. His sins get dissolved like 
darkness at sunrise. 

35. If a man gets up early in morning and recites this 
prayer he will never be assailed by any fear all through his life. 

36-37. The eighth lunar day in the bright half of the month 
of Asvayuj in conjunction with the constellation Mula is called 
Mahanamika (of great name). O splendid lady, those who give 
up their life on that day, shall certainly stay in Svarga. Those 
heroic ones become the favourites of celestial damsels. 

38. In all the Manvantaras and beginnings of Kalpas, O 
goddess of Suras, it is said that the sequence is the same. Now 
listen to the special features. 

39. The fifth lunar day in the bright half of the month of 
Asvayuj is called Papanasini (the destroyer of sins). During the 
night on that day, one should worship (her) adorned by means 
of Khadga Mantra. 

40. In. a place sloping towards the north-east a Brahmana 
should duly make a beautiful pavilion of sixteen pillars in the 
vicinity of Yogesvari. It should be embellished with banners. 

41. The priest should make a very splendid Kunda (sacri¬ 
ficial pit) of the length of a hand with three Mekhalas (slopes) 
and the Yorii (pit) shall have the semblance of a leaf of Asvattha. 

42. Payasa (milk pudding) is to be used for Homa as men¬ 
tioned in the scriptures with due utterance of Mantras. The 
sword is bathed in Pancamrta. Excellent Brahmanas should 
worship it with various kinds of flowers uttering the following 
Mantra: 

The Mantra for the Khadga worship: 

43-44. The following are the eight names uttered by Vedhas 
(god Brahma) himself: Abhi (fearless), Visasana (cutting), Khadga 


294 


Skancla Purana 


(sword), Pranabhula (that which is the very vital life), Durasada 
(difficult of approach), Agamya (impossible to reach), Vijaya 
(victor)') and Dharmadhara (the basis of piety). Thy constella¬ 
tion is Krttika; the preceptor is Lord Mahesvara. Gold is thy 
body; the Dhdta (Creator) is Lord Janardana; the father Lord 
Pitamaha (Brahma). Do protect (us) always with everything 
belonging to you. 

45. After duly worshipping it thus, the Sword is taken round 
in the city at night by excellent Brahmanas along with Nandighosa 
(loudly proclaiming the praise of the deity). 

46. The king who performs thus shall be accompanied by 
all the armies and excellent Brahmanas. After proceeding thus 
in accordance with the injunctions, it should be taken to Yogesvari. 
The Mantra is uttered and the Khadga is dedicated to the deity. 

47. It should be splashed with collyrium (application) and 
smeared with sandalpaste. A garland made of Bilva leaves is 
offered to the goddess. 

The Arghya Mantra: 

48. O goddess Durga, O destroyer of intractable distresses, 
O goddess destroying all evil ends (disasters), save me in all 
difficult situations. O Durga, I have sought refuge in you. 

49. O goddess of Devas, after offering the Arghya thus, the 
Khadga is kept there with vigilant guards (attending it). Till 
the AstamI (eighth day) it shall be adored everyday. 

50. After keeping awake that night, when the day has dawned, 
at the rise of Aruna, buffaloes and sheep should be beheaded 
in front. 

51. The animals may number a hundred, half of it (fifty) 
or half of half (twenty-five) as the devotee pleases. With potful 
of Surd and Asava (liquor) the great goddess should be pro¬ 
pitiated. 

52-53. The meat thereof should be given to Kapalikas as 
well as to servants and maid servants. In the afternoon of the 
Navami day, YogesI should be placed on a chariot and taken 
round the whole realm by the king himself along with his 
army. Conchs and Pataha drums should be sounded. Batus and 
Caranas should recite, sing and chant. 


VII.I.83.54-60—84.1-3 


295 


The Bali Mantra: 

54-56. May these Devas, Adityas, Vasus, Maruts, Asvins, Rudras. 
Suparnas, Pannagas etc. accept this oblation. Let all the spirits 
and ghosts become mild and conducive to happiness. 

O beautiful woman, the king should offer Bali (oblation) to 
the spirits with this Mantra. The oblation shall consist of water, 
blood, cooked rice, sweet scents, raw rice grains and flowers. 
The king should scatter this Bali three times in all the quarters 
and inner spaces by means of the trident. 

57. The Brahmanas residing in the holy spot should per¬ 
form the Yatrd thus. O goddess of Devas, due to the favour 
of Yogesvarl, they will have no enemies. Neither fire nor thieves, 
nor Vinayakas (Trouble-making gods) will impede their progress. 

58. They shall be happy enjoying all pleasures. They shall 
be devoid of all Atahkas (anguish, agony). The men shall be¬ 
come permanent devotees of Yogesvarl. 

59. Thus the great festival of Yogesvarl has been narrated 
to you. It destroys all inauspiciousness of those who read and 
listen to it. 

60. Men who worship Durga on the Navami day do cross 
the forests of impassable difficulties—the goddess who has pierced 
with the tip of the trident, the back of demon Mahisa and with 
her drawn sword, has cut up the staff-like arms (of the demon) 
adorned with armlets, and who is followed by Pancavadana 
(Lord Siva). 


CHAPTER EIGHTYFOUR 

Greatness of Adinarayana 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
Lord Visnu called Adinarayana. The deity is destructive of all 
sins. He is stationed on the eastern side of Yogesvarl. 

The Lord is the destroyer of all Daityas. He has sandals and 

a seat. 

At the beginning (of the creation) in Krtayuga, O fair lady, 


296 Skanda Purana 

there was a Daitya named Meghavahana. He had a huge body 
extending to ten thousand Yojanas. He was very mighty. He 
could not be conquered by all the Devas joined together. He 
caused the destruction of all the three worlds. O lady of ex¬ 
cellent countenance, Brahma, pleased by his penance, had 
granted him a boon. 

4. “Your death will take place only when in a battle Visnu 
strikes you with Paduka (sandal), not otherwise.” 

5. The Daitya who got this boon, began to oppress the 
whole of the earth along with Devas and Asuras and human 
beings. This continued for a period of a crore of Yugas. 

6. After to rmenting(all)in various ways.O goddess, he came 
to thesouthernsea.Therehedestroyedthe hermitages of sages. 

7. Then all those sages whose hermitages and surround¬ 
ings had been destroyed sought refuge in Kesava, the Lord of 
Devas. Knowing fully well that he is invincible, they eulogized 
the Garuda-emblemed Lord. 

The Sages said: 

8. Obeisance to the Atmayogin (the Supreme Soul as a 
Yogin) highly auspicious and cause of auspiciousness. Obei¬ 
sance to Janardana, to Lord Sridhara, to Vedhas. 

9. Obeisance to Kesava with the golden coronet resem¬ 
bling the Filaments of a lotus. Obeisance, obeisance to the 
extremely subtle in form, to one having a huge form. 

10. Obeisance to the lotus-navelled one, to the most pre¬ 
eminent one, to the most desirable one, to the great Atman. 
Obeisance to Hari in the form of Man-lion (Narasimha), to the 
creator of Indra. 

11. Obeisance to the Atman, to the cause of the universe, 
Obeisance to the Absolute having Hiranyagarbha (Brahma) in 
his womb. Obeisance to Acyuta always. Obeisance, obeisance 
to the infinite one. 

12. Obeisance to the great Atman whose refulgence is con¬ 
cealed by the veil of Maya, to the abode of the universe. Obeisance 
to the bestower of the raft of knowledge enabling one to cross 
the ocean of worldly existence. Obeisance to the Dhdtr (Cre- 
ator) of unobstructed intelligence, to the- Dhatr performing 
the duties of creation, maintenance and annihilation. 

14. Just as a sin gels destroyed when the name ‘Vasudeva’ 




VII.I.84.14-24 


297 


is uttered once, so also let this Daitya Meghavahana undergo 
destruction. 

14. Just as Visnu takes away a sin that is settled upon his 
devotees, so also may this Daitya, the perpetrator of sinful 
activities, meet with destruction. 

15. E\en as Visnu dispels all sins as soon as he is remem- 
bered.so also may this Daitya Meghavahana attain annihilation. 

16. When the Supreme Lord of great Lords, Vasudeva, the 
creator of the universe is remembered with impregnable (very' 
firm) devotion, let there be auspicious results; may all the 
defects of the entire universe meet with destruction. 

17. May excellent men, all those who are on the earth, 
those who are in heaven, those who are in the intervening 
space, all those living beings that live in Rasatala, become 
endowed with Siddlii (spiritual perfection) when Vasudeva, the 
creator of the universe, is remembered. 

18. May those living beings that live anywhere in this Cosmic 
Egg and beings living beyond that too, attain the greatest Siddhi 
when Vasudeva, the creator of the universe, is eulogized. 

isvara said: 

19-21. O fair lady, on being thus eulogized, Hari Adinarayana 
(the primordial Narayana) visualized the future task, stepped 
on the (Vehicle-like?) Sandals and became perceptible to those 
sages. The Lord, the destroyer of sins, spoke to them as they 
bowed down: “What is there in your heart that you wish to be 
done by me? May that be mentioned. Propitiated by the eulogy 
of you all, I shall duly accomplish it.” 

22. On being told thus, all those sages stood with palms 
joined in reverence. With the heads bowed down, they spoke 
to Hari, the primordial Lord. 

The Sages said: 

23. O Lord, you know everything. Nothing is unknown to 
you. O great Lord, slay this highly powerful Daitya, O Lord, 
so that this entire universe maybe free from dread. 

24. O splendid lady, on being told thus then by all of 
them, Visnu challenged the Daitya for a combat. He hit him 
on his chest with his sandal. 




298 Skanda Purana 

25. On being struck down, the Daitya fell dead into the 
great ocean. After killing the notorious Daitya, the Lord 
stationed himself there. O lady of excellent countenance, even 
today, he is stationed there on the sandal-shaped seat. 

26. Any excellent man who devoutly worships him gets the 
benefit of a horse-sacrifice and rejoices in heaven like a Deva. 

27. When Govinda, the primordial Lord, is visited devoutly 
the man gets the same benefit which is attained by giving away 
a hundred thousand cows to a Brahmana. 

28. The suffering of those who have Lord Adinarayana in 
their heart is less than happiness. It is as though they are 
having Krtayuga in Kali itself. 

29-30. By worshipping Adinarayana after bathing in the 
waters of Sannihita (a river)on a Sunday coinciding with the 
eleventh lunar day, one is rid of the bondage of worldly ex¬ 
istence. Thus, O goddess, the greatness of Visnu, the deity, has 
been spoken to you. If it is listened to by men, it destroys sins 
and a series of states of poverty. 


CHAPTER EIGI-ITYFIVE 


Greatness of Sannihita 1 

The Devi said: 

1-5. O Bull-emblemed One, you have said that there is 
(the river) Sannihita. How did that great river come there 
from Kuruksetra? Of what special efficacy is she reputed? What 
is the benefit derived by holy ablution etc.? 

Isvara said: 

Listen, O goddess, I shall tell you where the splendid Sannihita 
which destroys sins of all creatures through viewing and touch¬ 
ing is flowing. 

That great goddess, in the form of a great river, is situated 
wit in a istance of three Dhanus to the west of Adinarayana. 
O my beloved, I shall succinctly describe its origin. Listen. 
Due to the fear of Jarasandha, O goddess, Visnu (Krsna) 


'' U * lak ' “ d "« » *cr. This is an 

5? ?? (lake) in Kurudela. By b.,h in ii a, the time of solar 
eclipse one derives the fruit of Asvamedha. 






VII. 1 . 85 . 6-19 


299 


took all the Yadavas including children, old people and mer¬ 
chant folk and his relatives and attendants. Having deserted 
Mathura he came to Prabhasa. 

6-7. He requested the Ocean for some space for the sake 
of residence. 

At that festival time Divakara (Sun-god), the Lord of Devas, 
was swallowed by Rahu. On seeing this, all the Yadavas expe¬ 
rienced great grief. 

8-9. They were sorry because they could not reach Sannihita 
(-tya) (at Kuruksetra). Janardana spoke to them: “O excellent 
Yadavas, when I am here you need not experience any grief. 
May my power be witnessed. In order to boost up piety on the 
earth, I will bring here the sacred lake of Sannihita.” 

10-11. After saying thus, the Lord got absorbed in deep 
meditation. While Visnu of immeasurable refulgence was en¬ 
gaged in meditation thus, a splendid stream of water appeared 
in front of him. It had pierced the surface of the earth and presented 
itself for the holy ablution of the enemy of Asuras (i.e. Krsna). 

12. Thereupon, O great goddess, all the Yadavas with Balarama 
and Samba as their leaders, performed their holy ablution 
while the Sun was being swallowed by Rahu (i.e. Solar eclipse). 

13. They obtained the excellent fruit of the pilgrimage to 
Kuruksetra, the merit arising from (ablution in) Sannihitya. 

14. Thus the holy lake Sannihita came to be there. While 
the Sun is in the grasp of Rahu, O great goddess, one should 
take one's holy ablution there. He will get the entire benefit 

of Agnistoma Yajna. . . 

15. The devotee should feed a Brahmana with foodstuffs 
of all six tastes in accordance with the injunctions. Even if one 
is fed, the person (s) (so feeding) gets the benefit of feeding 

ten million people. , 

16 If Homa is performed in the vicinity of Sannihitya, t 

fruit of ten million Homas is derived at each Ahuti. 

17. If Mantras are uttered there, the fruit of ten million 
Japas is derived from the Japa of every Mantra. 

18-19 Gold is to be gifted by those who wish to get the 
benefit of the pilgrimage. After the holy ablution 
the primordial Lord, should be worshipped 'ThusI the perlfeet 
benefit derived from Sannihita has been spoken. ‘7° * „ 
beloved, if it is listened to it destroys the sms of those who ha 

great faith. 




300 


Skanda Purana 


CHAPTER EIGHTYSIX 

Greatness of Pandavesvara 

Isvara said: 

1. To the south thereof is situated a Lihga of great lustre 
named Pandavesvara. It has been installed by the five (Pandavas) 
in due order. 

2. When the Pandavas were obliged to remain incognito 
they were roaming in forests. They came to Prabhasa Ksetra 
with a view to perform their holy pilgrimage. 

3. O great goddess, when the Somaparvan occurred, 
at that time all of them installed the Lihga on the banks of 
Sannihita. 

4. Making the excellent Brahmanas beginning with 
Markandeya their Rtviks, they performed the Abhiselia (Ablu¬ 
tion) with the Mantras from the Vedas and gifted bulls (one 
each). 

5. O my beloved of excellent complexion, when the Lihga 
was installed, the sages beginning with Markanda became pleased. 

The sages said: 

6. Those who will worship this Lihga adored by Pandavas 
will be worthy of adoration by Devas, Danavas and Raksasas. 

7. There is no doubt. By our statement they will get the 
fruit of Asvamedha due to their faith and worship. 

8. If, after taking bath in Sannihita Kunda any person 
adores Pandavesvara during the whole of the month of Magha, 
he becomes Purusottama himself. 

9. By simply visiting him, sin gets rent into a thousand 
bits. He is said to be Visnu himself incarnate. There is no need 
to think over it. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYSEVEN 

Greatness of Bhutesvara 

Isvara said: 

1-4. Thus after performing the Ydtrd (of Pandavesvara), a 


VII.1.87.5-13 


301 


pilgrim, endowed with perfect faith, should, O great goddess, 
go to the eleven Rudras in due course. 

They are stationed in the centre of Prabhasa Ksetra and are 
the destroyers of great sins. Sins are acquired severally by men 
in eleven ways (through the ten Indriyas and Manas). Those 
sins are eradicated through the worship of the eleven Rudras. 

Becoming sanctified by good emotional feelings, a pilgrim 
should worship the eleven Rudras in due order during Samkrdnti 
(transit of the Sun), Ayana (on days when the Sun moves 
northwards and southwards), during solar and lunar eclipses 
or during other holy festival days. 

5. I shall tell their previous names as they were in Krtayuga. 
O goddess, listen to them correctly. 

6. (They are) Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya, Virupaksa, Raivata, 
Hara, Bahurupa, Tryambaka, Suresvara, Vrsakapi, Sarhbhu and 
Kapardin the undefeated. 

7. O goddess, these were the names first in Krtayuga. They 
continued in Treta and Dvapara also. (But) After the advent 
of the Kali Age, other names came into vogue. 

8-9. 1 The names of Rudras were eleven. I shall, tell them 
to you now. They are: Bhutesa, Nilarudra, Kapalin, Vrsavahana, 
Tryambaka, Aghoranaman (named as Aghora), Mahakala, Bhairava, 
Mrtyunjaya, Kamesa and Yogesa. O my beloved, the eleven 
Rudras have been enumerated to you. 

10. O goddess, they have neither beginning nor end. They 
are differentiated into eleven forms conforming to the names: 

The Devi said: 

11. O Lord, tell me in detail, the due order of the eleven 
Lingas, as based on the extension of their places, their great¬ 
ness and origin. 

12. O Lord, how are they to be worshipped? What are the 
Mantras? What is the mode of procedure of worship? On which 
festival day? Occasion? Do mention everything in detail. 

Isvara said: 

13. Listen, O goddess. I shall tell you the secret that is 
destructive of sins. Somanatha is at the beginning and Siddhinatha 
is the cause. 

1. From this chapter to the end of Chapter 97, the eleven Lingas enumer¬ 
ated in w 8-9 are described. 




302 


Skanda Purdna 


14-15. On listening to this, a creature is rid of the sins 
accumulated previously. O my beloved, the eleven Rudras men¬ 
tioned to you by me are said to be the ten Vayus (vital airs) 
and the Atman is remembered as the eleventh one. I shall tell 
the names of those ten Vayus in due order. Listen. 

16-17. The Lords, the Rudras, should be known in order 
thus: Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana, Vyana, Naga, Kurma, Krkala, 
Devadatta, Dhananjaya and Atman. For the sake of the welfare 
of all living beings, I shall explain the Yatra (pilgrimage, re¬ 
ligious procession) pertaining to them, in due order. 

18. O my beloved, formerly the first Lord of the Rudras 
was Somesvara. He should be worshipped in accordance with 
the injunctions under the name Bhutesvara. 

19. The services rendered should be those pertaining to 
and befitting kings. The mind should be sanctified by means 
of faith. The deity should be bathed in Pancamrta and wor¬ 
shipped uttering the Mantra Sadyojdla etc.( Taitl. Aranyalta. XVII. 1) 

20. The pilgrim should meditate on Lord Sadasiva and worship 
with charming flowers with great devotion. He should then 
circumambulate thrice and prostrate before the deity with the 
eight limbs touching the ground ( Sdstdhga ). 

21. One desirous of performing the Yatra of the eleven 
Rudras should proceed therefrom for the sake of averting obstacles. 

I shall explain the name Bhutesvara mentioned to you. 

22-23. The twenty-five Principles beginning with Mahal and 
ending with Visesa are called Bhutas. Since the Lord is remem¬ 
bered as their Lord, he was called Bhutesvara formerly. After 
knowing the twenty-five Tattvas one shall attain salvation. 

• 24 ' • worshi PP in S Bhutesa Rudra, one shall attain the 
imperishable salvation. 

. J.p US g *° r ' flcation of Adirudra is briefly told. It is worthyof 

glorification by the twice-born. When glorified, it enhances merit. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYEIGHT 

Greatness of Nllarudra 

Isvara said: 

Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 


VIU.88.S-6—89.1-4 


303 


the second shrine of Nllarudra situated within sixteen Dhanus 
to the north of Bhutesa. 

It is a great Lihga, O great goddess, worshipped by the 
Ganas and Gandharvas. After bathing the Lihga in accordance 
with injunctions, the pilgrim should worship it uttering the 
Mantra of Isa. 

3. By mean's of blue and white water lilies in abundance 
as well as other requisites for adoration, he should worship the 
deity after sanctifying his soul perfectly. After circumambula- 
tion, he should prostrate before the deity and worship (it). 

4. By performing the rites thus, O goddess, he shall obtain 
the fruit of a Rajasuya Sacrifice. A bull should be gifted by 
those who wish to obtain the benefit of a perfect pilgrimage. 

5. A Daitya who resembled blue collyrium and whose name 
was Antaka was killed formerly. The Lord caused the wives of 
that demon to lament and cry. Hence he is remembered as 
Nllarudra. 

6. The sin-destroying greatness of that deity has been succincdy 
spoken. It should be attained by those endowed with perfect 
faith. The story of the deity should be listened to by those who 
are eager to visit it. 


CHAPTER EIGHTYNINE 

Greatness of Kapallsvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O beautiful lady, a devotee should go to 
the excellent shrine of Kapallsvara. This is the third Rudra 
shrine. It is destructive of sins. It is stationed to the east of 
Nllarudra and within a distance of seven bows to the west of 
Budhesvara. 

You know, O goddess, that the fifth head of Brahma was 
formerly cut off by me and the skull got struck up to my hand. 
.1 then came to the holy place of Prabhasa and remained within 
the Ksetra for a thousand years. 

4. Nude as I was, I went on holding the skull and am 
hence remembered as Kapalin. O my beloved, for ten thou¬ 
sand years, the Lihga was worshipped by me. 


304 


Skanda Parana 


5. I had assumed the form of a Kapalin (holder of a skull). 
Therefore, I am remembered as Kapalisa. By seeing and touch¬ 
ing (me), all the sins of men are dispelled (by me). 

6. O goddess, thousands of Ganas armed with tridents were 
engaged there by me to save people from evil-minded sinners. 

7-10. Hence by making all efforts, a pilgrim should wor¬ 
ship the great Lord Kapalin, devoid of ailments. After worship¬ 
ping the Lord with the Mantra “latpurusaya vidmahe" ( Taitt. 
Aranyaka XVII, 4) etc., gold should be given to a Brahmana 
well-versed in the Vedas. All the sins acquired by the creature, 
ever since the nativity are dispelled by that Linga on being 
visited in the morning of the Sadasiti holy hour. 

Thus the sin-destroying greatness of KapalT Rudra Deva, the 
third deity, has been succinctly spoken (to you), O lady of 
excellent countenance. 


CHAPTER NINETY 

Greatness of Vrsavahanesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the excellent shrine of the fourth Rudra. The Linga named 
Vrsabhesvara is a Kalpalinga, a favourite of Suras. 

There, O great goddess, Brahma himself is stationed in the 
form of a boy. This shrine is situated within a distance of three 
Dhanus on the northern side. 

A man devoid of merits does not comprehend this primor¬ 
dial Linga of great efficacy. I shall now enumerate to you the 
names of the Linga in different Kalpas. 

Brahmp'° sreat goddess > the deity was remembered as 
Brahmesvara m the earlier Kalpa. O my beloved it was Dro 

piliated for ten thousand years by Brahma, the Lord who was 
Thereaftei^ Phamah th ' ^ ‘hereby 

° ut ‘ he creation of the four w- 

6. The name Brahmesvara was formerly aonlied m ih 
ur B S ;Z- ara P ' eaSed " ith ,he Slatus of ‘he Lord 






VII.I.90.7-23 


305 


7. Then, O lady of excellent complexion, when the sec¬ 
ond Kalpa arrived, the shrine became well-known on the earth 
by the name Raivatesvara. 

8. There was a king named Raivata in the Cosmic Egg 
consisting of mobile and immobile beings. As a result of the 
power of that Lihga, he conquered this world. 

9-10. Therefore, the Lihga of great lustre came to be known 
by the name Raivatesvara. 

Again, O lady of excellent complexion, at the advent of the 
third Kalpa the name of that Lihga was Vrsabhesvara. Vrsa 
(Bull) is my vehicle and it is Dharma (Virtue, Piety) who has 
taken the form of a bull. 

11. That Lihga was worshipped by him for a thousand years 
as per celestial reckoning. The bull attained Sayujya (merging 
into the divinity), a type of salvation, when the Lord was pleased, 
O goddess of Devas. 

12-13. Hence that Lihga became known as Vrsabha on the 
earth. 

At the advent of the fourth Kalpa named Varaha, at the 
beginning of the twenty-eighth Tretayuga there was a king 
named Iksvaku. He was an ornament unto the Solar race. 

14. Excessively sanctified through devotion, he worshipped 
the Lihga thrice a day. He took food only once a day. He 
conquered the craving for food and all the sense-organs. He 
slept on bare ground. 

15. Thus, much time elapsed. Then Mahesvara became pleased. 
He granted highly prosperous kingdom and progeny in the 
form of sons and grandsons. 

16-17. Therefore, this excellent Lihga became known by 
the name Iksvakvlsvara. He who devoutly worship the Bull- 
vehicled Lord gets rid of sins incurred in the course of seven 
births. There is no doubt about it. That holy spot extends upto 
thirty Dhanus on the four sides. 

18. Whatever is performed in that Tirtha such as bath, 
Japya, oblation, Homa, adoration, eulogy and chanting of Vedic 
Mantra, shall be everlasting. 

19-23. By measurement and magnitude, the holy spot is 
rectangular. One who spends a night in the vicinity of that 
Lihga, observes celibacy, and keeps awake at night doing dance, 
(amidst) vocal and instrumental music gets rid of all sins. 


306 


Skanda Purana 


A man may be a cow-slayer or a Brahmana murderer, yet he 
is rid of all evil deeds if he performs Homo, and Japa and 
meditates. The pilgrim should delight Brahmanas by means of 
different kinds of edible things. Feeding only one Brahmana 
here is as good as feeding ten million. 

O goddess, the following eight Tirthas are well settled in 
that Lihga: Bhairava, Kedara, Puskara, Drutijaiigama, Varanasi, 
Kuruksetra, Mahakala and Naimisa. 

24-26. He who keeps awake at night on the fourteenth 
lunar day in the dark half of Magha and worships the Lord 
duly, shall get the fruit of (visiting) the (above) eight Tirthas. 

If a pilgrim offers rice-balls in the vicinity of Siva, on the 
day when the Moon is not visible (New-Moon day) the Pitrs 
become pleased with him till the close of the day of Brahma. 

A devotee should adore that Lihga at night with curds, ghee, 
milk, the five products from a cow, water from Kusa grass, 
saffron, agallochum and camphor. 

27. If the devotee utters the Aghora Mantra and meditates 
on Lord Sadasiva, O great goddess, he is rid of the five sins. 

28. If a Brahmana bathes the deity with curds on the eighth 
and fourteenth lunar days, he shall undoubtedly become well- 
versed in all the four Vedas. 

29. O goddess, if he bathes the deity Vrsabhesvara with 
milk, he obtains the great fruit of offering seven thousand 
cows as gift. 

30. O beautiful woman, the sins committed in the previous 
births and also committed now are destroyed, O my beloved, 
through the ablution (of the Lihga) with curds. 

31. O goddess, he who bathes Vrsabhesvara with the five 

products from a cow burns all sins and obtains the fruit of all 
Yajnas. 


32-33. On seeing him, if a person endeavours to propitiate 
that Linga, the following sinners are rid of all their sins: a 
Brahmana-slayer, a cow-slayer, a thief, a defiler of preceptor’s 
bed, a murderer of one seeking refuge, one who betrays friends 
all evd-minded sinners, slayers of mother and father. 

the whof:; f h ,° W °; ShipS the Sreat Li " ga Brah ™esvara during 
of sins m ° nth al ° ng Wkh Brahm * sha11 be nd 

35. If anyone worships Vrsabhesvara, the Lord of all the 





VII.I.90.36-37—91.1-8 


307 


Devas, he is as good as one who gives away everything, who 
pleases all the preceptors, who performs Sraddha in Gaya Tlrtha. 

36. Thus the greatness honoured by the Devas has been 
wholly told to you, O •goddess. O beautiful woman, the great¬ 
ness of Lord Vrsabhesvara, the Kalpalinga, has been told. 

37. He who listens to the greatness of the Lord of Devas, 
O great goddess, attains the greatest goal even if he be a fool 
or a scholar. 


CHAPTER NINETYONE 

Greatness of Tryambakesvara 


Isvarn said: 

1-2. Thereafter, O goddess, a pilgrim should go to the 
immutable Tryambakesvara. It has been proclaimed as the fifth 
of the Rudras, the primordial deity. 

O my beloved, it was named in the earlier Treta yuga as 
Sikhandlsvara. I shall describe it now in the manner known to 
people. 

3-4. O goddess Paramesvarl, there is the city of Sambapura 
situated there. The holy spot remembered as Kapalika is estab¬ 
lished to the north thereof. The Lord named Kapalesvara is 
stationed there in the form of a Linga for the sake of dispel¬ 
ling sins of men by seeing and touching it. 

5. Within a distance of sixteen Dhanus from that deity (i.e. 
Kapalesvara) in the north-eastern direction, the deity Rudra 
called Tryambakesvara is stationed. 

6. The deity blesses all and bestows all cherished desires. 

It was at this holy spot that the excellent sage named Guru 

performed a very severe and difficult penance unbearable even 
to Devas and Danavas. 

7. He worshipped Sankara thrice a day in an excellent 
manner. He performed thejapa of the great Tryambaka Mantra 1 
three crore times. 

8. Thereby he propitiated the Lord of Devas and obtained 


1. The Mantra is - tryambakam yajamahe etc. RV VII.59.12. 




308 


Skanda Purdna 


divine powers and prosperity. He himself designated the im¬ 
mutable deity as Tryambakesvara. 

9. It was by repeating the Tiyambaka Mantra that he obtained 
supernatural power and eightfold divine Aisvarya (Mastery). 
Therefore, the deity is called Tryambakesvara. 

10. Even by viewing or touching the deity it destroys sins. 
A Brahmana who performs Jap a in the vicinity of Tryambakesvara 
attains the great Siddhi. He becomes the veritable Rudra him¬ 
self. 

11. By merely viewing it, sin is broken into a thousand bits. 
He who devoutly worships it with sanctity and in the prescribed 
manner uttering Vamadeva Mantra' will be rid of sins. 

12. He who keeps awake at night on the fourteenth lunar 
day in the bright half of the month of Caitra doing adoration, 
singing eulogy and hearing/telling devotional stories gets the 
desired fruit. 

13. A cow should be gifted there itself by those who desire 
to get the fruit of the perfect pilgrimage. 

14. Thus, O goddess, the sin-destroying greatness of 
Tryambakesvara Rudra has been spoken to you. It bestows 
meritorious fruits on men. 


CHAPTER NINETYTWO 

Greatness of Aghoresvara 


Isvara said: 


'~P ,h T „ herCa n er ' ? f«“. a devotee should pro¬ 

face is rememberecTas^hairava^terribleW^sh* 1 ^*^ a,an< * 

CO <he north-west of ^ 

“s “tn “ bes r ■“ !«££££ 

of abtal erfo^ clnXtr^h 5 ,:' by 

Of the gift Of Me™ rd "' Sha " Set the Fruit 


'■ Protabl l' "*■«*■>>,« |„ 7W„. X VII. 2. 



VII.I.92.4-9—93.1-5 


309 


4. Depending on Daksinamurti everything that is offered 
there to Lord Aghoresvara shall be everlasting. 

5-7. If a devotee performs Sraddha to the south of 
Aghoresvara, the Pitrs so propitiated remain happy for a Kalpa. 
Of what avail is Sraddha at Gaya Tirtha, O my beloved? Of what 
avail is a horse-sacrifice? By performing Sraddha there, all these 
benefits and even more are obtained. He who offers even a bit 
of gold during the pilgrimage, obtains abundant fruit of a 
great act of charity. 

8-9. He who performs Brahmakurca in accordance with 
the injunctions on the eighth lunar day on a Monday in the 
vicinity of Aghoresvara uttering Aghora Mantra 1 gets the fruit 
of performing Prayascitta (expiation) for six years. Thus the 
great glory of Aghoresa has been briefly spoken. The greatness 
is destructive of all sins. If listened to it accomplishes all ob¬ 
jectives. 


CHAPTER NINETYTHREE 

Greatness of Mahakalesvara 

Isvara said: 

1-2. Thereafter, O beautiful lady, a pilgrim should go to 
the shrine of H'ara called Mahakalesvara situated slightly to the 
north rather to the north-west of Aghoresa within a distance 
of thirty Dhanus. O goddess, on being listened to, it destroys 
sins. O fair lady, formerly in Krtayuga it was remembered as 
Citrarigadesvara. 

3. O goddess, in Kali age, its name is proclaimed as 
Mahakalvesvara. The great Rudra in the form of Kala is 
stationed in that Linga. 

4-5. O my beloved, he is the preceptor of the mobile and 
immobile beings. The Lord destroys the arrogance of Devas 
and Danavas. O my beloved, in the form of the Sun-go.d, he 
swallows the whole of the Cosmic Egg. O goddess, that Lord 


1. Probably aghorebhyo’ tha ghorebhyo etc .-TaiU. Aranyaka XVII.3. 



310 


Skanda Parana 


of great lustre is stationed in that Linga. One who devoutly 
worships the Linga of mine early in the morning uttering the 
six syllabled Mantra conquers death in a moment. I am fond 
of that Linga. 

6-7. Especially on the eighth day in the dark half, the 
devotee should perform the adoration at nightfall and burn 
Guggula along with ghee duly. Bhairava exonerates a hundred 
crimes of his. Great sages praise gifting cows at that holy spot. 

8-9. Certainly a person who gifts cows here redeems ten 
generations before and ten generations after him. 

A man who mutters Satarudriya hymn in the spot to the 
south of the Lord, will uplift all the members of his father’s 
and mother’s family. By visiting Hara named Kalesvara, one 
dispels all the sins committed in childhood, youth or old age. 

10. If a person performs the rite of Ghrlahambala (covering 
the Linga with ghee) at the time of the northern transit of the 
Sun, he never again takes another birth in the world. 

11. By visiting Mahakalesvara, one can avert the eventual¬ 
ity of becoming poor, miserable and unlucky in the course of 
seven subsequent births. 

12. He is reborn in a dignified well-to-do family. He will 
have even more devotjon to the adoration of Mahakalesvara. 

13-14. Thus, O my beloved, the description of Mahakales'vara 
has been given by me briefly. O goddess, there is a Gana named 
Citrangada. The deity Mahakalesvara was formerly propitiated 
by him for a period of a thousand years according to the reckoning 
of Devas. Hence it became well-known as Citrangadesvara. 


CHAPTER NINETYFOUR 

Greatness of Bhairavesvara 

Isvara said: 

i-3. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the excel!, 

®uZr“ f n t e h d within r a dista "« «*ow \ 

it “isvara). O fair !a, 

poverty. d destro y s a series of states 


t 


j 







VII.1.94.4-10—95.1-4 


311 


O my beloved, formerly rn Krtayttga it „ as „ e l|. kno „ n „ (hc 
name Candesvara. There was a Gatta named Canda, O god 
dess, and the deny was propitiated by him for a thousand 
divine years. Hence it is remembered as Candesvara d 
4-5. By visiting the Lord of the chiefs of Devas and by 
touching him with concentration and mental purity one is riri 
of all sins committed between birth and death. He who keens 
awake at night after fasting on the fourteenth day in the dark 
half of the month of Bhadrapada, goes to the great r e g on 
where Lord Mahesvara dwells. s 

6-8. All sins incurred verbally, mentally and physically are 
destroyed by vtstung that Lthga. Gingelly seeds, gold and garments 
should be gifted there to an enlightened scholar for destroying 
a! sms by one who desires to get the fruit of a well performed 
ptlgrtmage. At the end of a Kalpa the Lord assumes a Bhairava 
(terrible) form and annihilates the entire universe. O goddess 
of gods, he is then remembered as Bhairava 

9-10. O great goddess, in this Kalpa, Rudra named Bhairava 
resorted to Prabhasa Ksetra and had the form of a Lihga till 
the end of the Kalpa. Thus the greatness of Bhairavesvara has 
been briefly spoken. By listening to this, the creature is rid of 
highly terrible sins. 


CHAPTER NINETYFIVE 

Greatness of Mrtyunjaya 

Isvara said: 

*Thereafter, O beautiful lady, a pilgrim should go to 
t ie Linga named Mrtyunjayesvara situated within a distance of 
ten Dhanus in the south-east corner thereof. 

In the western direction, it is situated within a distance of 
our Dhanus from the shrine of Sagaraditya. It destroys the sins 
of all creatures who visit and touch it. In the earlier Yuga, it 
was called Nandlsvara, because it is the place where a severe 
penance was performed by my Gana named Nandin. 

4. After installing the great Lihga, he became engaged in 
Us worship always and performed thejapa of the great Mantra 
well-known as Mrtyunjaya. 




312 


Skanda Purana 


5 o goddess, he muttered the Mantra millions and croies 
of times Thereby Lord Mahesvara became pleased. The Lord 
gave him chieftainship of Ganas and salvation called Sdmipya 
(nearness to the Lord). 

6. Since Hara became pleased with him due to (the Japa 
of) Mi-tyunjaya Mantra, the Lihga therefore, became famous 

all over the earth as Mr-tyunjayesa. 

7. If anyone worships it devoutly or visits it with sanctified 
soul, he will destroy all the sins acquired even in the course 
of seven births. 

8. The devotee should bathe the Lihga with milk, curds, 
honey mixed with ghee, or sugarcane juice. He should apply 
Kumkuma (saffron) to it. 

9. The juice of (liquid) musk mixed with camphor and 
Usira, or scented sandalwood also should be applied. Then he 
should worship it with flowers. 

10-11. O goddess, incense and Aguru should be fumigated 
before the Lord. Then he (the devotee) should honour the 
Lord (or priest) with different kinds of garments in accor¬ 
dance with his capacity. He shall then offer milk pudding as 
Naivedya along with lamps. Thereafter, Astanga prostration should 
be devoutly performed touching the ground with eight parts 
of the body. 

12-14. Gold should be offered to a Brahmana who has 
mastered the Vedas. In this manner his pilgrimage shall be¬ 
come one conforming to the scriptural texts. There is no doubt 
about it. By doing this, O goddess, the man gets the fruit of 
his birth. 

Thus the great glory (of the worship) of Mrtyunjaya has 
been succinctly stated. It is destructive of the sins of all crea¬ 
tures. It causes the fulfilment of all cherished desires. 


CHAPTER NINETYSIX 

Greatness of Kamesvara 

Isvara said: 

1-2. Thereafter, O goddess, a pilgrim should go to the 



VII.I-96.3-14 


313 


shrine proclaimed as Kamesvara. It is stationed within a dis¬ 
tance of three Dhanus to the north thereof. O goddess of 
Suras, in Treta, it was famous by the name Ratlsvara. O lady 
of excellent countenance, if it is visited and worshipped, the 
sins of men committed during the period of seven births get 
destroyed. There shall be no break-up of households. 

The Devi said: 

3. O Lord, by whom was this installed? Why is it called 
Ratlsvara? What fruit is obtained by visiting it? Mention every¬ 
thing in detail. 

Isvara said: 

4-6. Listen, O fair lady, I shall narrate to you a sin-destroy¬ 
ing story. There was a chaste lady named Rati. She was the 
well-known wife of Kama. 

Formerly when Manasija (i.e. Kama) was burnt by Lord Tripurari, 
it is said that Rati performed a penance at that spot for the 
sake of getting him (Kama) back. 

For a period of four Yugas, she stood on the tip of her toes, 
O my beloved, and with a tranquil mind Mahadeva was pro¬ 
pitiated (by her). 

7-9. At a certain time, O my beloved, the Mahesvara Linga 
pierced through the ground and came up before her. 

At the same time, an unembodied voice spoke as follows, O 
lady of excellent countenance, and delighted her. “Since, O 
highly esteemed lady, the Mahesvara Linga suddenly rose up 
as a result of your devotion, you should worship it. You will get 
back your husband.” 

10. On hearing these words of the divine messenger, that 
chaste lady worshipped the Linga with great devotion. 

11. Then, O my beloved one, Kama rose up as though he 
was getting up. from sleep. Ever since then that Linga is known 
as Kamesvara. 

12. Delighted due to the return of Kamadeva the wife of 
Kama spoke these words to the Flower-weaponed One: 

13-14. “Those others who concentrate their minds with 
purity and worship this Linga thus, acquire their desired su¬ 
pernatural powers and attain the excellent goal. By the favour 


314 


Skanda Purdiia 


of this Liriga, they will get everything mentally desired even if 
it happens to be very difficult to get. There is no doubt.” 

15. After saying thus, the chaste lady Rati went away ac¬ 
companied by Kama. With the innermost soul delighted and 
with desires fulfilled, she went to her abode. 

16. He who perfectly worships this (Linga) on the thir¬ 
teenth lunar day in the bright half of Caitra, shall become one 
like Kama. If listened to, this story accords conjugal felicity. 


CHAPTER NINETYSEVEN 

Greatness of Yogesvara 


Isvara said: 


1-3. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the shrine well- 
known as Yogesvara, O great goddess. It is situated within a 
distance of seven Dhanus from Kamesa in the north-western 
direction. 

The Linga is of great power. It destroys sins through viewing 
(it). In the earlier Yuga, it was well-known as Ganesvara. 

O goddess, formerly the highly powerful innumerable Ganas 
of mine came to Prabhasa after knowing that it is a holy spot 
of Mahesvara. 


4. Staying there they resorted to Yoga practice and per¬ 
formed a great penance for a thousand years according to the 
divine reckoning. Mahes'vara was pleased thereby. 

5. The Lord granted them salvation called Salokya (Resi¬ 
dence in the world of the Lord) as a result of their Yogic 
power. Since the Bull-bannered Lord was pleased with their 

ogic practice consisting of six ancillaries, the Linga was given 

the name Yogesvara. It bestows the fruit in the form of Yogic 
power. 5 

6. He who devoutly worships it in accordance with the 
injunctions of a perfect adoration, attains Yogic Siddhi and 
rejoices in heaven like Devas. 

eanh iLT" T y 8if ‘ awa >' the S°lden Men. or the entire 
WOrSh " K YoS « a is —bered a, superior 


\ 


VII.I.97.8-12—98.1-5 


315 


8. For the sake of the full benefit, a bull should be given 
as a charitable gift there. 

Thus the eleven Rudras stationed in Prabhasa Ksetra have 
been described. They are to be worshipped and honoured 
everyday by those who desire to attain the fruit of (visiting) the 
holy spot. 

9. He who listens to the Samhitd (Scriptural Text) pertain¬ 
ing to the eleven Rudras attains the entire fruit of (visiting) 
the holy spot like the residents of Prabhasa. 

10. He who resides within this holy place yet does not 
know these Rudras stationed in Prabhasa is no better than 
non-existent (despite his residence therein). He is remem¬ 
bered as a beast. 

11. After worshipping all these eleven Rudras or one only, 
and visiting the deity Somesvara, a devotee should perform the 
Japa of Satarudriya. There is no doubt about this that he ac¬ 
quires the fruit (of the worship) of all the Rudras. 

12. O beautiful woman, this secret of the greatness of the 
Rudras has been fully spoken to you. When listened to, it 
destroys sins and increases merit. 


CHAPTER NINETYEIGHT 

Greatness of Prthvisvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the shrine well-known as Candesvara. It is situated to the north¬ 
west of Somesa within a distance of sixty Dhanus. It is a divine 
Lihga, O great goddess, and destroys all sins. 

In an earlier Yuga, in the Svayambhuva Manvantara, at the 
beginning of Tretayuga, it was installed by PrthivI (goddess 
Earth). In this previous Manvantara, O my beloved, the Lihga 
was called Prthvisvara. 

4. Further, O my beloved, it was acquired by Candra. The 
Lihga (came to be called) Candresvara. It destroys sins like 
Brahmana-slaughter etc. It is conducive to the increase of merit. 

5. On visiting the deity, O goddess, a man is rid of all the 


316 


Skanda Purana 


sins originating (committed) in the course of seven births. He 
becomes contented and blessed. 


The Devi said: 

6. How did that sin-destroying Linga come to be well-known 
as PrthvTsvara? How did it further become famous as Candresvara, 
O my Lord. Do narrate this in detail. I am desirous of listening 
to it respectfully. 

J'svara said: 


7. Listen, O goddess, I shall narrate the sin-annihilating 
story. On listening to this, a creature is rid of the three types 
of Karma-bondages. 

8. O great goddess, the Earth became afflicted formerly 
by the burden of the Daityas. Slipping and going down sud¬ 
denly, she became transformed into a cow. 

9-10. Running about here and there, she could not get 
relief anywhere. She went on wandering from place to place for 
a hundred years. When a hundred years were completed, she 
reached the great holy spot well-known as Prabhasa which destroys 
sins. It has been resorted to by Devas, Danavas and Gandharvas. 

11. Endowed with great devotion, she stayed in that great 
holy place and resolving in her mind she eventually installed 
the Linga. 


12. When an extremely difficult penance was performed 
for a period of more than a hundred years, Lord Rudra be¬ 
came pleased and spoke to Dharitrl (Earth) these words: 

13. “O fair lady Vis'vambhara (Earth), all the austerities 
have been performed quite well by you. O auspicious one, do 
not be grief-stricken. Your wish will become fulfilled. 

14. Daityas will meet with destruction after being slain bv 
isnu on the Earth. O extremely great lady, you will be re¬ 
lieved of the burden of Daityas. 

15. This highly excellent Linga installed by you will be very 
famous after your name Dharitrl, all over the world. ^ 

in 1 ?? 8t ? hCre ’ the great Lord ’ in the form of a Linga 
m every Kalpa dispelling sins of men. 

Dre S enM„ n< !hr. d ” i,h f my dghtf0ld Cosn,ic fon ” 1 shall •>= 
present in this Linga for ever. I shall destroy all sins of man¬ 
kind incurred during hundreds of previous births 


VII.I.98.18-30—99.1-3 


317 


18. He who adores this Lihga on the third lunar day in the 
dark half of the month of Bhadrapada, shall undoubtedly ac¬ 
quire the fruit of a thousand horse-sacrifices. 

19. By worshipping this Lihga alone, the fruit acquired 
shall be that of ablution in all the Tirthas and giving all kinds 
of charitable gifts. 

20. An area of about sixteen Dhanus all round is the extent 
of this holy place which grants salvation unto all living beings. 

21-22. Living beings like even worms and insects that die 
within this range attain the highest goal. A person may gift 
away the golden Meru or the entire earth but he who adores 
Prthvisa Lihga is proclaimed as superior to both of them.” 

Isvara said: 

23-26. After saying thus and granting the boons, the Lord 
vanished there itself. Ever since then, Sankara became a deity 
with the name Prthvlsvara. Again in this Kalpa, well-known as 
Varahakalpa, Candra become debilitated once due to Daksa’s 
curse, O goddess. Sasin fell on to the ground afflicted by phthysis. 
He came to the Prabhasa Ksetra on the shore of the ocean. 
On seeing the powerful Lihga of great lustre named Prthvlsvara, 
he became engaged in worshipping it for a thousand years. 

27-30. He performed a very terrible penance with only 
fallen leaves and water constituting his diet. Due to the great¬ 
ness of that Linga, Sasin became a delighter of everyone with 
his refulgence'. 

Therefore, the deity became Candresvara. Due to the great¬ 
ness of that Lihga, Candra was rid of all sins. He obtained a 
very powerful Siddhi revealing a Sparsalinga. That deity in the 
form of a Lihga they call Somanatha, the well-known deity. 

Thus the greatness of the deity Candra has been briefly 
mentioned. If listened to, it destroys sins and grants health. 


CHAPTER NINETYNINE 

Greatness of Dandapani-Cakradhara 
Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O goddess, a pilgrim should go to the holy 


318 


Skanda Purana 


place where Cakradhara (Discus-bearing Lord) and the staff- 
bearing deities are present, O goddess of Devas. They are stationed 
in the same spot. 

They are situated within a distance of five Dhanus to the 
north of Somesa and to the east of Candresa. They are very 
near Gandharvesa. 

It is also on the south-western side of Uma. It is honoured 
by Brahmanical and celestial sages. I shall narrate its origin 
which destroys all sins. 

4-5. Formerly there was Paundraka 1 (King of the country 
Pundra) Vasudeva in Varanasi. While the Puranas were being 
read by Brahmanas, he heard that at the beginning of the 
Kalpa, towards the close of the Dvapara Yuga, the mighty Vasudeva 
would be taking his incarnation in the household of Ksatriyas. 

6. The foolish fellow considered himself Vasudeva, O my 
beloved of excellent countenance, and bore (his) marks such 
as holding a discus. 


7-10. He sent a messenger (called) Mahodara to Dvaraka. 


He went there and said to Visnu: “Give up your discus etc. King 
Paundraka says so. If you do not, you will meet with death.” 
Thereupon, Lord Visnu told him these charming words: “That 
king Paundraka should be told these words of mine: ‘I will 
come to your city Kas'I holding my discus. I will then leave 
(hurl) the discus as well as this club. Undoubtedly vou *hn..M 




armies and 


own big army and that 


against Kesava. 


. He was seated in his 
a club and the Sarnga 


15. On seeing him, Krsna with the real Garuda 


da as his emblem 



was the king of Kurusa (Mod. 
when challenged.(Bh.P.X.65) 



VI 1.1.98.16-28 


319 


laughed meaningfully. He then spoke to the foolish Paundraka 
characterised with his (Hari’s) own marks: 

16-17. “O Paundraka, through your messenger’s oral message, 
you told me thus: ‘Leave (hurl) the marks’, I shall leave (dis¬ 
charge) everything. This discus has been discharged. So also 
this club. Let this Garuda go and climb on to your banner.” 

18. After saying thus, the discus was discharged and the 
(enemy) was caused to fall down. The chariot was broken by 
the club. The elephants and the horses were smashed into 
smithereens. 

19. Thereat a loud cry of lamentation spread in the world. 
The highly powerful king of Kasi, who grieved at the misery 
(death) of his friend, fought with Vasudeva. 

20. By means of arrows discharged from his Sarhga bow his 
head was cut off (by Vasudeva) and hurled into the city of 
Kasi. This caused great wonder in the minds of the people. 

21. After killing Paundraka and the King of Kasi along 
with his followers, Sauri came back to Dvaraka like one who 
had gone ahunting. 

22. Thereafter, the son of the king of Kasi, miserable due 
to his father’s mishap, propitiated Sankara. He (Sankara) granted 
him a boon. 

23. He wooed: “O Lord, O Lord of Suras, with your favour 
let a Krtya (Ogress of destruction) appear before me for killing 
Krsna, the slayer of my father.” 

24. “It will happen so”. When this was uttered (by the Lord) 
a great Krtya rose up from the centre of the Daksinagni (Sac¬ 
rificial Fire) and started towards Dvaraka. 

25. On seeing the terrible Krtya emitting wreaths of flames, 
all the frightened Yadavas approached Janardana seeking ref¬ 
uge. 

26. Then the Garuda-emblemed Lord discharged Sudarsana 
for the destruction of the Krtya which was shattered (fled) on 
being afflicted by the brilliance of the discus. 

27. The discus of Visnu, Sudarsana, pursued the Krtya 
immediately. The Krtya reached Varanasi and the discus 
followed closely. 

28. Then excessively frightened, the Krtya sought refuge in 
Sankara, Somanatha, the Lord of the universe. No one else was 
competent to save it. 


320 Skanda Purana 

29. Then Sankara hit the discus with his excellent arrows. 
Getting entangled with the arrows of Siva it returned to DvaravatT. 

30. On seeing his discus hit with the arrows marked by 
Siva’s name. Lord Hari became furious. He seized it with his 
hand and went to the place where Kalabhairava Somesa was 
present. 

31. His eyes became red like copper. He stood there rais¬ 
ing the discus with his hand. He determined to destroy the 
Krtya created by Kalabhairava. 

32. He was seen thus by all the Devas and the Gana of the 
Staff-bearing Lord (Dandapani). Even as the Devas were look¬ 
ing, the great Gana Dandapani looked at the Lotus-eyed Visnu 
with the discus in his raised hand and requested him: 


Dandapani said: 


33. O Lord of Devas, O Lord of the universe, do not be 
angry with the Krlyd. 

34. Your discus is infallible in battle. Sankara’s Krlyd too 
is so. When the discus is hurled and if Hara becomes furious, 

a great calamity will befall or the destruction of the worlds will 
follow. 


35. Hence the discus should not be released. Listen once 

again to our words. O Hari, I have been appointed in this holy 
spot by Sankara formerly. ’ 

36. It is for the sake of protection the sinners' and to 
obstruct the evil-minded ones. Hence, O Hari, do stand beside 
me holding the discus. 

37. Men will worship Lord Cakradhara here by means of 
stuffs) C ’ gar 3ndS ’ ° ffenngS and various Wnds of Naivedyas (food- 


Visnu said: 

J*?’ . "."f ‘ *Tdrained by your words as though with a 
Cakra raised u7 ' by ^ “ d ' with "V »and holding the 

39. It was thus, O my beloved, that Lord Cakradhara 

'• T "' re,d "' ! Sl ' OU " 1 b “" ***- instead « pspMm . 




VTI.I.99.40-43—100.1-7 


321 


stationed himself there. So also Lord Dandapani, the Lord of 
Ganas, my own form. 

40. A man who devoutly worships Dandapani and Hari duly 
will be rid of sins. He shall go to the city of Siva. 

41. If anyone worships Dandanayaka with scents, incense 
and offerings especially on the fourteenth lunar day as well as 
eighth lunar day in the dark half of the month of Magha, he 
will have no obstacle anywhere while he stays in the holy spot. 

42-43. He who abstains from food on the eleventh day and 
worships Cakrapani shall be rid of all sins. He will attain Salckata 
(residing in the same world) of Visnu. 

Thus the greatness of Cakrapani has been briefly stated. So 
also that of Dandapani Gana. If listened to it destroys sins. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED 

Durvasas Curses Samba 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the shrine of Sambaditya situated to the north of those two 
(Dandapani and Cakradhara) and to the north-west of Brahma 
in the form of a boy. 

O most excellent lady among Suras, the deity was installed 
by Samba. In this Dvlpa, there are three holy places of Lord 
Bhaskara (the Sun-god). The first one is Mitravana by name. 
Then the next is called Mundira and the third one in Prabhasa 
Ksetra is Sambaditya. 

4. O great goddess, the city called Samba in that holy spot 
is the second permanent abode of the Sun-god there. 

5-6. Due to his affection for Samba and in order to bless 
the people, Arka (the Sun-god) stays there with a twelfth part 
of his self for the purpose of general welfare. He views all the 
worlds always with a friendly eye. The Lord himself (directly) 
accepts the adoration duly performed. 

The Devi said: 

7. Who is this Samba? Whose son is he? Wherefore is the 


322 


Skanda Parana 


city of Ravi (Sun-god) named after him? Wherefore does this 
person of meritorious activities get the boon granted by the 
Thousand-rayed Lord? 

Isvara said: 

8-9. There are highly powerful twelve Adilyas (Suns) shin¬ 
ing. Among them the Lord named Visnu is well-known in all 
the worlds. This omnipresent Lord attained the status of being 
the son of Vasudeva. 

10. Samba was born as his powerful son of Jambavatl. 
Vehemently cursed by his father, he contracted the fell disease 
of leprosy. The Sun-god was installed by him and a city was 
built after his own name. 


The Devi said: 

11. For what reason was the son cursed by the father him¬ 
self? O Lord, the reason cannot be insignificant because he 
cursed his own son. 


Isvara said: 

12. Listen with attention to the reason for the curse given 
to him. There is a holy sage named Durvasas, born of my own 
part. 

13. That holy sage was moving about wandering in the 
three worlds. Then he came to Dvaravati and the people gath¬ 
ered before him. 

14-15. Samba who was arrogant due to his handsome fea¬ 
tures saw the sage who arrived. The sage was tawny-eyed with 
matted hairs. He was emaciated, rough and very ugly. By look¬ 
ing at him and touching him, he insulted the sage. The stupid 

exaUe„Ton' S ™ de hU face a PP' ar similar - The most 

excellent one among the members of Yadu’s family did thus 

because he was proud of his youthful features 

ssSSaswa 

^•=HSS=jS£*= 


VII.I-IOl-1-1 1 


323 


walking. Therefore, you will be overpowered by the fell disease 
of leprosy ere long.” 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED ONE 

Greatness of Sambaditya 


Isvara said: 

1-3. At this very juncture (came) venerable sage Narada, 
the mental son of Brahma, who was proud that he could wander 
all over the three worlds. Though young, he was bowed to by 
all Devas. In the course of his wandering at will, he always used 
to come to Dvaravatl to pay a visit to Vasudeva. That excellent 
sage came furiously along with other sages. 

4. As he came on quickly all the Yadava youths beginning 
with Pradyumna remained with their heads (politely) bent down. 

5-6. Only there was neither Arghya nor Padya, but they 
honoured him all round, but Samba due to the inevitability of 
the curse, slighted the noble-souled Narada as usual. 

Being very proud of his youth and handsome features he 
was forever indulgent in sexual dalliance and liquor. 

7. On seeing him impolite and rude, Narada thought thus: 
‘Today I shall try to curb this impolite one and make him 
adopt auspicious (behaviour of) humility.’ 

8-1 Oa. After thinking thus, he spoke to Vasudeva: “O most 
excellent one among Devas, here there are sixteen thousand 
women. O my Lord,their emotional fondness for Samba is much. 
No doubt, Samba is unrivalled in all the worlds consisting of 
mobile and immobile beings. Further, those good women do 
deservingly need to see him always.” 

10b. On hearing these words from Narada, Kesava began 
to think. 

11. ‘What has thus been mentioned by Narada may have 
some truth in it. Moreover this is often heard (as being) said 
that there is fickleness in women. These two verses have been 
recited formerly by Brahmanas well aware of the workings of 
the minds of women: 



324 


Skanda Purana 


12-13. Though guarded vigilantly, they act unfaithfully to 
their husbands and betray their husbands due to their innate 
ignorance, fickleness and womanly incontinence. They never 
care to examine handsomeness. Nor do they resort to youthful 
charms alone. A man may be handsome or ugly, they enjoy 
him merely because he is a man.’ 


Isvara said: 

14. After thinking thus in his mind, Krsna spoke to Narada: 
“I do not believe in this ancient saying.” 

15. When the Lord said thus, Narada replied “I shall so 
manage everything as to convince you.” 

16. After saying thus, Narada went away as he came. A few 
days thereafter, he returned to Dvaraka. 

17. On that day the Lord was engaged in drinking liquor 
after enjoying aquatic sports along with all the members of his 
Antahpura (inner apartment). They were in a secluded place. 

18-21. It was in the beautiful Raivataka park embellished 
with different kinds of trees and rendered fragrant and charm¬ 
ing to all by means of the flowers of all the seasons. 

Large lakes abounding in different kinds of lotuses in full 
bloom added to its beauty. Warbling swans and Sarasa (ducks) 
birds and ruddy geese increased its splendour. The Lord was 
sporting about there surrounded by women fully bedecked in 
necklaces, anklets, armlets, girdles and other ornaments. The 
excellent maidens had some jewels on every limb. Staying there 
the Lord drank the liquor of great auspicious flavour. 

22-24. In the meantime, fully aware that the women were 
inebriated due to liquor, Narada spoke to Samba: “ O princely 
youth, do come and stand here.The Lord calls you. It is not 
proper on my part to stay on there.” 

Urged by Narada but not realizing the implication of Narada’s 
utterance, Samba entered quickly and bowed down to his father 

ling 8631 P ° inted ° Ut by Vi? ' U With natural fee - 


VII.1.101.28-40 


325 


in making them forget everything. Further they were naturally 
devoid of self-control. Hence their loins became moistened. 
Moreover this verse is heard everywhere on the earth as pro¬ 
claimed in the Puranas: 

28. 1 “On seeing an excellent man, the excellent organ of 
generation of women becomes moistened and dump even if 
they are observing celibacy or are YoginTs”. 

29. Such things are seen in the world: By taking in liquor 
even bashful women discard shame and become unsuspecting. 

30. Kama (passion) becomes clearly manifest in women 
due to tasty, delicious foodstuffs containing meat as well as 
beverages of Sidhu, Surd and Asava (different varieties of 
liquor) and fascinating scents and garments. 

31. Too much of liquor should not be given to them by a 
sensible man, because women are naturally already inebriated 
with wantonly sexual desires. 

32. After sending Samba in, Narada also came hurriedly 
closely on the heels of Samba. 

33. On seeing the sage coming with pleasant manners, all 
those women suddenly got up; they were tipsy. 

34-35. Even as Vasudeva was watching, when they got up 
suddenly their valuable garments got torn and fell down into 
the pots (of liquor). The clothes clinging to their loins (un¬ 
derwear) also fell separately. On seeing it Hari became angry. 
He cursed those women: 

36-37. “O women, since your minds strayed elsewhere 
unmindful of me, you will not get into the regions occupied 
by your husband at the close of your life. 

Slipping down from the world of your husband as well as 
from the path of heaven, you will have no refuge and will fall 
into the clutches of robbers.” 

38. As a result of this defect and curse, those women, at 
the time of Krsna’s heavenward departure, were abducted by 
robbers belonging to Pancanada even as Arjuna was looking 
on. 

39-40. Those women who were deficient in inherent moral 
strength and grit became defiled, O my beloved, But Rukmini, 


1 • In the tcxi, the number wrongly printed as 27. 



326 


Skanda Purdna 


Satyavatl and Jambavatl did not fall into the hands of the robbei s'. 

They were protected by their own intrinsic power. 

After cursing the women Krsna cursed Samba too. 

41 “Since, on perceiving your extremely attractive features 
all these women became agitated, you do be afflicted by the 
disease of leprosy.” 

42. On hearing his words Samba became ashamed. Remem¬ 
bering the earlier words of the excellent sage he said with a 
subdued smile: 

43. “O my father, I was devoid of impure emotion yet I 
have been cursed (by you) without any reason. How could the 
angry Durvasas have said otherwise?” 

44-45. After having said thus to the lotus-eyed Krsna Samba 
was overcome with anxiety and grief. He was disgusted with 
everything. He then went to the Prabhasa Ksetra that destroys 
all sins. After reaching that holy place, he practised a very 
severe penance. 

46. He installed Lord Sun, the thousand-rayed deity, who 
destroys sins. Then he propitiated it fully conforming to the 
(prescribed) rules and restrictions. 

47. He worshipped the Lord thrice a day during the three 
junctions (morning, midday and dusk) by means of divine scents 
and unguents. He used to eulogize the Lord of day everyday 
by means of this prayer: 

Samba said: 

48. Obeisance to the light of the three worlds. O destroyer 
of darkness, obeisance to you. Obeisance to the Lord of 
lotuses: obeisance to the enemy of Kumuda (lily, night- 
lotus) 

49. Obeisance to the firm base of the universe, Obeisance 
to thee, the creator of the universe. O Lord of Devas, I bow 
down to Surya, the illuminator of the three worlds. 

50. “Having the complexion of Aditya, he is the protector 
of the universe. He is unprecedented, the foremost one of 


1. According to Mbh Mausala 7.73-74; Satyavatl (Bhama) performed pen¬ 
ance and Rukmini and Jambavatl entered fire after Krsna’s death. 







327 


vii.no 1 - 51 ' 62 

all Suras. He is the being with the golden womb. He is spoken 
as being the noble-souled one beyond all darkness.” 

51 On being eulogized thus, Surya became manifest to 
him and said to Samba, the son of Jambavatl, with a highly 
delighted heart: 

52. “O Samba, O mighty-armed Samba, O son of Govinda, 
listen. I am delighted with this prayer. Tell me the boon desired 
by you (to be granted). 

Samba said: 

53. O most excellent one among Suras, I have been cursed 
by Krsna. I am a sinner with a defiled mind; O Lord, if you 
are pleased with me, heal completely the fell disease of lep¬ 
rosy. 


Sri Bhanu said: 

54. O highly fortunate one, you shall be free from ail¬ 
ments, once again, with my favour you will be in the same form 
as you were in before. 

55. From now onwards, those wives of Visnu should not at 
all be looked at by you, O scion of the family of Yadu. You 
should never stay within the range of their vision. 

56. O excellent Yadava, you had to contract leprosy trans¬ 
mitted to you by the noble-souled, all powerful Visnu who was 
overpowered by jealous feelings for them. 

57. If anyone comes here and eulogizes me with this prayer, 
no one born of his family will be a leper. _ 

58. Understand perfectly the twelve names of Aditya. I shall 

tell you another set of twelve names fully. 

59-61. They are: Aditya, Savitr, Surya, Mihira, Arka, Pratapana, 
Martanda, Bhaskara, Bhanu, Citrabhanu, Divakara and Ravi. 
These twelve names should be known along with the general 
names which are: Visnu, Dhatr, Bhaga, Pusan, Mitra, su, 
Varuna, Aryaman, Indra, Vivasvat, Tvas^r and Parjanya remem 
bered as the twelfth. Thus the twelve Adityas have been enu¬ 
merated severally. , . 

62. They rise up always along with the twelve months m 





328 


Skanda Purana 


due order. Visnu blazes in Caitra, Aryaman in Vaisakha always. 

63-65. Vivasvat (blazes) in the month ofjyestha, and Amsvmat 
in Asadha, Parjanya in the month of Sravana and Varuna in 
the month called Prosthapada (Bhadrapada). Indra in the 
month of Asvayuja and Dhatr blazes in Karttika. Mitra blazes 
in Margasirsa; the Aditya Pusan in the month of Pausa. Bhaga 
should be known (blazing) in the month of Magha. Tvastr 
blazes in Phalguna. Visnu blazes always with twelve hundreds 
of rays. 

66. Aryaman blazes with one thousand three hundred rays; 
Vivasvat with twice seven hundred rays; Arhsuman with eight 
hundred rays. 

67. Parjanya is like Vivasvat. Varuna is like Aryaman. Indra 
shines with twice six and eleven hundred. 

68. Bhaga and Tvastr with a thousand and one hundred 
(rays). During the northern transit, the rays of the Sun in¬ 
crease always. During the southern transit, the rays of the Sun 
decrease. 

69-/3. Thus I take up twelve Multiset the centre of Prabhasa 
Ksetra. I am well-known as Sambaditya and will stay thus in 
another Manvantara. O most excellent one among the descen¬ 
dants of Yadu, on the fifth lunar day in the bright half of 
Magha, taking Ekabhakta (a single meal) is recommended; taking 
food at night is cited for the sixth lunar day. On the seventh 
lunar day a devotee fasts in the presence of Sambarka. The 

devotee of great vows offers KaravTra flowers mixed with red 
sandal. 

A sensible man should offer Kundaraka incense and worship 
Bhaskara. He should feed Brahmanas with divine foods in 
accordance with his financial capacity. He who performs duly 

the adoration of Sariibaditya with great faith, obtains the entire 
benefit. 

Isvara said: 


,J„t f■ /f Kr fyi"8 thus, ihe Thousand-rayed One vanished 

Dvarak - Th San ?s ba l?''’' " d of his ailmc ™ s and returned to 
haThee' hUS ’ ' ,h ' <*«Hverance of Sambaditya 

accoS:Tahir 1 ' °" bCinS UStt "' d “ “ - 






329 


VII.1. 102.1-6—103.1-3 

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWO 

Greatness of KantakasodhinI 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the shrine of God¬ 
dess KantakasodhinI situated within a distance of two bows to 
the north thereof. 

O great goddess, she is the destroyer of Mahisa. She is huge- 
bodies and adored by Brahma, Devas and sages. 

Sinful Danavas were Devakan takas (Thorns unto the Devas) 
and the goddess purged the worlds of those demons in every 
Yuga. Hence she is KantakasodhinI. A devotee should worship 
her on the ninth day in the bright half of the month of Asvayuj. 

4. If a devotee worships her with the offerings of animals, 
flowers, excellent lights and incense, O lady of excellent coun¬ 
tenance, he will have no enemies in the course of a full year. 

5. If anyone visits her with excellent devotion on the four¬ 
teenth lunar day (in dark half) or everyday the benefactress 
guards him like her own son. There is no doubt about it. 

6. Thus, O goddess, the sin-destroying greatness of 
KantakasodhinI has been spoken succinctly. If it is listened to 
it is a great succour. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THREE 

Greatness of Kapalesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O beautiful lady, a pilgrim should go to 
the excellent Kapalesvara shrine situated to the north thereof. 
It is worshipped by Suras and Gandharvas. 

Formerly when the Yajna of the intelligent Daksaraja was 
going on, while Homa was being performed in the holy fire, 
when all the Brahmanas were seated there, Sankara came there 
in the form of ajalma (wretched rogue). O goddess, he was 
clad in old tattered rags. He was covered with dust and dirt. 









330 


Slianda Purana 


He appeared grey in colour clue to the dust particles. 

4. On seeing him in the form of a ruffian holding a skull, 
those Brahmanas became angry and all of them rebuked him 
with shouts of “Fie upon you! ” 

5. They called him many times, “O you sinner! O sinner!” 
and told him, "O base one, go away. The sacrificial altar is no 
place for you, as you are holding a human bone.” 

6. Then, O goddess of Suras, the Lord laughed loudly and 
hurled the skull on the sacrificial altar. He vanished some¬ 
where and could not be found out by those learned ones. 

7. When he vanished thus, they threw the skull out of the 
pavilion. But, O lady of excellent countenance, another skull 
of the same form cropped up there. 

8. As and when one skull was thrown out another one 
sprang up from the ground. Thus there were hundreds of 
thousands, millions and trillions of skulls. 

9. The skulls were cast out and they sprang up again. They 
were struck with wonder. Getting frustrated thus, the sages 
commented on his activities: 

10. “Who else other than Mahadeva whose head is washed 
by the waters of Gahga is capable to do something like this, 
particularly in this Yajna?” 

11. They eulogized the Bull-emblemed Lord. They performed 
Homas in the sacred fire uttering the Satarudriya Mantras. 

12. Thereupon Lord Mahesvara became manifest unto them. 
Then they eulogized the Trident-bearing Lord by means of 
various hymns of the Vedas and the diverse Mantras mentioned 
in the Puranas. 


[Sages’ prayer (13-16):] 

The Sages said: 

13. Om. Obeisance to the primordial Prakpli, Obeisance to 
the unvanquished and the noble-souled one. Obeisance, obei¬ 
sance to the unconcealed, desireless Lord. 

!4 Obeisance to the original seed, to the promoter of 
saintly activities. Obeisance to the one without a parallel, to 
% i^ nC ' ° beisance ’ obeisance to the unmanifest one. 

kinHc' < ? e,sance the Lord having serpents of different 
kinds and variegated colours for his armlets, to the Lord of all, 



vil.l. 103.16-25 


331 


to the one without the Rajas element. Obeisance to the excel¬ 
lent one. Obeisance to the soul of the universe, to the cause 
of the ultimate causes. Obeisance to the Lord with eyes resem¬ 
bling lotus in full bloom. 

16. I seek refuge in that primordial Lord, on seeing whom 
one is redeemed from the jaws of death, the Lord whom they 
call the invisible Brahman (Absolute), the omnipresent one, 
the immutable, the unmanifest, the beginningless and the un¬ 
changing one. 

17. On being eulogized then in this manner by all those 
sages devoid of sins, the great Lord became pleased. Becoming 
manifest to them the Lord spoke to those sages: “Choose your 
boons.” 

The Brahmanas said: 

18-19. O Lord, if you are pleased with us, do be staying 
in this holy spot with the name Kapalesvara, because, O Lord, 
innumerable skulls (Kapdlas) cropped up here though they 
were removed. O Lord of Suras, undoubtedly this holy spot 
deserves it. 

20. O Lord of Devas, the Lihga by itself shall stay for another 
Manvantara. You do stay here in this holy spot by the name 
Kapalesvara. 

21. In the case of those who worship you with incense, 
garlands and unguents, let them attain the highest region 
inaccessible to even Devas. 

22. After saying “So be it" Lord Mahesvara stationed him¬ 
self there. O beautiful lady, the Yajna of the Lord of the night 
was resumed again. 

23. On seeing the shrine, O my beloved, a man shall attain 
the fruit of a horse-sacrifice. He shall be rid of all sins incurred 

in the course of all the births. 

24. This incident happened in the Svayarhbhuva Manvantara. 
But in the Vaivasvata Manvantara, another event occurred ending 
with the destruction of Daksa s Yajna. 

25. Formerly the great Lord Hara was called Kapall by Daksa. 
Therefore, Kapall caused the destruction of that Yajna. In this 
Manvantara, he stationed himself as Kapalesvara by name. 



332 


Skanda Purana 


26. Further, in the Surya Savarnika Manvantara, O beau¬ 
tiful woman, the name of this Lord shall be Tattvesvara. 

27. Thus the greatness of the deity, Rudra, has been suc¬ 
cinctly spoken. It causes destruction of the sins of all creatures. 
It causes the bonds of the Pasu (individual soul) to be snapped. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FOUR 

Greatness of Kotlsvara 


Isvara said: 


1-5. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the excellent Kotlsvara shrine situated to the north thereof. It 
is well-known as Kotlsa. 

It destroys all sins of all creatures. It gives liberation from 
bondage to the Pasus (individual souls). 

Formerly, O goddess, Pasupata sages used to perform pen¬ 
ance in the vicinity of Kapalesvara. With bodies smeared with 
holy ash, they used to perform elaborate penance. They had 
matted hairs like coronets. They wore girdles of the Munja 
grass. All of them were quiescent. They were Sivayogls, Brahmanas 
who had subdued their anger. They spread all over the holy 
spot in all directions. 

O great goddess, they numbered a crore and they were ea¬ 
gerly devoted to th ejapa of Mantras and they had installed the 
Linga very near Kapalesa. 

6. Then, with great devotion, they worshipped the Linga. 
Then Hara, the great Lord, was pleased with them and granted 
them salvation. 


7 7 my beloved, a crore (Kofi) of sages became Siddhas 
there. Hence the Linga became famous by the name Kotlsvara. 

8 A man who devoutly worships the Andmaya (one who 
dispels internal sufferings) Kotlsvara obtains the fruit of the 
Japa of a crore of Mantras. 

mastered^heV 0 ^ ld tf g ‘ ftCd there to a Br ahmana who has 

and The merit o? a$ ' 7 gCt the fruit of a "ore of Hamas 

and the merit of a perfect pilgrimage. 


VII.1.105.1-10 


333 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIVE 

Greatness of Brahma 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Henceforth, I shall describe another secret and exce¬ 
llent holy place. It destroys all the sins of men. I shall describe 
it in detail to you the greatness of the principal deity, the 
greatness of the residents throughout the Kalpa. 

Somesa, Daitya- Hanta (destroyer of demons i.e. Visnu), Pitamaha 
in the form of a boy, Aditya belonging to Arkasthala, Prabhasa 
and Sasibhusana (Moon-adorned One i.e. Siva)—these six leading 
deities are stationed in the holy place Prabhasika. 

Merely by viewing them, a devotee becomes contented and 
one who has fulfilled his duties. Certainly he is redeemed from 
terrible sins incurred throughout the life. 

The Devi, said: 

5. The greatness of the deities who were mentioned ear¬ 
lier (in the above list) has been described by you. What about 
that which you refer to as the deity in the form of a boy? 

6. In all other holy places Pitamaha is in the form of an 
old one. How did he happen to be a boy ? What is the great¬ 
ness thereof? 

7. O Lord, if you are pleased with me, do tell me this in 
detail. O Lord of Devas, how is he to be worshipped? How is 
the pilgrimage (religious procession, Yatra) to be performed 
by men? 

Isvara said: 

8. O goddess, listen. I shall describe the greatness pertain¬ 
ing to Brahma. Merely by listening to this one is liberated from 
all sins. 

9. There is no other deity equal to Brahma. There is no 
elderly preceptor equal to Brahma. There is no knowledge like 
that of Brahma. There is no penance like that pertaining to 
Brahma. 

10. People wander in the course of mundane existence, 
utterly overwhelmed by misery, grief and terror as long as they 
do not become devoted to Pitamaha, the eldest of all the Suras. 


334 


Skanda Parana 


] ] Who will not become liberated from bondage, if the 
mind of a creature is directed towards and placed steadily in 
god Brahma just as it is directed to worldly topics. 

The Devi said: 

12-13. If Brahma is the preceptor of the universe and possesses 
such greatness, why has he come to the holy place of Prabhasika? 
Where is he stationed in that great Tirtha? At what time did 
the most excellent one of Suras come there? How is he to be 
worshipped by leading Brahmanas and on what lunar day? Do 
mention all these in due order. 

Isvara said: 

14. The great holy spot of Brahma is on the north-east side 
of Somanatha and on the south-east of Sarhbadilya. It is like 
another world of Brahma. 

15. There in his holy spot where Pitamaha is stationed in 
the form of a boy, O goddess, these residents of the whole 
Kalpa are also present. 

16. The creator of the universe, the Lord of the universe 
is highly refulgent and this is his Saliva form. In the splendid 
holy spot of Prabhasika, he happened to arrive when he was 
eight years old. 

17. Desirous of creating different kinds of subjects, he installed 
the great Linga there and performed penance for a thousand 
years according to the divine reckoning. 

18. After the lapse of some time, the Lord was requested 
by Soma. He had been rid of his phthisis and had sound faith. 

19. It was for the purpose of installing the Linga in the 
splendid Prabhasika Ksetra. Accompanied by Visvakarman and 
a crore of the Brahmana-sages, he carried out the installation 
of the excellent Linga. 

20. Then, O lady of excellent countenance, after the in¬ 
stallation of Somanatha Linga, he caused plenty of Yajna-Daksinas 
to be given to Brahmanas. 

21-22. The Linga was installed by Brahma, the creator of 
the worlds, in this manner. Many years passed by even as he 
was in the form of a boy in the holy spot Prabhasa. As he stayed 
in the centre of the holy spot forty-two (catvarimsad dvayam ca) 


VII.1.105.23-32 


335 


years passed by. Thus Parardha - the earlier half of 100 years 
of Brahma’s life 1 —passed by while he was staying at the holy 
spot of Prabhasa. 

The Devi said: 

23. Do mention to me the measure (or extent) of a day, 
a month or a thousand years of Brahma in detail. What is the 
span of the life of Brahma as proclaimed (by sages)? 

Isvara said: 

24. Brahma is remembered as having the greatest span of 
life. A Parardha has passed by even as he stayed in the holy 
spot of Prabhasa. The second half will start now. 

25. When Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, came to 
the holy spot of Prabhasa, it is said that, he was eight years old. 

26. O goddess fond of Devas, excepting the holy spot of 
Prabhasa, in all other Tirthas, the grandfather (Brahma) is in 
the form of an old person. 

27. There are many Tirthas in the whole Brahmanda. Among 
all where Brahma is remembered as present there, the first 
and the foremost one of great splendour is he (that Brahma) 
who is stationed in Prabhasa. 

28. O my beloved, listen to the names (of Brahma) in the 
different Kalpas. It is Svayavibhu in the first Kalpa, in the sec¬ 
ond it was Padmabhu who was stationed there. 

29. In the third (Kalpa), he is (was) called Visvakartd and 
in the fourth, Balarupin (one in the form of a boy). These are 
mentioned as the principal names of Svayambhu, the self-born 
god Brahma. 

30. He who remembers these names every day shall be a 
long-lived man. 

31. At the advent of the night of Brahma, all the Planets, 
Moon, Sun, along with Devas, Asuras, and human beings, the 
entire range of the three worlds, perish. 

32. Again, when the day dawns, Pitamaha wakes up and 
resumes creation as it was before,O my beloved. 

1. Brahma came io Prabhasa when he was eight years oW He sta^d fQr 
forty-two years at Prabhasa. He was then fifty years old (8+42). Hair or 
his life (of 100 years) was spent at Prabhasa. 



33(5 


Skanda Purana 


33. I shall mention the measure of the day of Brahma, the 
creator of the worlds. That time unit is called Truti which is 
a fourth of the Netra Bhanga (? wink of the eye) 

34. O lady of excellent countenance, twice that time unit 
should be known as a Nvnisa. Fifteen such Nimisas are termed 
Knslhd by learned men. Thirty such Kasthas make a Kcild as 
mentioned by learned men. 

35. A Muhurta is made up of thirty Kalas. A day is made 
up of fifteen Muhurtas. A night should be known as having the 
same duration as that of the day. The two together make an 
Ahoratra (complete day). 

36. Fifteen Ahordlras make one Paksa (fortnight). The time 
unit formed by two Paksas is called a Mdsa (month). Six months 
constitute an Ayana. An Abda (year) is formed by two Ayanas. 

37. Four million three hundred twenty thousand years should 
be known as a Caturyuga according to solar reckoning. 


38. Seventy-one Catruyugas make one Manvanlara. This shall 
be the span of life of an Indra. This has thus been succinctly 

m pnlionarl ' 


mentioned to you. 


39. The First Manu is Svayambhuva. Then the next Manu 
was Svarocisa. Then follow Aultama, Tamasa, Raivata and Caksusa 

40. Thereafter come Vaivasvata, Arkasdvarni, Brahmasdvami 
Dnarmasavarni, Raucya and Bhutya (along with lndrasdvarni and 
Daksasavarni to be added to the lists). 

t u\’> Theseare (he fourteen Manus enumerated in due order 
1 shall now enumerate all the Indras of the past and future in 



• Raurava is mentioned as the fifth; the sixth 


one is 


1- The list of Indras is different i 


in Devi Purdna (in chapter on Kala- 


t-vyavastha) 



VI I.1.105.47-60 


337 


remembered as Prana; the seventh one is Brhatkalpa. Kandarba 
is mentioned as the eighth. 

47-48. Sadya is mentioned as the ninth, Isdna is remem¬ 
bered as the tenth, Dhyana is mentioned as the eleventh Then 
Saiasvata is the next. Uddna is the thirteenth. Garuda is the 
fourteenth. Kaurma should be known as the fifteenth. This is 
the Paurnamdsi (Full-Moon day) of Prajapati (Brahma). 

49. The sixteenth is Narasimha. Samadhi is the next one. 
Agneya is the eighteenth; then the next one is Somakalpa. 

50. Bhavana is mentioned as the twentieth. Suptavialin is 
another. Then Vaikuntha, Arcisa, Rudra and Laksml Kalpa. 

51. The twenty-seventh is Vairdja. Then Gaunkalpa i.e. Andhaka 
(i.e. when Andhaka was subdued). Then Mdhesvara when Tripuras 
were killed. 

52. In the end came Pitrkalpa which is remembered as the 
New-Moon day of Brahma. Thus, O my beloved, the thirty 
Kalpas in a month of Brahma have been mentioned. 

53. All the past days of Brahma have been mentioned. It 
is Vardha Kalpa now, the first lunar day of Brahma when the 
Earth was lifted up by the Divine Boar. 

54. These thirty Kalpas make one time unit remembered 
as Masa. Such twelve units make one year. Under this reckoing 
of a year, Brahma was eight years old when he was brought by 
Somaraja and then Somanatha was installed. 

55. Thus even as Brahma was residing in the Prabhasa Ksetra 
in the form of a boy, a Parardha elapsed. The second one is 
running now. 

56. Thus Brahma, the Self-born Lord, residing in the cen¬ 
tre of Prabhasa Ksetra has a great power. The Lord resorted 
to the Ksetra in the form of a boy. 

57. He should be worshipped, should be saluted by learned 
men. At the outset, he alone should be worshipped by those 
who wish to get the fruit of the perfect pilgrimage. 

58. He who devoutly worships him, certainly worships me. 
He who hates him, hates me. One who is venerable to him is 
so to me also. 

59. Visnu and I are worshipped by one who is venerated 
by Brahma. Brahma and I are worshipped by one who is ven¬ 
erated by Visnu. 

60. Brahma and Visnu are worshipped when worship was 



338 


Skanda Purana 


performed by me. Brahma is Sattva quality (?), Visnu is Rajas 
quality (?) and I am Tamas quality, so it has been proclaimed. 

61. Brahma is glorified as Vayu, Rudra as Anala (Fire) and 
Visnu as AP (Water). Visnu is Ratri (night); Rudra is Allan 
(day); Pitamaha is what is termed as Sandhya (dusk). 

62. O goddess, I am Sama Veda. Brahma is called Rg Veda. 
Visnu shall be Yajur Veda and Kulad/idia (basis of the family) 
is Atharvana. 

63. O goddess, I am summer (season of heat). Pitamaha 
is the season of rains. Visnu shall be winter (cold season). Thus 
he constitutes the three units of time. 

64. I should be known as the sacred fire called Dahsindgnl. 
Hari is remembered as Garhapatya fire and Brahma is Ahavanlya 
fire. Thus everything has the three divinities. 

65. I am stationed in the form of Linga; Visnu is glorified 
as Bhaga (the base of Linga). Brahma shall be set up in the 
seed. Visnu is glorified as AP (water). 

66. I abide in the form of Akasa (Ether). Thus the Lord 
is identical with the Taltvas (Elements). The Btja (seed) that 
drops down from the ether is set up in Brahma. Resorting to 
the form of Brahma, he is the one who makes the seed 
grow. 

67. Brahma is stationed in the middle of the navel; Visnu 
in the middle of the heart. O goddess, I am in the middle of 
the face as the support of all embodied beings. 

68. That which I am is Brahma himself; that which Brahma 
is, is Hutasana (fire). That which the goddess is, is Visnu and 
that which is Visnu is the Moon. 

69. That which Kala (Time) is, is Brahma himself; that 
who is Rudra, is Bhaskara (the Sun god). Thus, O my beloved, 
the highest Brahman is stationed with a special Sakti (power). 

70. Orhkara is the Supreme Brahman (Absolute). Gayatrl 
is the ultimate Prakrti (source of origin). Knowing these two, 
a man becomes liberated. He does not fall. 

71. He who knows the ultimate, imperishable, non-dual 
principle, O goddess of Devas, shall know everything. Not the 
other one, the base man who causes differences. 

72. The Supreme Brahman is in the form of one entire 
whole. It is stationed separately in the form of the effect. He 
who hates it, O beautiful woman, is called a hater of Brahman. 








339 


VII.1.105.73-74—106.1-10 

73. Brahma is stationed on my right limb (part of the body). 
Kesava is stationed on my left limb (Part). He who entertains 
hatred towards them both, O beautiful woman is a hater of 
mine. 

74. Thus, O beautiful woman, knowing (the reality) by the 
non-different inner Atman, one should worship Brahma, Kesava 
and Rudra in the same form. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIX 

Glorification of Brahmanas 


The Devi said: 

1-5. Tell me exactly the procedure of the worship of Brah¬ 
man which has been glorified thus in non-dualistic terms. 

That Pitamaha is in the form of a boy in the holy spot of 
Prabhasa. O Lord, how is he whose form is that of the ultimate 
Absolute, worshipped by people? 

What are the Mantras? What is the procedure? Of what 
nature are the Brahmanas thereof? How do the Brahmanas 
staying there, derive the benefit of the holy spot? 

Of how many classes are the Brahmanas residing in the holy 
place? O great Lord, of what nature are their manners and 
customs? What are their habits? What do they resort to? Do 
explain in detail the great prosperity of these Brahmanas. 

Isvara said: 

6. Very well! Very well! O great goddess proficient in asking 
questions! Be attentive and listen to the greatness of the deities 
in the form of Brahmanas. 

7-10. On listening to it, O goddess, a man is rid of all sins. 

O goddess of Devas, all those Brahmanas glorified on the 
earth surrounded by seas, constitute my form. This form is 
visible on the earth. Brahmanas are Devas perceptible-on t e 
earth while Devas in heaven are imperceptible. Brahmaqas are 
always dear to me. Brahmanas constitute my body, e w o 
devoutly worships them, worships me always. He who devout y 
propitiates them shall propitiate me. 







340 


Skanda Purana 


11. O my beloved, undoubtedly I am identical with those 
who are Brahmanas, if they are worshipped, I shall become 
worshipped. Only when they are pleased, do I become pleased. 
1-Ie who entertains enmity to them, is inimical to me also. 

12. If anyone worships my replica in the form of a stone 
icon with sandalpaste along with a agallochum, sweet scents 
and garlands he does not (really) worship me. If one venerates 
Brahmanas and adores them, I am really worshipped. 

13. O my beloved, all the Brahmanas within this world are 
worthy of veneration, whether they have performed the Vratas 
mentioned in the Vedas or not. 

14. At the time of Sraddha.one should not subject Brahmanas 
to a close test, if they are residents of the holy spot. In the case 
of testing Brahmanas, there is a great deal of abuse. 

15. One-eyed, lame, hump-backed, poor and sick—all these 
should be engaged in a Sraddha mixed (along) with Brahmanas 
who have mastered the Vedas. 


16. Brahmanas are worthy of veneration merely because of 
their birth. So if they are well-versed much more in the Vedas 
and the practice thereof. Therefore, Brahmanas should not be 
censured in any respect in the cases of Havya and Kavyaofferings. 

17. One-eyed persons, bulky ones, hump-backed ones, poor 
and sick ones should not be insulted. A sensible man should 
not insult such Brahmanas because their forms are remem¬ 
bered as my form. 

18. Many men do not know as they are beyond the ken of 
wisdom. They are not aware that I wander on the earth in the 
form of a Brahmana. 


19-20. If people strike or kill Brahmanas of my form, if they 
make them perform impious jobs, if they send them on an 
errand to places where they should not be sent, if they compel 
them to be slaves, then the powerful messengers of Yama cut 

them with a saw after their death, even as artisans cut off a piece 
of wood with a string, ” 

21-24. If base men threaten them with harsh speech, if they 

the^™*! W ° rd v S dU ^ l ° 3nSer ’ ‘ f thCy kick with their foot > then 
the people m Yama s world strike them and make them fall 

0 " th " groun u d ‘ With the eyes turned red due to anger 
they kick them with their feet. Yama plucks out their tongue 
by means of hot and fiery tongs. S 


VII.I.l 06.25-37 


341 


Those men who hate Brahmanas, the sinners who look at 
Brahmanas with an evil eye are enemies of Brahmanas. Crows 
with huge bodies and adamantine beaks pluck their eyes out 
in a trice at the behest of Yama. 

25-27. If anyone beats or wounds a Brahmana, if anyone 
sheds his blood, breaks his bone or slays him out, he should 
be known as Brahmaghna (Brahmana-slayer). There is no expia¬ 
tion at all in his case. There are fifty crores of Narakas. A fellow 
who slays Brahmanas is thoroughly cooked in them successively 
for many thousand years. Hence, O beautiful woman, a Brahmana 
shall always be saluted by men. 

28. Brahmanas should be honoured always by offerings of 
food and drink. All Brahmanas are persons deserving to receive 
all kinds of gifts. 

29-30. O goddess of Devas, no one else deserves the same. 
If (another one) receives a gift, he attains downfall (low po¬ 
sition). O goddess, a Brahmana sanctified by penance is one 
who has shaken off all sins. He does not incur anything adverse, 
if he accepts as gift the whole world surrounded by oceans. O 
goddess, there is nothing sinful in the case of a Brahmana. 

31. A Brahmana who abides always by spiritual principles, 
who is sanctified by good emotional fervour, is by birth a great 
holy spirit. 

32. All the Guardians of the Quarters in the world are 
worshippers of Brahmanas. Hence one should not insult them 
if one wishes'for a long life. 

33. If Brahmanas are infuriated, they will reduce every¬ 
thing to ashes by means of their own refulgence. They may even 
create other worlds and other guardians of the quarters. 

34-35. They are the leaders of the heaven, the eternal 
Lords of Devas. By those noble-souled ones, the ocean 
was rendered impotable when they became infuriated. Even 
today their fiery anger does not cool down in the Dantjaka 
forest. The path made by them is called Devayana (a path of 


36. They are worthy of veneration. They should be.bowed 
down to. Everything is well-established in them. It is they who 
make the worlds hold one another together. 

37 Their penance and self-study of the Vedas is well-guarded 
and kept secret. Brahmanas have their own esteemed Vratas. 


342 


Skanda Purana 


They are perfect in all lores and Vratas well-concluded. They 
lead life without resorting to anyone else. 

38. When infuriated, Brahmanas become like serpents. They 
should be well attended to and served. Blazing by means of 
their power of penance, they may burn even oceans. 

39. When Brahmanas are pleased, all the deities become 
pleased. They are the ultimate goal of all living beings. They 
ponder over the spiritual pursuit. 

40. They have all their doubts perfectly resolved in the 
pursuit of all types of knowledge in the beginning, middle or 
end. They are conversant with the higher and lower features 
(of everything). They lead others to the ultimate goal. Hence, 
even if Brahmanas be always engaged in sinful deeds, they 
should not be killed. 

41. He who destroys all this world may destroy Brahmana 
also in the same manner. If infuriated a Brahmana becomes 
like fire, the highly blazing Arka (Sun)and poison. 

42. A Brahmana has precedence in the matter of taking 
food, among all living beings. He is the most excellent among 
all castes. He is the father, the preceptor. He does not perish. 
He does not incur pain or loss. He is not afflicted at all. 

43. What is consigned to the mouth of a Brahmana is more 
excellent than (oblation in fire) even in Agnihotra. All Devas 
stay resorting to the bodies of Brahmanas. 

44. Hence Brahmanas are worthy of being worshipped. If 
they be not available, idols and images are to be adored. 


45. Whether he is equipped with learning or not, a Brahmana 
is my deity, just as the fire is a great divinity whether conse¬ 
crated with prayers or not. 

46. A fire does not become impure even in cremation grounds. A 
Brahmanaevenbereft oiHavya and Kama does nor hprnm* Jr™,,™ 


vcnci tf.UJLC. 









343 


VII.1.106.49-61 

49 . Henceforth I shall describe the difference among the 
Brahmana residents of a holy spot of all the four stages in life 
in due order as based on their avocation. 

50. Those Brahmanas who know the procedure of Sannyasa 
(perfect placement) of the Ksetra and also the difference in 
avocation in due order are the partakers of the benefit of the 
holy spot. 

51. O lady of excellent countenance, listen to the details 
of how a Brahmana-resident of a Ksetra is to conduct himself 
in the different avocations of Prajapatya etc. 

52-54. O lady of excellent countenance, the following are 
the pursuits of the residents under the different names (titles) 
such as Prdjapatyas, Mahtpalas, Kapotas, Granthikas, Kulikas, Vaitalas, 
Padmahavisas, Dhrtarastras, Bakas, Kahkas, Gopalas, Trutikas, Matharas 
and Gutikas. O beautiful woman, the others are Dandikas. Listen 
to their special activities for maintaining themselves. 

55. These are remembered as constituting the Vrata called 
prajapatya: non-violence, service to preceptors and elders, self- 
study of the Vedas, cleanliness of the body, restraint of the 
sense-organs, truthfulness and abstention from theft. 

56. The second category of people is remembered as Mahipala 
because they sustain the earth by means of the rites such as 
Santika (conducive to tranquality) etc. with destruction, nour¬ 
ishment and enmity as the objective. 

57. Those Sddhakas (persons in pursuit of perfection in 
spirituality) whose sustenance is affected by means of gleaning 
grains that are scattered on the ground as in the case of pi¬ 
geons (Kapotas) are also called Kapotas. 

58. Those who get houses built and stay in them are called 

Sadgranthas (or Granthikas). 

Those Sddhakas who suddenly forsake houses after building 
them are called Kutikas (dwellers of huts). They are devoted 
to the propitiation of Siva. 

59. The Sadhakas called Vaitalas are attached to Tirthas. 
With great daring, they live there with their wives and sustain 

themselves with what they casually get. 

60. Those who have self-restraint though they are attracted 
by desires, and who pursue the desire for kingdom and wea t 
are known as Padmas. They are always engaged in seeking alms. 

61. Those Sddhakas who adopt Jnanayoga (pursuit of the 








344 


Skanda Purana 


path of Jnana —spiritual knowledge) and are engaged in the 
practice of dualism are well-known as Multisets. Knowledge dawns 
on them automatically. 

62. Those who sustain the universe won over by means of 
celibacy, Sattva quality and absence of greed, are known as 
Dlirtarastras. 

63. Those Sadhakas are known as Balias who secretly pur¬ 
sue knowledge (Jnana), Vrata and Dharma but whose Nistha 
(established faith) is in their own selfish interest. 

64. Those who for the purpose of achieving the noblest 
objectives resort to ponds and water reservoirs and subsist on 
lotus stalks and Srhgataka plants, are remembered as the Sadhakas 
of the Kahka type. 

65. Those Sadhakas who wander along with cows and stay 
in cowpen, and subsist on Pahcagavya (five cow products) are 
(known as) Gopalas. 

66 . Those who let their bodies become emaciated by the 
practice of Krcchra and Candrayana \ows and eat only very small 
quantity (Cardamom size) (Truti) of food are known as the 
Sadhakas of the Trutika type. 

67. The Sadhakas called Matharas consider themselves house¬ 
holders in a Matha (monastery) with the replica of a woman 
made of Kusa Grass representing their wives. They are very 
pure and simple. They sustain themselves by seeking alms. 

68 . Those Brahmanas who regularly eat eight morsel like 
pills made of bulbous roots, roots and fruits are called Gutilias. 

69. They keep their bodies well-disciplined and subjected 
to restraints. During nights they remain in Virasana (hero-like 
posture). They are called Dandins (Dandikas). Now everything 
has been explained to you. 

70. The general and particular avocations of the house¬ 
holders and others among the residents of holy spots along 
with their diverse varieties have been fully narrated to you. 

71. The residents of the Prabhasa Ksetra have the Dharmas 
(rites and customs) in this manner and Lord Pitamaha in the 
form of a boy is worthy of their adoration. 

72. Those who are guilty of Mahapatakas, those who have 
been excommunicated by Brahmanas, should never touch Brahma 
in the form of a boy. 

73. They are always celibate. They are self-controlled. They 


345 


VH.I.106.74r—107.1-10 

subdue their anger. They control all the sense-organs. Thus 
the Brahmanas residing in a Ksetra are known. 

74 The holy Lord Pitamaha in the form of a boy is worthy 
of their veneration. Pitamaha is to be perfectly worshipped by 
°hose who regularly study (and recite) the Vedas. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVEN 

Procedure of the Worship of Brahma 


Isvara said: 


l Henceforth I shall succinctly describe to you the pro¬ 
cedure for the worship of Brahma as a boy. I shall mention 
different types of adoration. 

2 . I shall tell you the procedure of chariot procession, the 
(serial) order of eulogies, Mantras as well as different types of 
devotion, viz. physical, oral and mental. 

3. Further, it may be Laukiki (Mundane), Vaidiki (Vedic) 

and Adhyatmiki (spiritual). 

That which causes delight to Brahma by means of Dhyana 
(meditation) and Dhdrand (steady absorption of the mind) as 
well as recollecting Vedic Mantras is called Manasi (menta ) 


Bhakti. Rec . tat . on of Vedk Ma ntras, prostrating oneself while 

bowing, performance of rites in the sacred Fire, ra a 
ceremonies, Japa and repetition of Aranyaka passages—This 

called Vaciki (verbal) Bhakti. ... n,n™«ina" 

5-6. The Kayihl (physical) DM includes the following. 

Restraints of the mind and the sense-organs s t roug 
lations of Vratas, fasts etc., observance of Krcchra, 

Candrayana and other expiatory rites, and of ausp.cmu Vratas 
as explained in the Scriptural Texts and similar fasts. Thus 
Bhakti in the case of Brahmanas is of Jands. 

7-10. The worship of Brahma of the worldly 
Laukiki Bhakti. The following articles are made use o ^ 

cow's ghee, milk, curds, honey, sugarcane juice, water from 
excellent Kusa gr'ass, sweet scents, garlands various subsidy 
articles of worship, incense from Guggala and gh , 



346 


Skanda Parana 


of sweet scent, gold ornaments, jewels, wreaths of various sorts, 
Nyasa (ritualistic touching of the limbs), Parisara (circumambu- 
lation), flags, banners, prayers in chorus, dances, songs, mu¬ 
sical instruments, offerings of all kinds of articles, foodstuffs, 
cooked rice, beverages etc. 

11 . The sacred rite performed with Vedic Mantras, Havis 
etc. is remembered as Vaidikl (Vedic type) Bhakti. 

12-13. Various sacred rites are performed with Brahma in 
view. Those rites constitute what is called Vaidika Bhakti: Agnihotra 
rite is performed on New-Moon day and Full-Moon day. The 
holy Havis is consumed. Monetary gifts are offered. Puroddsa 
is offered in sacrificial rites such as Isti and Dhrti. Soma juice 
is drunk as a sacrificial rite. Rk., Yajus and Sama Mantras are 
used in Japa. The Samhita texts are studied and recited. 

14-16. A person who is called Brahmabhakta (devotee of 
Brahma) is like this: He is always engaged in Pranayama (re¬ 
straint of breath). He meditates with full control over the sense- 


organs. He eats what is obtained by way of alms. He observes 
Vratas. He withdraws his sense-organs from everything (with 
the aim of sublimating his desires). Prajesvara (i.e. Lord of the 
Subjects, Brahma) is retained by him in his heart. Brahma is 
meditated upon as seated in the pericarp of the lotus of the 
heart, red in colour and having excellent eyes. The devotee 
visualizes Brahma with excellent waist and seat and beaming 
face. The Lord has four arms granting boons and fearlessness 
(freedom from fear). Such is the devotee of Brahma. 

17. O goddess, listen to the procedure and injunction re¬ 
garding the residents of the holy spot. 

18. They are free from the sense of Mamatva (my-ness, 
possession). They are not egoistic. They have no close attach¬ 
ments (with anything). They do not accept gifts. They have no 
love for the usual four aims of life (Purusdrlhas). They view 
(regard) equally a lump of clay, a stone and a piece ofgold 

2°. They are engaged in the performance of J a p a always 

srsr are engased in 

ot ascetics. They are conversant with the procedures of Samkhya 


VII.I-107.21-29 


347 


and Yoga. They get all their doubts cleared by persons well- 
versed in the Dharma Sastras. 

21-22. Those Brahmanas residing in holy spots are always 
engaged in the worship of Brahma. I shall explain how Pitamaha 
in the form of a boy, should be worshipped by them. O my 
beloved, listen attentively. After taking holy bath in the TTrtha 
free from impurities, he should wear white clothes and remain 
pure and clean. Fully equipping himself with the requisites for 
adoration and offerings he should worship Brahma. 

23. At the outset, he has to bathe the deity in accordance 
with the injunctions, by means of Pancamrtarasa (may be Panca 
Gavya) and water. He has to take cow’s urine, dung, milk, 
curds and ghee. Then water with Kusa blades. 

24. He takes Gomutra (cow’s urine) uttering the Gayatri 
Mantra. He takes cowdung uttering the Vedic text beginning 
with gandhadvara. He takes cow’s milk uttering the Mantra 
beginning with apyavasva. He takes up curds with the Mantra 
beginning with dadhikravna. 

25. He takes Ajya (ghee) uttering the Mantra beginning 
with tejosi sukram He takes the Kusa water uttering the Mantra 
beginning with devasya tva. He should then bathe the deity 
uttering the Mantra beginning with apo histha. 

26. The devotee thus bathes the deity with the five milk 
products from a Kapila (tawny-coloured) cow further sancti¬ 
fied by the Mantras. This is remembered as Brahmasnana. 

27. By bathing Surajyestha (the seniormost god i.e. Brahma) 
one undoubtedly reduces to ash all the sins incurred in the 
course of thousands of crores of years. 

28. After duly bathing thus, the deity Brahma in the form 
of a boy, the Brahmana then bathes the deity further with 
water mixed with camphor and agallochum. 

29. After doing this the devotee should worship the Lord 
through the Gayatri Nyasa (ritualistic touching of the limbs 
while uttering the syllables of the Gayatri Mantra 1 ). A wise man 
should perform the Nyasa with Pranava (all over the body) 
beginning with the head and ending with the sole of the foot. 


1. W 29-36 express belief in the protective power of every syllable of the 
Gayatri Mantra. 



348 


Skanda Parana 


30. The Nyasa of Takara (the syllable tat) is on the head, 
that of ‘sa’ syllable is in the region of the face, that of ‘vi’ is 
in the region of the throat and that of ‘to’ (that is tur) is in 
the joints of the limbs. 

31. The Nyasa of syllable ‘va’ is in the centre of the heart 
and of the syllable ‘re’ at the two sides. The Nyasa of syllable 
•nV is in the right side of belly and that of ‘ya’ in the left one 

(*nya’ split into *ni 9 and ya ). 

32. The Nyasa of syllable ‘bha (i.e. bhar) should be in the 

navel of the waist and of ‘go’ in the two sides (in the Jangha- 
calf muscles). After the Nyasa of ‘de’ on the two knees that of 
the syllable ‘va’ is to be on the lotus-like feet. 

33. After the ritualistic touch of the two thumbs with the 
syllable ‘sye’ that of the chest shall be made with syllable ‘din. 
The Nyasa of syllable ‘ma’ is at the root of the knee and of the 
syllable ‘hi’ is on the private parts. 

34. The Nyasa of syllable ‘dhi’ is on the heart and that of 
‘yo’ is in the lower lips. A wise devotee should perform the 
Nyasa of the other syllable ‘yo’ on the upper lip. 

35. The Nyasa of the syllable ‘na’ (i'.e. nah) is at the tip of 
the nose and that of ‘pra’ is on the eye. The Nyasa of syllable 
‘co’ is in the middle of the eyebrows and of the syllable ‘da’ 
is on Prana (life breath). 

36. O goddess of Suras, the Nyasa of the syllable ‘ya’ is on 
the forehead. O beloved, after the Nyasa on his own body, the 
devotee shall make the Nyasa on the deity too. 

37-38. After making the deity full with all the offerings, 
the devotee reviews it completely. After supplementing the 
holy articles mixed with saffron, Agaru, camphor and sandal 
by means of scented water, the devotee sprinkles all those 
articles uttering Gayatn (beginning with Om) and Pranava. 
Thereafter he should begin the adoration. 

39. He should worship in due order with divine flowers of 
sweet scents such as Malatl, Kamala, Asoka, Satapatra and Bakula. 

40. Fumigation should be done with excellent incense of 
black Agaru as well as excellent lamps with ghee. Thereafter 
the devotee should offer the Naivedya of different kinds in due 
order. 

41. The Naivedya should consist of Khanda, Ladduka, Srivesta, 
Kamsara, Asoka Pallava (sprouts and shoots of Asoka), Svastika 



VIM-107.42-51 


349 


(Marathi—Saiikarapali), Ullipikd,Dugdhd, Tila-vesta as well as 
Kilatikd'. 

42. Ripe fruits should be offered uttering the Mula Man¬ 
tra. The devotee should worship Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda. 

43. A wise man should worship Jnana (knowledge), Vairagya 
(disinterestedness), Aisvarya (or authority) and Dharma (pi¬ 
ety), O goddess, in the quarters and the intervening spaces 
between them beginning with north-east and proceeding in 
due order. 

44 . The devotee should worship the places of,the fourteen 
Vidyas 1 (Lores) before Brahma. Then Nyasa on Hrdaya (heart) 
etc. should be performed in front of the Lord in the proper 
order. 

45-46. The Mantra for the Nyasa on the heart is the Rk 
beginning with apo hi stha . The Mantra beginning with rtam 
satyam is said to be the Mantra for the Nyasa of Sikha (tuft of 
hair). The Mantra for the Nyasa on the eyes is that beginning 
with udutyam. The Mantra beginning with citram devdndm is 
well-known in all the worlds. It is pointed out that the Kavaca 
(protective Mantra) is uttering the Mantra brahmams te chddaydmi. 

47 . The worship of Isa is proclaimed with the utterance of 
bhuh bhuvah svah After consecrating with Omkara the devotee 
should worship the Lord by means of Gayatri Mantra. 

48. The devotee should worship all the others beginning 
with Rgveda by means of Pranava. Gayatri is the greatest Mantra, 
it is the mother of the Vedas. It is Vibhdvan (excellent due to 

its splendour). _ 

49. He who observes fast on the Pancadasi (fifteenth day, 

Full-Moon or New-Moon day) and worships Brahma by means 
of the principles underlying the syllables of the Gayatri attams 

the greatest position (Moksa). 

50 If a Brahmana is desirous of crossing the terrible ocean 
of mundane existence, he should always worship Brahma in 
the Prabhasa Ksetra in the month of Karttika. 

51. As a mere sight of Brahmi in the form of a boy gives 
the fruit of a horse-sacrifice, a sensible learned man will not 

worship him. 


1 . 

2 . 


hese are varieties of sweet dishes. ... , oc 

ccording to Visnu P. the Vidyas arc as follows: Six Angas, four Vedas, 

limarhsa, Nyaya, Dharma Sastra and Puranas. 



350 


Skanda Parana 


52. O goddess of Devas, who will not eagerly worship Brahma 
within whose unit of time reckoned as one day, all the Devas, 
Asuras and human beings become annihilated? 

53. It is he who is the father of all the Devas. He is the 
grandfather of all the living beings. Hence he should be wor¬ 
shipped by all the Brahmanas residing in the holy spot. 

54. He alone is the Lord of the Bhuvana (universe). He is 
in the form of Rudra. He is multiformed. He who observes fast 
on the Full-Moon day and duly worships Brahma, the Lord of 
the worlds, shall get the fruit of a horse sacrifice. 

55. The Rathayatra (religious procession or a Car festival) 
of the Lord in the month of Karttika is glorified. A man who 
devoutly performs it, attains Salokya Mukti i.e. residence in the 
same world as that of Brahma. 

56-57. O goddess of Devas, a king who wishes to be a Parantapa 
(destroyer of enemies) should take the Four-faced Lord clad 
in deerhide and accompanied by Savitrl all through the city. 
It shall be on the Full-Moon day. Many kinds of musical instru¬ 
ments should be played. After taking the deity round the entire 
city, he shall be installed. 

58. At the outset a Brahmana belonging to the Sandilya 
Gotra should be honoured. Then the Brahmanas should be 
fed. Then the Lord is to be placed on a chariot (car) to the accompa¬ 
niment of music played on different musical instruments. 

59. In front of the Ratha (chariot) the son of Sandill should 
be worshipped in accordance with the injunctions. The Brahmanas 
should be made to recite the Mantras and the auspicious cer¬ 
emony of Punyaha (-vacana ) is to be performed. 

60. The Lord (deity) is to be placed on the chariot. The 
devotees then keep awake by seeing various kinds of visual 
scenes of dramatic performance and listening to profound sounds 
of the Vedic chant. 

61. A Sudra who wishes for welfare should not ride the 
chariot. O my beloved wife and goddess, particularly a man of 
no pious nature abstains from riding it. In fact excepting a 
Bhojaka (Brahmana of Bhoja clan—MW) no one gets into the 


62. O my beloved, the devotee should place Savitrl on the 
rig t side of Brahma. The Bhojaka should be seated on the left 
side. A lotus is to be placed in front. 


VII.1.107.63-75 


351 


63. Thus, a wise devotee makes the chariot go round the 
city to the accompaniment of sounds of conchs and musical 
instruments, O goddess. After performing the Nirajana rite 
(waving lights before an idol) the deity is placed on its own 
original place. 

64. He who devoutly conducts this religious procession, he 
who views it and he who pulls the car, shall go to the region 
of Brahma. 

65. He who holds a lamp there at the back of the car of 
Brahma, obtains the great fruit of a horse-sacrifice at every 
step. 

66 . O great goddess, a king who does not make arrange¬ 
ments for the car festival of Brahma is cooked in Raurava hell 
for an endless period of time. 

67. Hence by all means, with a keen desire for the welfare 
of the nation, a king himself should make special arrange¬ 
ments for the chariot festival. 

68 . A wise king should duly feed Brahmanas on the First 
lunar day and honour them with unwashed clothes (fresh from 
the loom), sweet scents, garlands and unguents. 

69. He who lights lamps in the sacred chamber of Brahma 
on the New-Moon day in the month of Karttika, shall go to the 
highest region. 

.70. During all festivals, especially on all occasions, Brahmanas 
should worship Brahma, the preceptor of all the worlds. 

71. Those Brahmanas should possess perfect faith and cel¬ 
ebrations should be befitting their duties. The deity should be 
honoured with divine offerings and services according to one’s 
means and affluence. 

72. Thus, O goddess, the excellent greatness of the wor¬ 
ship of Brahma in the form of a boy, along with the greatness 
of Prabhasa Ksetra has been narrated to you. 

73. I shall now mention his (Brahma’s) one hundred eight 
names by reciting and handing over of which to others, one 
will derive the fruit of ten thousand Yajnas. 

74. By reciting this prayer, one obtains that fruit which 
accrues by perfect articulation of a hundred thousand Gayatri 
Japas. 

75. This is the most excellent of all eulogies. It has divine 
esoteric significance. It is destructive of all sins. It should not 


352 


Skanda Purana 


be imparted to evil-minded persons indulging in censuring otheis. 

76. It should be given to a noble-souled Brahmana having 
perfect acquaintance with the Vedic texts. 

Formerly this excellent eulogy of Brahma was enquired about 
by Visnu: 

77. “O Pitamaha, O Lord of Devas, how are you to be 
meditated upon and in which holy spot? Do tell this to me. You 
are indeed the most excellent one of the omniscient ones.” 

Brahma said: 

78. I am Surasrestha in Puskara. Prapitdmaha (Great-grand¬ 
father) in Gaya, Vedagarbha in Kanyakubja and Caturmukha (Four¬ 
faced) in Bhrgu Ksetra. 

79. I am: Srstikartd (Creator) in Kauberl (northern region), 
Brhaspati in Nandipurl. (I am one) in the form of a boy at 
Prabhasa and Surapriya in Varanasi. 

80. (I am) Cakradeva in Dvaravatl. Bhuvanadhipa in Vaidisa 
(Vidisa), Pundankaksa (Lotus-eyed) in Paundraka (N. Bengal?) 
and PItaksa in Hastinapura. 

81. I am Vijaya in JayantI (Jyntia in Assam). Jayanta in 
Purusottama (Jagannathapuri), Padmahasta in Vada, and Tamonuda 
in Tamolipta (Tamralipti—mod. Tamluk). 

82. (I am) Janananda in hYncchalri', Janapriya (favourite of 
the people) in Kanclpurl 2 , Brahma in Karnata’s city and Muni 
in Rsikunda. 

83. (I am called) Srinivasa in Srlkantha; Subhamkara in 
Kamarupa (Assam), Devakarta in Ucchriyana 3 4 (Orissa) and Srasia 
(Creator) in Jalandhara (Punjab); 

84. Visnu in the holy spot named Mallika 1 ; Bhargava in 
Mahendra; Gonarda in Sthavirakara and Pitamaha in Ujjayinl; 

85. Mahadeva in Kausambi 5 ; Raghava in Ayodhya; Virahci in 
Citrakuta and Varaha in Vindhyaparvata; 

86 . Surasrestha in Ganga dvara; Sankara in Himavanta; Srucdhasta 
in Dehika; Padmahasta in Arbuda (Mt. Abu); 


1. Ramnagar in Rohil Khanda (Uttar Pradesh) 

2. Ranchi in Tamil Nadu 

3. V.L. Uddiyana (Orissa) 

4. If Mallikarjuna, Mod. Srisaila. 

5. Mod. Kosam, a village. 






VII.I.107.87-101 


353 


87. Padmanetra in Vrndavana, Kusahasta in Naimisa; Govinda 
in Gopaksetra and Surendra in Yamunatata (the banks of Yam¬ 
una); 

88 . Padmatanu in Bhaglrathi and Janananda in Janasthala. 
Madhvaksa in Kaunkana and Kanakaprabha in Kampilya 
(Farrukhabad in U.P.); 

89. Annadata (one who provides with food) in Khetaka 
(Kaira-Gujarat); Sambhu in Kratusthala; Paulastya in Lanka and 
Hamsavahana (Swan-vehicled) in Kasmlra; 

90. Vasistha too in Arbuda (See 86); Narada in Utpalavana; 
Srutidata in Medhaka; and Yajusampati (Lord of Yajus Mantras) 
in Prayaga. 

91. Samaveda in Sivaliriga; Madhupriya in Markata; Narayana 
in Gomanta (Goa) and Dvijapriya (favourite of Brahmanas) in 
Vidarbha (Maharashtra); 

92. Brahmagarbha in Arikulaka (Arikola in Gujarat); Sutapriya 
in Brahmavaha; Duradharsa in Indraprastha (Delhi); and 
Suramardana in Campa (Bhagalpur) (Orissa, around Jaypur on 
the river VaitaranI); 

93. Maharupa in Viraja; Surupa in Rastravardhana; Janadhyaksa 
in Kadambaka; and Devadhyaksa in Samasthala; 

94. Gangadhara in Rudrapltha; remembered as Jalada in 
SupTtha; Tripurari in Tryambaka (Nasik, Maharashtra); and Trilocana 
in Srisaila (Karnul, Andhra); 

95. Mahadeva in Plaksapura; Vedhanasana in Kapala; Sauri 
in Srngaverapura (Singraur on Ganga; Allahabad Dist.), and 
Cakradharaka in Nimisa; 

96. Virupdksa in Nandipuri (See 79); Gautama in Plaksapadapa, 
Malyavan in Hastinatha and Dvijendra in Vacika (Vatika?); 

97. Divanatha in Indrapurl; and Purandara in Bhutika; 
Havisabahu in Candra and Garudapriya in Campa (see v 92), 

98. Mahayaksa in Mahodaya (Kanoj); Suyajna in Putakavana; 
Suklavarna in Siddhesvara and Padmabodhaka in Vibha; 

99. Lihgin in Devadaruvana, Umdpati in Udaka; Vindyaka in 
Matrsthana anid Dhanadhipa in Alaka; 

100. Govinda in Trikuta (a mountain in Lanka), Vasuki in 
Patala, Yugadhyaksa in Kovidara and Surapriya in Strirajya (kingdom 
of women—Kamarupa, Assam); 

101. Subhoga in Purnagiri; Taksaka in Salmall; Papaha in 
Amara; and Sudarsana in Ambika; 




354 


SkandaPurana 


102. Mahavira in Naravapi; Durgandsana in Kantara; Padmagrha 
in Padmavati and Mrgalanchana in Gagana (Sky). 

103. O Madhusudana, my presence all through the three 
twilights is only in that place where these one hundred eight 
names are recited. 

104. He who views anyone of these in the form of the boy- 
Brahma, obtains the merit of all the Vedhas (gods—Brahmas) 
mentioned before. 

105. O Krsna, he who always eulogizes me at Prabhasa by 
means of these names, goes to my region called Vijaya and 
rejoices there for endless years. 

106. By reciting my prayer, all the sins, mental, verbal and 
physical, get destroyed. 

107. By reciting my prayer one obtains that fruit which is 
attained by men through offerings of flowers and incense, 
propitiation of Brahmanas and by steady meditation. 

108. The sins of Brahmana-slaughter etc. committed in this 
world knowingly or unknowingly, do perish in a moment. 

109. This eulogy of mine is liked by me. He who listens to 
it or recites it shall be rid of all sins. He will obtain intensely 
desired things. 

110. O Krsna, I shall tell you another secret thing. Listen 
to it with attention. 

111. In the month of Karttika, if the constellation Krttika 
coincides with the Karttikl day, that lunar day is to be consid¬ 
ered very great. It is my favourite in Prabhasa. 

112. If the constellation RohinI coincides with that lunar 
day, that is the meritorious Mahakarttika day inaccessible even 
to Devas. 

113. If the constellation Krttika coincides with the Karttikl 
lunar day or Saturday, Sunday or Thursday and the devotee 
views Brahma in the form of a boy, he attains the fruit of a 
horse-sacrifice. 

114. When the Sun is in the constellation Visakha and the 

Moon in Krttika, that Yoga is called Padmaka. O Hari, it is very 
rare in Prabhasa. ’ 

115. During that Yoga a man must view Brahma in the 
form of a boy at Prabhasa. Even if he is defiled by crores of 
sins he does not see the world of Yama. 






mi.107.116-119—108.1-5 


355 


Isvara said: 

116. In this manner, the prayer was recounted to Hari by 
Brahma. The greatness of Brahma as a deity has been ex¬ 
plained by me to you. 

117. If it is listened to, it destroys all sins of men. It facili¬ 
tates the acquisition of all objectives. Gift of a plot of land 
should be made there by those who desire the fruit of the 
(complete) pilgrimage. 

118. O goddess, there itself a water-pot, a white cloth and 
sixteen great gifts should be made to Brahma in the form of 
a boy. 

119. When great Parvan days (festival days) come all the 
Brahmanas residing in the holy place should perform Parayana 
(reading and reciting the scriptures), O goddess. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHT 

Greatness of Pratyusesvara 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a devotee should go to 
the excellent Linga of Vasus. It is within a distance of fifty 
Dhanus from Somesa, in the north-eastern direction. 

The Linga installed there, O great goddess, has four faces 
and is a favourite of Suras. Its name is Pratyusesvara and it 
destroys great sins. 

By visiting that deity, sins incurred in the course of seven 
births get destroyed, O lady of excellent countenance. It is 
truth, it is the truth. 

The Devi said: 

4. Who is this person named Pratyusa? Whose son was he? 
How was the Linga installed? How is he famous? O Sankara do 
tell me all this. 

Isvara said: 

5. O goddess, Daksa, a son of Brahma, is remembered as 










356 


Skanda Purana 


P « ^ve ten of them to Dharma 

vf £SZSSSZT - “ 

Pralyusa. O g^sTf^Te j^us^h' " ^ « 
came to the holy spot of Prabhasa ege “'" g 3 S °"' he 

yieldin^InaTntmried MaVetta 0^7“ 5 f ”* 

an elaborate penance for ! , y beloved, he performed 

reckoning Tranquil and U ° ^ / CarS accor ding to divine 

-IP. he m\*™To„ a; M*Z~ S WS mi " d WUW " »*- 

with his devotion an'dgranted hit/a”' became P leased 
lent one among Yogin! ° n ZW “’ 3 most «*cel- 

the soyf pr^a! ,e becamea e Urtga ' DeraI ». 

13 p^nThont e a d ehTd iS 

goddess of Devas the line of P ro P m ates that Lord, O 
broken. " e ° f P ro S en >' ™ his race never gets 

Pra'tynselarTeariraTL^Ttrexcetn": T ^ 

petual restraint of himself his sin a devotlon and per- 
Incnrred by the ^ 7^?'°^ «" * * * 

A bull should be cdven awav u 

t0 l S 6 et Th Pe ; fCCt frUU ° f the P^rimage ' 6 Wh ° WiSh 

fourteenth lunarday in^hedariThal/Th 6 ** ° n Ule 

By keeping awake one shall attain th^ f ^ m ? mh ° f M * gha - 
Yajnas. atta,n the frui t of all Danas and 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINE 

Greatness of Anilesvara 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter. O great goddess, a pilgrim shonld go to 


VII.1.109.4-7—110.1-4 


357 


the excellent shrine of Anilesvara. O my beloved, it is situated 
within a distance of three Dhanus to the north-east thereof 
(i.e. of Pratyusesvara). 

The Linga is highly powerful. By merely viewing, it destroys 
sins. The fifth among Vasus who is known as Anila (Wind god) 
propitiated Mahadeva and made him manifest to him. Equipped 
with perfect faith, he installed the Linga. 

4. Thus, by the power of Isa, his son became very strong. 
He became well-known as Manojava (having speed of the mind) 
and his movement could not be comprehended fully. 

5. By visiting him, a man ceases to be afflicted with sick¬ 
ness. He will never again be sick. If he is viewed, neither a 
blind one, nor a deaf one, neither a dumb person nor a sickly 
and impoverished one is born in the family. 

6. He who offers a single flower on the Linga becomes 
richly endowed with happiness and good fortune. He will al¬ 
ways be handsome. 

7. Thus, O goddess, the greatness that destroys sins, has 
been narrated. By listening to this and approving this with 
emotional fervour, one becomes rich by realizing all his de¬ 
sires. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TEN 

Greatness of Prabhasesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O beautiful woman, a pilgrim should go 
to the excellent shrine of Prabhasesvara. O goddess, it is stated 
to be situated within a distance of seven Dhanus to the west 
of Gauritapovana (penance grove of Gauri). It is not very far 
away. That great Linga was installed by the eighth of the Vasus 
named Prabhasa, who was engaged in the adoration of Siva. 
O goddess of Devas, he had come to the holy spot of Prabhasa 
with a keen desire for a son. 

4. After installing the great Linga well-known as Agneya 
(fiery), he performed an elaborate penance for a hundred 
years according to divine reckoning, O my beloved. 


358 


Skanda Purana 


5. Thereafter, O great goddess, Lord Rudra became pleased 
with him as he had great faith. The Lord granted him what 
he had desired in his mind. 

6. Bhuvana, the sister of Brhaspati, was an expounder of 
Brahman. She was the wife of Prabhasa, the eighth one among 
Vasus. 

7. Her son was Visvakarman, creator of the universe and 
a patriarch. He is remembered as the maternal grandfather of 
Manu. He was an expert architect. 

8. He became the fashioner of the Solar disc, the great 
hewer of the refulgence. The son of the eighth one among the 
Vasus was like this. 

9. O goddess of Devas, the son of the Vasu named Prabhasa 
was also engaged in the propitiation of that Linga. Thus, O 
goddess, the greatness pertaining to Prabhasesvara has been 
spoken to you. 

10. The greatness is destroyer of all sins. It is splendid and 
it fulfills all desires. A devotee should worship him with devo¬ 
tion and should possess perfect faith. 

11. He should observe fast and recite the Satarudriya Man¬ 
tra. He should lie down on the bare ground. On the four¬ 
teenth lunar day in the month of Magha, he should take a holy 
dip at the confluence with the ocean (of a river). 

12. He should bathe the deity with Pancamrta and worship 
it in accordance with the injunctions. 

13. O goddess, he who performs the great festival of the 
chariot and concludes the pilgrimage shall be rid of all sins. 
He becomes prosperous with the realization of all desires. A 
bull should be offered as a gift there by those who wish to get 
the fruit of a perfect pilgrimage. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED ELEVEN 

Greatness of Ramesvara Ksetra 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the excellent 
Puskararanya, O great goddess, situated within sixty Dhanus in 
the north-eastern corner thereof. 


VII.I.l 11.5-13 


359 


O great goddess, there is a Kunda there named Astapuskara. 
It is a destroyer of all sins. O goddess, it is inaccessible to those 
who have not controlled their selves. 

Near the Kunda is the great Linga named Ramesvara in¬ 
stalled by the intelligent Ramesa (Rama). Merely through its 
worship, one is rid of the sin of Brahmana-slaughter. 

Sri Devi said: 

5. O great Lord, do tell me in detail everything pertaining 
to Ramesvara. How did Rama come there accompanied by Slta 
and Laksmana? 

6. How was the Linga installed in Puskara that removes all 
sins? Describe this in detail as well as the benefit along with 
its greatness. 

Isvara said: 

7. In the twenty-fourth Yuga, formerly Rama was born as 
the son of Dasaratha with Vasistha as his family priest. He was 
born for the purpose of slaying Ravana. 

8. Then, O goddess, due to the curse of a sage (?) Rama, 
the son of Dasaratha, went (to the forest) after some time 
along with Slta and Laksmana and performed a great penance. 

9. He set out surrounded by divine Brahmana-sages, for a 
stay in the forest. In the course of his wanderings he came to 
Prabhasa Ksetra. 

10. After reaching that spot, he sat there because he was 
extremely tired. When the Sun set he prepared a bed of leaves 
on the ground. 

11. He went to sleep. O goddess, at the close of the night, 
he saw his father Dasaratha in a dream. He was highly brilliant 
yet gentle in appearance. 

12. After getting up in the morning, he related to the 
Brahmanas how Dasaratha was seen in dream by that noble- 
souled one. 

The Brahmanas said: 

13. Pitrs desirous of the prosperity of the persons born in 
their family appear before them in dreams. O Raghava, your 
ancestors do bestow boons on you. 


360 


Skanda Purana 


14. This Tlrtha of Sarhgadhanvan (Visnu, the bearer of 
Sarhga bow) is highly meritorious and well-guarded. It is called 
Puskara. May the Sraddha be offered here. 

15. Indeed King Dasaratha desires that an auspicious ball 
of rice should be offered by you in this Tlrtha. Therefore, he 
has appeared to you. 

Isvara said: 

16. On hearing their words, the lotus-eyed Rama invited 
splendid Brahmanas worthy of the invitation to Sraddha. 

17. He told Laksmana who was standing humbly at his side: 
“O son of Sumitra, go to fetch fruits for the Sraddha. Do-go 
quickly.” 

18-20. After saying “So it shall be”, the scion of the family 
of Raghu went out and quickly brought different kinds of fruits 
like Bilva, Kapittha, plenty of Tinduka, Badara, Karira and 
Karamarda, O my beloved. There were also Cirbhata, Parusa, 
Matulihga (citron), Nalikera (coconut) and white Ingudi fruits. 

21-24. Slta, the daughter of Janaka, cooked them immedi¬ 
ately. Then at the auspicious hour of Kutapa Rama had his 
bath and wore a clean bark garment and invited excellent 
Brahmanas worthy of the Sraddha honour. They were: Galava, 
Devala, Raibhya, Yavakrita, Parvata, Bharadvaja, Vasistha, Jabali, 
Gautama, Bhrgu etc. These and many other Brahmanas who 
had mastered the Vedas (came there). They came there for 
the Sraddha to be performed by Rama of energetic actions. At 
that time Rama spoke to Sita: 

25. “Do come, O Vaidehl, for the holy rite of washing the 
feet of the Brahmanas.” On hearing this, Slta entered a place 
in the midst of the trees. 

26. She got hidden among the bushes. She was out of Rama’s 
sight, despite the fact that Rama repeatedly called “Slta ! Slta!” 

27. Seeing Rama very angry and Slta out of view, Laksmana 
himself performed the duty of honouring the Brahmanas. 

28. After the Brahmanas had taken their food and the ball 
of rice was also offered, Sita, the daughter of Janaka, came to 
the place where Rama was present. 

29. On seeing her, Raghava rebuked her with harsh words: 
Fie upon you, O sinful woman! Where had you been leaving 

me as well as the Brahmanas when the time for Sraddha had 


VILLI 11.30-43 


361 


arrived? This was the holy rite of Pitrs which brings about great 
prosperity.” 

Isvara said: 

30. On hearing his words JanakI became extremely fright¬ 
ened. 

31-36. With palms joined in veneration and trembling much 
she spoke: “O noble one, do not be angry. O Lord, do not 
rebuke me. Listen, O my Lord, why I went elsewhere leaving 
your side. Your father was seen by me. So also your grand¬ 
father. The one earlier than he and the maternal grandfather 
and others were seen separately in the bodies of the leading 
Brahmanas. They had separately occupied those bodies. So, O 
scion of the family of Raghu, bashfulness overwhelmed me. O 
mighty one, your father was accustomed to eat charmingly 
delicious food-stuffs of good qualities. O great king, how will 
he eat this saltish, astringent and bitter stuff? So I became 
miserable. O leader of the descendants of Raghu, for this reason, 
on seeing the kinsmen of the father-in-law I disappeared through 
bashfulness. Hence eschew your anger.” 

37. On hearing her words Raghava became surprised. He 
offered a special Sraddha in the holy Puskara Tlrtha. 

38. There in the vicinity of Puskara itself, within a distance 
of three Dhanus to the south, he installed the Lihga well-known 
as Ramesvara. 

39. He who devoutly worships him with sweet scents, flow¬ 
ers etc. in due order, attains the great region where Lord 
Janardana is present. 

40. Of what avail is profuse talk? If the Sraddha is offered 
on DvadasT (twelfth lunar day) the merit thereof cannot be 
properly estimated in all the three worlds. 

41. O beautiful lady, there is great merit in offering Sraddha 
on any day when Sasthi (6th lunar day) or Caturthi (4th lunar 
day) coincides with Friday or Tuesday. 

42. If propitiated in Puskara by one of their own family, 
the fathers and grandfathers become delighted for a period of 
twelve years. They never wish for anything else. 

43. A man who offers the gift of a horse there with perfect 
devotion, attains the fruit of an Asvamedha Yajna (horse-sac¬ 
rifice). 


362 


Skanda Purana 


44. Thus the sin-destroying greatness of Lord Ramesvara 
and Puskara has been perfectly spoken to you, O beautiful 
woman. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWELVE 

Greatness of Laksmanesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the excellent 
Laksmanesvara, O great goddess. It is situated within a dis¬ 
tance of thirty Dhanus to the east of Ramesa. 

It was installed by Laksmana who had come there in the 
course of his pilgrimage. O goddess, that Linga is a destroyer 
of great sins. It is adored by Suras. 

He who worships it devoudy and remains absorbed in meditation 
and also offers dance, instrumental music and songs along 
with Homa and Japa attains the greatest goal. 

4. Cooked food, water and gold should be gifted there to 
a Brahmana after worshipping the Lord of the chiefs of Devas 
with sweet scents, flowers etc, in due order. 

5. Worshipping there on the fourteenth day in the dark 
half of Magha is particularly recommended. Holy ablution, 
donation and Japa there shall be of everlasting benefit. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED THIRTEEN 

Greatness of Janakisvara 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the excellent shrine of Janakisvara situated within a distance 
of thirty Dhanus to the south-west of Ramesa. 

Formerly it was worshipped by Janakl. It destroys sins of all 
creatures. It was installed after propitiating Sankara perfectly. 


VII.I.113.4-9—114.1-5 


363 


Earlier, the very same Linga was called Vasisthesa. There- 
aftei, it became famous on the earth in Treta asjanaklsa. 

4. Thereafter, sixty thousand great sages named Valakhilyas 
attained Siddhi there. So it is known as Siddhesvara also. 

5- O great goddess, that Yugalinga of great refulgence became 
well-known as Siddhesvara in Kali Age. On seeing it one is rid 
of sins arising from misery and bad luck. 

6. A pilgrim who worships it devoutly after bathing it duly, 
shall be rid of sins whether one is a man or a woman. 

7-8. A pilgrim should bathe in the Puskara Tirtha and 
worship the Linga regularly for a month continuously with 
restriction in his diet. Each day he will get more fruit than that 
of a horse-sacrifice. If a woman worships it on the third lunar 
day in the month of Magha, there shall be no ill-luck, misery 
or grief in that family. 

9. Thus, O goddess, the sin-destroying greatness has been 
related to you. If listened to, it eradicates sins and accords 
conjugal felicity. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FOURTEEN 

Greatness of VamanasvamI 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the shrine of sin-destroying Visnu named Vamanasvamin. He 
is the destroyer of all sins. 

It is remembered that the deity is stationed within a dis¬ 
tance of twenty Dhanus on the south-western side of Puskara. 

When, O goddess, Bali was bound by the powerful Visnu, 
the right foot was placed there by the Visvarupin (Omniformed 
One). O beloved, the second step was placed on the peak of 
Meru and the third in the firmament. 

4. When he lifted up the foot the Cosmic Egg received a 
long crack by the tip of the foot (of Visnu) and water gushed 
forth therefrom. 

5. It came up to his knees on the earth. Therefore, it 
became famous on the earth as Visnupadi Ganga (the Ganga 
arising from Visnu’s foot). 


364 


Skanda Parana 


6. At the outset that great river reached Puskara from the 
sky. The sky is called by the name Puskara. Water is also called 
Puskara. Hence the place of the presence of Prajapati is 
famous as Puskara. 

7. After taking holy bath there, the man who views the 
foot of Hari, attains the greatest region where Hari himself is 
present. 

8. O beautiful lady, by offering balls of rice there to the 
Pitrs, they become satisfied for a crore of years. Hari himself 
has said this. 

9. In this context a couplet has been sung by the great 
sage Vasistha after viewing Vamanasvamin. Listen to it atten¬ 
tively. 

10. “After bathing in Puskara and viewing Visnu’s foot there¬ 
after, why should there be worry even after committing great 
sins?” 

11. He who makes a gift of a pair of shoes to a Brahmana 
and observes Vratas, proceeds to Visnu’s world riding on a 
vehicle and is also honoured in Visnuloka. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTEEN 

Greatness of Puskaresvara 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the excellent shrine of Puskaresvara to the south of the excel¬ 
lent Janaklsvara. 

The Lihga is of great power and has been worshipped by 
sage Sanatkumara, a son of Brahma. It has been worshipped 
with faith by means of golden lotuses in accordance with the 
injunctions. Hence it is well-known as Puskaresvara. O beau¬ 
tiful lady, it is a destroyer of all sins. 

If anyone devoudy worships him with sweet scents, flowers 
etc, it is as good as a pilgrimage to Puskara performed by him. 
There is no doubt about it. 


VII.L116.1-10—117.1-4 


365 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SIXTEEN 

Greatness of Saiikhodakakundesvari Gauri 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the shrine of the 
goddess well-known as Kundesvarl, O great goddess. She con¬ 
fers conjugal felicity. The shrine is situated within a distance 
of thirty Dhanus to the north-west of Puskara and south-west 
of Bhutanatha. The goddess that supresses sins and destroys 
a series of impoverished states is stationed there. There is a 
Kunda (holy pit) named Sankhodaka situated within a distance 
of fifteen Dhanus to the south-west of the shrine of the god¬ 
dess. This holy pit destroys all sins. 

4. Whether a man or a woman, the pilgrim should take 
the holy bath in the auspicious water, O great goddess and 
worship that goddess well-known as Sahkhavarta. 

5-6. The name of that goddess during Kali is Kundesvarl. 
She bestows all happiness. O my beloved goddess, a (demon) 
named Sahkha was formerly killed by Visnu. He took his huge 
body in the form of a conch shell, filled it with the waters of 
the Tirtha and came to Prabhasa Ksetra. 

7-8. After washing the conch he created the highly lus¬ 
trous Tirtha. Then he blew the conch shell producing a sound 
majestically rumbling like a cloud. Due to the loud sound, the 
goddess came there enquiring about the cause. She stayed 
near the Kunda. So she became famous as Kundesvarl. The 
Kunda is remembered as Sankhodaka. 

9-10. Whether one is a man or a woman, one who worships 
her on the third lunar day of Magha with great devotion shall 
attain the region of Gauri. Couples should be fed there by 
those who wish for the fruit of the pilgrimage. Gifts of bodice, 
fruits and meal are to be made to virgins. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEEN 

Greatness of Bhutanathesvara 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 


366 


Skanda Purana 


the shrine of Hara known as Bhutanathesvara. It is situated 
within a distance of twenty Dhanus to the north-east of Kundesvari. 

O great goddess, this Kalpalihga is without beginning and 
end. Formerly in Treta Yuga, it was famous on the earth as 
Virabhadresvara. O goddess of Devas, it is remembered as 
Bhutesvara in Kali Age. 

Formerly at the juncture of Dvapara, crores of Bhutas (spir¬ 
its, goblins) attained great Siddhi there by the power of that 
Lihga. Hence it became famous by the name Bhutesvara on 
the earth. 

5-6. The pilgrim should be fearless. With all sense-organs 
conquered, he must meditate on the Lord perfectly. On the 
fourteenth lunar day in the dark half of the month, he should 
worship Sankara and then Aghora in the southern quarter. 
Only he will attain whatever Siddhi there is on the earth. 

7. Homas, gifts of gingelly seeds and offerings of balls of 
rice with Pitrs in view, should be made for realizing their release 
from the state of ghosthood. 

8. Thus the greatness of Bhutanathesvara has been ex¬ 
pounded. It destroys the extensive sins of the Kali Age. It is- 
the cause of merit. A person who reads or listens to the great¬ 
ness of the most excellent one among Suras with devotion, is 
rid of the multitude of sins. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEEN 


Greatness of Gopyaditya 

Isvara said: 

1-3. Thereafter, O great goddess, a pilgrim should go to 
the excellent shrine of Gopyaditya situated within thirty Dhanus 
on the north-west of Bhutesa and. within a distance of ten 
Dhanus on the south and south-east side of the goddess 
destroying Balatibala Daityas (powerful and super-powerful 
demons). O goddess, the shrine is a destroyer of sins. 

I shall explain its origin that is auspicious and destroys great 
sins. A man who devoutly listens to it, is rid of misery and grief. 
4-6. O my beloved, when the powerful Krsna came to Prabhasa 


VTI.I-118.7-17 


367 


accompanied by all the fifty-six crores of Yadavas, sixteen thousand 
Gopis (cowherdesses) as well as one hundred thousand sixty 
sons of Krsna, they stayed in the sin-destroying holy spot of 
Prabhasika occupying Yadavasthala (region of the Yadavas) 
extending up to the Raivataka mountain. 

7. Those powerful ones stayed there for twelve years. After 
marking them with their names, they installed Siva Linga in 
the holy spot. 

8. Thus all those leading Yadavas made the entire holy 
spot extending to twelve Yojanas, marked with their banners 
as well as Siva Lihgas. 

9. O goddess, the Lihgas were at a distance of a Hasta 
from each other. Temples were built in the centre of the holy 
spot. They had golden pot-like domes. Banners and festoons 
fluttered. These shrines shone in different places like pillars 
of Hari’s fame. 

10. I shall mention the names of sixteen senior Gopis. 
Listen to them with attention, O great goddess. 

11-12. They are: Larhbinl, Candrika, Kanta, Krura, Santa, 
Mahodaya, Nandini, Bhisana, Asoka, Suparna, Vimala, Aksaya, 
Subhada, Sobhana, and Punya. These are remembered as the 
Kalas (digits) of Harhsa. Krsna, the Supreme Absolute, Janardana, 
alone is considered as Hamsa. 

13. O goddess, these sixteen are glorified as his Saktis. 
Krsna is in the form of Candra (Moon). They are remembered 
to be in the form of Kalas (digits). 

14. Malini, the sixteenth Kala, has perfect and full disc. 
Candramas moves in these Kalas beginning with the first lunar 
day. 

15. O lady of excellent countenance, the Kalas are only 
those sixteen in the form of the Gopis. Each of them is sepa¬ 
rately involved with a thousand (Gopis). 

16. Thus, O goddess, the secret pertaining to knowledge 
(and wisdom) has been spoken to you. He who knows this in 
this manner, should be known as Vaisnavapurusa (Visnu s devotee) 
by wise persons. 

17. Having come to know that the shrines (temples) were 
built separately by the Yadavas, all those sixteen thousand Gopis 
informed (and received the permission of) Krsna and installed 
Ravi (Sun-god) with feelings of devotion. 


368 


Skanda Purana 


18. In accordance with the injunctions, they got (the idols 
of) Ravi installed through Narada and other sages as well as 
those residing in the holy spot. 

19. After the installation of Sun-god, they gave plenty of 
gifts such as plots of land, cows, gold and garments to the 
residents of the holy place. 

20-21. After having finished thus, they became happy and 
contented. They earned great fame. Accompanied by Krsna, 
they went back to Dvaraka by the way they came by. All the 
sages became satisfied and delighted in their minds. They named 
the idol of the Sun there as Gopyaditya. It became well-known 
as such. The deity is a destroyer of all sins and confers great 
conjugal felicity. 

22. After some time again, O my beloved goddess, they 
arrived at the Yadavasthala in the sin-destroying Prabhasa. (They 
went there) on account of the curse of Durvasas. 

23. Thus, O goddess, the greatness pertaining to Gopyaditya 
has been spoken to you. I shall now mention to you the details 
of adoration and obeisance thereof in due order. 

24. Merely by visiting the deity that was installed by Gopls 
a devotee gets rid of misery and grief, O goddess, in Mitravana 
(the park of Sun-god). 

25. Men who seek refuge in Gopiravi (the deity Gopyaditya) 
attain that goal which is usually obtained through perfectly 
performed penance as well as Yajnas with plenty of monetary 
gifts. 

26. O Mahesvarl, if a devotee places all his emotional and 
devout fervour in Gopyaditya with all his heart and soul, he 
has fulfilled his duty. He is really praiseworthy. 

27. (Even Pitrs wish like this) : ‘Would that, a blessed son, 
a sanctifier of the family, were born in our family—a blessed 
fellow who will adore (perform Upasti of) Bhanu with devout 
feelings.’ 

28. O my beloved, a man who worships the deity early in 
the morning on the seventh lunar day in the month of Magha, 
shall redeem the members of his family of seven earlier gen¬ 
erations and of seven succeeding generations. 

29. The devotee of Gopyaditya dispels ailments and con¬ 
quers invisible enemies of evil conduct: 

30. One should not touch gingelly oil on the SaptamT day 


VTI.I.l 18.31-38.—119.1 


369 


nor should he wear a blue cloth, nor should one bathe with 
Amalaka (Indian Gooseberry), nor should one quarrel at any 
cost. 

31. If a Brahmana performs any sacred rite wearing blue 
or red cloth, such rites as holy ablution, donation, Japa, Homa, 
self-study of the Vedas and offering libations to the Pitrs, performing 
great Yajnas, all that becomes futile. 

32. If a Brahmana wears on his body a cloth dyed in NT1I 
(blue) (the indigo plant) he regains purity by fasting for a day 
and a night and consuming Pancagavya (five cow products such 
as milk, curds, ghee etc.) 

33. If the juice of indigo plant gets into the hair pores of 
any Brahmana, he shall become a Patita (a fallen, sinful man). 
He can, however, expiate by means of three Krcchras. 

34. If any Brahmana inadvertently gets into the midst of 
Nila (indigo plants) he regains purity by fasting for a night 
and a day and consuming Pancagavya. 

35. If the indigo plant causes bruises in the body of Brahmarras 
and blood comes out, the Brahmanas should perform Cdndrayana 
expiation. 

36. If any one inadvertently uses an indigo twig as tooth 
brush, it is said by learned men that he gets purity by perform¬ 
ing two Krcchras. 

37. Thus, O goddess, the great prosperity resulting from 
(the adoration of) Gopyaditya has been spoken to you. It destroys 
sins of all creatures. When listened to, it causes the acquisition 
of all objectives. 

38. O goddess of Devas, by visiting Gopyaditya one gets 
that merit which is obtained by gifting hundreds and thou¬ 
sands of cows in Kurujangala country. 

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETEEN 
Greatness of BalatibaladaityaghnI 
Isvara said: 

1. Then, O great goddess, a devotee should'go to the 
shrine of the highly resplendent MahadevI well-known all over 
the earth by the name BalatibaladaityaghnI. 


370 


Skanda Purana 


2. The goddess has neither beginning nor death. She is 
stationed in the holy spot with a crore of Bhutas as her atten¬ 
dants. She is the destroyer of all Daityas. 

The Devi said: 

3. O Lord, why has she been mentioned as Balatibala- 
daityaghnl? How were the Daityas named Bala and Atibala struck 
down (by her)? 

4. O Mahesvara, where does that goddess reside? Of what 
power is she? Mention in detail the entire greatness of that 
goddess. 


Isvara said: 

5. Listen, O goddess, I shall describe the sin-destroying 
story by listening to which devoutly a man is rid of all sins. 

6. There was a powerful demon named Raktasura. He was 
son of Mahisa. With a huge body and powerful arms, he was 
another Hiranyaksa. 

7-8. He had two sons named Bala and Atibala. They de¬ 
feated all the Suras with Devendra and Agni as their leaders. 
In the entire region of the three worlds, they established then- 
suzerainty without fear and apprehension. Thirty-three war¬ 
riors were glorified as the leaders of their army. 

9. Ferocious by nature, they were great warriors leading a 
thousand Aksauhims. They had huge bodies and stout shoul¬ 
ders like lions. Those mighty ones were wicked by nature. 

10-13. The following Daityas of veiy huge bodies were the 
officials in their army: Dhumraksa, Bhlmadarhstra, Kalavasya, 
Mahahanu, Brahmaghna, Yajiiakopa, Strighna, Papaniketana, 
Vidyunmalm, Bandhuka, Sankukarna, Vibhavasu, Devantaka, 

Kr ' Qra ’ Ha yagriva, Asvakarna, Ketuman, 
Vr?abha, Dvija, Sarabha, Salabha, Vyaghra, Nikurhbha, Manika, 

Ba ^’ S £u Paka ’ Vlk?ara ’ Malin > Ka 1 *. Dandaka and Kerala. 

w _. i hl J hC earth 1 T tending l ° fifty Crores of Y °janas in area 

Dev 1 T by them - ° n COmin § to know of this, the 

Devas were distressed in mind due to fear. 

15 They went to the Himalaya forest along with all the 
££& X h “ S P “ re to ^ Eulogized the 


VII.I.l 19.16-25 


371 


The Devas said: 

16. O imperishable one, be victorious! O infinite one, be 
victorious! O unmanifest one free from ailments, be victorious! 
O goddess of great Maya, be victorious! O goddess, saluted to 
by Devas and sages, be victorious! 

17. Be victorious, O ruler of the universe! O Gahga, be 
victorious! O bestower of all Siddhis, be victorious! O Brahmanl. 
O Kaumarl, O Narayani, O Isvarl, be victorious! 

18. Be victorious, O Brahmanl, O Camunda ! Be victori¬ 
ous, O Indrani, O Mahesvarf! Be victorious, O mother MahalaksmI, 
O omnipresent Parvati! 

19. Be victorious, O refulgent goddess, O creator of the 
universe! Be victorious, O Airavati, O BharatT! Be victorious, 
O infinite one! Be victorious, O Jaya, the victorious one, be 
victorious, O goddess Jalavila (confusing to the confounded 
ones?)! 

20. Be victorious, O IsanI, O Siva, O Sarva! Be victorious 
always, O goddess adored with victory! Be victorious, O bestower 
of salvation; be victorious, O omniscient one; be victorious, 
O bestower of piety, wealth and desire! 

21. O Gayatrl, be victorious! O KalyanI (bestower of wel¬ 
fare), be victorious! Be victorious, O Sahya (the endurable 
one), O Vibhavarl (the most excellent one due to brilliance)! 
Be victorious, O Durga, O Mahakall, O SivadutI (one with Siva 
as messenger); be victorious, O invincible one! 

22. Be victorious, O Canda (fierce one); be victorious, O 
Mahamunda! Be victorious, O Nanda,the beloved of Siva; be 
victorious, O Ksemarhkari (One who causes welfare), O Siva, 
be victorious, O KalyanI, O Revatl! 

23. Be victorious, O Uma, O Siddhi-Mangalya (perfect achieve¬ 
ment and auspicious one)! Obeisance to you, O Harasiddha; 
be victorious, O Aparna; be victorious, O Ananda, O destroyer 
of the demon Mahisa! 

24. Be victorious, O Medha (intelligence), O Visalaksi (one 
with wide eyes), be victorious O Anariga, O Sarasvatl, be vic¬ 
torious, O receptable of all good qualities! Be Victorious, O 
Avarta, O destroyer of Asuras. 

25. Be victorious, O goddess of perfect achievement by 
mere will. Be victorious, O sole beautiful lady of the three 
worlds !Be victorious, O destroyer of Sumbha and Nisumbha! 


372 


Skanda Purana 


Be victorious, O Padma, O Adrisambhava (born of the Moun¬ 
tain)! , . 

26. O KausikI, be victorious! O Kaumarl! Be victorious, O 

Varuni, O bestower of desires! Obeisance, obeisance to you, O 
Sarvani'; O Arhbika, be victorious, again and again! 

27. Save us, save us, O goddess, save us who have sought 
refuge in you, O Saranya (One worthy of being a refuge)! 

28. On being eulogized thus, O lady of excellent counte¬ 
nance, by all the Devas, the goddess manifested her own form 
that had illuminated the quarters. 

29. After making obeisance to her, those Suras spoke to the 
goddess who dispelled their fear: “Kill the highly powerful 
Daityas named Bala and Atibala as well as their vast army. Save 
us from this great danger.” 

30. On hearing their words and after granting them free¬ 
dom from fear, she assumed a wonderful form with three eyes 
and the Moon on the head. 

31. The great goddess held different kinds of weapons and 
missiles and was riding a lion. She could be compared to a 
streak of a refulgent lightning. She had twenty arms and an 
excellent countenance. 

32. Then Ambika (the mother) roared loudly with repeated 
boisterous laughs. 

33. On account of her terrible sound, the entire earth girdled 
by rivers and oceans quaked. The echoes filled the entire firmament. 

34. Her breasts were protruding like mountains. She was 
like a beautiful woman. Like a woman she appeared to be 
distressed due to fear. The Asuras too with the four divisions 
of their army came there. 

35. The Raksasas, Danavas and Daityas who were dwelling 
in the nether worlds, who were well-known for their valour and 
resembled Rala, Antaka and Yama (god of death) reached the 
place. 

36. Crores of leading Daityas came there. Thereupon there 
started a great battle between the goddess and the Asuras. 

37-39. The battle that enveloped the entire Cosmic Egg 
became the cause of sudden annihilation thereof. The goddess 
sportingly annihilated thousands of the Daityas. O goddess of 
Suras, thirty-three thousands of Aksauhinis (of foot soldiers) 


VII.1.119.40-49 


373 


twenty-one thousand attendants and seven thousand eight hundred 
fast moving chariots were destroyed. The goddess thereby brought 
tremendous annihilation without the least agitation. 

40. The entire battlefield was strewn with the bodies of the 
horses and elephants and the highly powerful Daityas killed by 
the goddess. 

41. In the arena of the war, where headless bodies writhed 
and danced about recklessly, where the suet issuing from the 
bones caused a large slush, the energetic Nisacaras (Night- 
stalkers; ghosts etc.) wandered about. 

42. In some places jackals, vultures and crows flew and 
fluttered and jumped about. The Nisacaras drank blood pro¬ 
fusely and arrogantly ingratiated themselves. After propitiating 
their Pitrs, they adored the sages too. 

43. Many of them ruthlessly ate up elephants and men as 
well as the horses. They crossed the oceans of blood by means 
of chariots serving the function of rafts. 

44. While the war was thus taking a more serious turn, with 
the groups of the Asuras agitating all round, the Mother Di¬ 
vine made her brilliant appearance there holding and wielding 
her bow, arrows, sword and trident. 

45. She suppressed the arrogance of the huge tuskers; she 
thrashed the assemblage of the horses; she destroyed the armies 
of the demons and surveyed all round. 

46 1 . On seeing the lady of exalted mind riding a great Pretaka 
(spirit, ghost) joined with eight lions, shining brightly and 
having refulgent splendour like a mountain, like a swan and 
resembling a bull, the Daitya warriors became furious. They 
rushed thereat roaring like rumbling clouds. 

47. When they were killed, they shouted “Ha! Ha!” Some 
of the Asuras entered the sea. A few Danavas went over the 
mountains. 

48. Some of them had tonsured their heads and they stayed 
within forests as rogues. Some of them adopted the Vrata of 
the Nirgranthas (nude sages or Digambarajainas) and preached 
sermons on the pious activities of merciful nature. 

49. Some of them became afraid of (the goddess) for their 


1. Seems to be a piece in prose and not a verse. 



374 


Skanda Purana 


lives. They resorted to the life of heretics. They were fools 
engaged in arguments and disputations about basic or original 
causes. They had no cleanliness and they did not crave for 
anything. 

50. They are indeed seen even today in the world of Ksapanakas 
(Buddhist monks). Others are Bhindakas excluded from the 
scriptures of Saiva cult. 

51. Some of the Kaulavratas (persons practising the left- 
hand Sakta cult) are seen in this world by all the people. They 
are most addicted to Surd (liquor), Stri (women) and Mamsa 
(meat). They follow the path of unfair activities. They are 
Lingins (Lihga worshippers). 

52. Many of them were sinful Naiskriikas (rogues, having 
no virtuous activities) too much addicted to tongue (glutton¬ 
ous) and organs of generation (given to debauchery). Thus all 
connected with Bala and Atibala were killed by the goddess. 

53. Then Ambika (Mother Divine) came to Prabhasa and 
settled there. The sin-destroying goddess was accompanied by 
sixty-four Yoginis. In Prabhasa she was well-known all over the 
world as Balatibalanasinl. 

The Devi said: 

54. O Lord of Suras, do tell me the sin-destroying names 
of the Yoginis mentioned by you as numbering sixty-four. 

Isvara said: 

55. Listen, O goddess, I shall describe to you the great 
glory of the Yoginis. It gives protection to everyone. It is divine 
and remover of great fear. 

56-62. The first is MahalaksmI. Then come Nanda. 
Ksemamkarl, SivadutI, Mahabhadra, Bhramari, Candramandala, 
Revati, Harasiddhi, Durga, Visamalocana, Sahaja, Kulaja, Kubja, 
Mayavl, Sambhavi, Kriya, Adya, Sarvagata, Suddha, Bhavagamya, 
Manotiga, Vidya, Avidya, Mahamaya, Susumna, Sarvamarigala, 
Omkaratma, MahadevI, Vedartha, jananl, Siva, Purananviksikl, 
Dik?a, Camunda, Sankarapriya, Brahml, Santikarl, Gaurl, 
Brahmanya, Brahmanapriya, Bhadra, Bhagavatl, Krsna, 
GrahanaksatramalinI, Tripura, Tvarita, Nitya, Samkhya, KundalinI, 
Dhruva, KalyanI, Sobhana, Nitya, Niskala, Parama, Kala, Yoginl, 


VII.L119.63-70—120.1-4 


375 


Yogasadbhava, Yogagamya, Guhasaya, KatyayanI, Uma, Sarva 
and Aparna the glorified one. 

63-69. O great goddess, thus I have enumerated to you all 
the sixty-four (Yoginis). 

Sarvanl will protect from all dangers like her own son, a 
devotee who devoutly eulogizes Candika by means of this Stotra 
of divine features. 

On the eighth, ninth and fourteenth lunar days, the devo¬ 
tees should observe fasts or take only a single meal, that too 
unsolicited. They should observe all restrictions and continue 
thus for one year or six months. They shall become Siddhas 
and Tattvacarins (observers of great principles). 

For increase in welfare a devotee should worship the god¬ 
dess by celebrating great festival during Astaka days, Manvadis 
(first day of Manvantaras) and in the bright half of Asvayuk 
month. 

A devotee of Durga should hold the golden sandals of the 
goddess for the suppression of blunders and obstacles. He 
should also hold a dagger. 

Those with Asura (Demoniac) tendencies who worship Ambika 
by means of meat of beasts and liquor shall become Daityas 
enjoying prosperity and Lordship. 

Those who adopt Sattvika type of devotion attain Devatva 
(godhood). 

70. Thus succinctly the sin-destroying greatness of goddess 
BalatibalanasinI residing in the holy spot of Prabhasa has been 
explained to you, O fair lady. It augments fame and facilitates 
the acquisition of all objectives. 


CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED TWENTY 

Greatness of Goplsvara 


Isvara said: 

1-4. Thereafter, a pilgrim should go to the excellent shrine 
of Goplsvara, O great goddess. It is situated within a distance 
of three Dhanus to the north of Balatibaladaityaghni. 

It was installed by the Gopis (cowherdesses) and it is de¬ 
structive of sins. They had propitiated Mahesvara for the sake 



376 


SkandaPurana 


of sons. When adored, it bestows all the desires unto men. It 

bC A^an*who worships the deity on the third lunar day in the 
bright half of Caitra by offerings of sweet scents and flowers, 
attains desired benefit. 

Thus the sin-destroying greatness of Lord Gopisvara stationed 
in Prabhasa Ksetra has been succinctly described. 













ISBN 81-208-1984-5 

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































