o 

{  «■  ?,  ?;.?  } 


70?^ 


ANCIENT  INDIAN 
TRADITION  &  MYTHOLOGY 


Translated  by 

A  BOARD  OF  SCHOLARS 


Edited  by 

Dr.  G.P.  BHATT 


Volume  63 


I  i 


ANCIENT  INDIAN  TRADITION  AND 
MYTHOLOGY  SERIES 


[PURANAS  IN  TRANSLATION] 

Volumes  Released 

&VA1  -4 
LINGA5-6 
BHAGAVATA  7-11 
GARUDA 12-14 
NARADA 15-19 
KURMA  20-21 
BRAHMANDA  22-26 
AGNI 27-30 
VARAHA  31-32 
BRAHMA  33-36 
VAYU  37-38 
PADMA  39-48 

SKANDA,  PARTS  I-XXI,  49-69 

Volumes  Under  Preparation 

SKANDA,  PARTS  XXH-XXm,  70-7 1 
VAMANA  72-73 
BHAVISYA 
BRAHMAVAIVARTA 
DEVlBHAGAVATA 
KALKA 
MARKANDEYA 
MATSYA 
VISNU 

VISNUDHARMOTTARA 


THE 

skanda-purAna 


Translated  and  Annotated  by 

Dr.  G.V.  TAGARE 


PART  XV 


MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS  PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE  LIMITED  •DELHI 


Reprint:  Delhi,  2010 
First  Edition:  Delhi ,  2001 


©  MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS  PUBLISHERS  PVT.  LTD. 
All  Rights  Reserved 


ISBN:  978-81-208-1837-8 


MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS 

41  U.A.  Bungalow  Road,  Jawahar  Nagar,  Delhi  110  007 
8  Mahalaxmi  Chamber,  22  Bhulabhai  Desai  Road,  Mumbai  400  026 
203  Royapeuah  High  Road,  Mylapore,  Chennai  600  004 
236,  9ih  Main  III  Block,  Jayanagar,  Bangalore  560  011 
Sanas  Plaza,  1302  Baji  Rao  Road,  Pune  411  002 
8  Camac  Street,  Kolkata  700  017 
Ashok  Rajpalh,  Patna  800  004 
Chowk,  Varanasi  221  001 


UNESCO  COLLECTION  OF  REPRESENTATIVE  WORKS — Mian  Senes 
':iiis  book  has  been  accepted  in  the  Indian  Translation  Series 
of  the  UNESCO  Collection  of  Representative  Works , 
jointly  sponsored  by  the  United  Nations  Educational, 

Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization 
(UNESCO)  and  the  Government  of  India 


Piinted  in  India 

By  Jainendra  Prakash  Jain  at  Shri  Jainendra  Press, 
A-45  Naraina,  Phase-I,  New  Delhi  110  028 
and  Published  by  Narendra  Prakash  Jain  for 
Motilal  Banarsidass  Publishers  Private  Limited, 
Bungalow  Road,  Delhi  110  007 


PUBLISHER’S  NOTE 


The  purest  gems  lie  hidden  in  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  or  in  the 
depth  of  rocks.  One  has  to  dive  into  the  ocean  or  delve  into  the 
rocks  to  find  them  out.  Similarly,  truth  lies  concealed  in  the  language 
which  with  the  passage  of  time  has  become  obsolete.  Man  has 
to  learn  that  language  before  he  discovers  that  truth. 

But  he  has  neither  the  means  nor  the  leisure  to  embark  on 
that  course.  We  have,  therefore,  planned  to  help  him  acquire 
knowledge  by  an  easier  course.  We  have  started  the  series  of  Ancient 
Indian  Tradition  and  Mythology  in  English  Translation.  Our  goal 
is  to  universalize  knowledge  through  the  most  popular  international 
medium  of  expression.  The  publication  of  the  Puranas  in  English 
Translation  is  a  step  towards  that  goal. 

Acknowledgements 

It  is  our  pleasant  duty  to  put  on  record  our  sincere  thanks  to 
Dr.  R.N.  Dandekar  and  the  UNESCO  authorities  for  their  kind 
encouragement  and  valuable  help  in  the  publication  of  the  volumes 
in  this  series. 


CONTENTS 

PUBLISHER’S  NOTE  v 

ABBREVIATIONS  xi 

SKANDA-PURANA 
Book  V:  AVANTYA  KHANDA 
Section  III:  REVA-KHANDA 

101.  The  Greatness  of  Sankarsana  Tlrtha  333 

1 02.  The  Glory  of  Manmathesvara  Tlrtha  333 

103.  The  Greatness  of  the  Confluence  (Of  Erandl  and 

Narmada)  334 

104.  The  Greatness  of  Suvarnasila  Tlrtha  351 

105.  The  Greatness  of  Karanja  Tlrtha  352 

106.  The  Greatness  of  Kamada  Tlrtha  352 

107.  The  Greatness  of  Bhandarl  Tlrtha  354 

108.  The  Greatness  of  RohinI  Tlrtha  354 

109.  The  Greatness  of  Cakra  Tlrtha  356 

110.  The  Greatness  of  Dhaulapapa  Tlrtha  358 

111.  The  Greatness  of  Skanda  Tlrtha  358 

112.  The  Greatness  of  Angirasa  Tlrtha  362 

113.  The  Greatness  of  Koti  Tlrtha  363 

114.  The  Greatness  of  Ayonisambhava  Tlrtha  364 

115.  The  Greatness  of  Aiigaraka  Tlrtha  364 

116.  The  Greatness  of  Pandu  Tlrtha  365 

117.  The  Greatness  of  Trilocana  Tlrtha  366 

118.  The  Greatness  of  Indra  Tlrtha  366 

119.  The  Greatness  of  Kalhodl  Tlrtha  369 

120.  The  Greatness  of  Kambukesvara  Tlrtha  370 

121.  The  Greatness  of  Soma  Tlrtha  372 

122.  The  Greatness  of  Kohana  Tlrtha  375 

123.  The  Greatness  of  Karmadesvara  Tlrtha  378 

124.  The  Greatness  of  Narmadesvara  Tlrtha  378 

1 25.  The  Greatness  of  Ravi  Tlrtha  379 

126.  The  Greatness  of  Ayoniprabhava  Tlrtha  382 

127.  The  Greatness  of  Agni  Tlrtha  384 


Skanda  Purana 


128.  The  Greatness  of  Bhrkutesvara  Tirtha  384 

129.  The  Greatness  of  Brahma  Tirtha  385 

1 30.  The  Greatness  of  Devatlrtha  386 

131.  The  Greatness  of  Nagesvara  Tirtha  387 

132.  The  Greatness  of  Adivaraha  Tirtha  390 

133.  The  Glory  of  Kaubera  and  other  Tlrthas  391 

134.  The  Greatness  of  Ramesvara  Tirtha  395 

135.  The  Greatness  of  Siddhesvara.Tlrtha  396 

136.  The  Greatness  of  Ahalya  Tirtha  396 

137.  The  Greatness  of  Karkatesvara  Tirtha  398 

1 38.  The  Greatness  of  Sakra  Tirtha  399 

139.  The  Greatness  of  Somatlrlha  400 

140.  The  Greatness  of  Nandahrada  Tirtha  401 

141.  The  Greatness  of  Tapesvara  Tirtha  402 

142.  The  Greatness  of  RukminI  Tirtha  404 

143.  The  Greatness  of  Yojanesvara  Tirtha  411 

144.  The  Greatness  of  DvadasI  Tirtha  413 

145.  The  Greatness  of  Siva  Tirtha  413 

146.  The  Greatness  of  Asmahaka  Tirtha  414 

147.  The  Greatness  of  Siddhesvara  Tirtha  422 

148.  The  Greatness  of  Mahgalesvara  Tirtha  423 

149.  The  Greatness  of  Linga  Varaha  Tirtha  425 

150.  The  Greatness  of  Kusumesvara  Tirtha  427 

151.  The  Greatness  of  Svetavaraha  Tirtha  431 

152.  The  Greatness  of  Bhargalesvara  Tirtha  433 

153.  The  Greatness  of  Adityesvara  Tirtha  434 

154.  The  Greatness  of  Kalakalesvara  Tirtha  437 

1 55.  Attainment  of  Siddhi  by  Canakya  438 

156.  The  Greatness  of  Suklatlrtha  447 

157.  The  Greatness  of  Humkarasvaml  450 

158.  The  Greatness  of  Sarigamesvafa  Tirtha  452 

159.  The  Greatness  of  Anarakesvara  Tirtha  453 

160.  The.  Greatness  of  Moksa  Tirtha  461 

161.  The  Greatness  of  Sarpa  Tirtha  462 

162.  The  Greatness  of  Gopesvara  Tirtha  463 

163.  The  Greatness  of  Nafca  Tirtha  464 

164.  The  Greatness  of  Saiiivauresvara  Tirtha  464 

165.  The  Greatness  of  Siddhesvara  Tirtha  465 

166.  The  Greatness  of  Siddhesvarl  Tirtha  466 

167.  The  Greatness  of  Markandesvara  Tirtha  467 


Contents 


168.  The  Greatness  of  Arikuresvara  TTrtha  470 

169.  The  Abduction  of  Kamamohini  473 

170.  Mandavya  Impaled  477 

171.  Dialogue  between  Sandili  and  the  Sages  479 

172.  The  Greatness  of  Mandavya  Tlrtha  484 

173.  The  Greatness  of  Suddhesvara  Tirtha  491 

174.  The  Greatness  of  Gopesvara  Tlrtha  492 

175.  The  Greatness  of  Kapilesvara  Tirtha  493 

176.  The  Greatness  of  Pingalesvara  Tlrtha  495 

177.  The  Greatness  of  Bhutisvara  Tlrtha  498 

178.  The  Greatness  of  Gahgavahaka  Tlrtha  500 

179.  The  Greatness  of  Gautamesvara  Tirtha  503 

180.  The  Greatness  of  Dasasvamedha  Tirtha  504 

181.  The  Creation  of  Bhrgukaccha  (Broach)  511 

182.  The  Greatness  of  Bhrgukaccha  Tirtha  517 

1 83.  The  Greatness  of  Kedaresvara  Tirtha  522 

184.  The  Greatness  of  Dhautapapa.Tirtha  524 

185.  The  Greatness  of  Erandi  Tirtha  526 

1 86.  The  Greatness  of  Kanakhalesvara  Tirtha  .527 

187.  The  Greatness  of  Kalagnirudra  Tirtha  531 

188.  The  Greatness  of  Salagrama  Tirtha  532 

189.  The  Greatness  of  Udirna  Varaha  Tirtha  533 

190.  The  Greatness  of  Candrahasa  Tirtha  537 


191.  The  Greatness  of  Dvadasaditya Tirtha  •  540 


192.  The  Birth  of  Sripati  541 

193.  The  Greatness  of  Sripati  Tirtha  549 

194.  The  Marriage  of  Sripati  555 

195.  The  Glory  of  Sripati  562 

196.  The  Greatness  of  Harhsatirtha  565 

197.  The  Greatness  of  Mulasthana  Tirtha  565 

198.  The  Greatness  of  Sulesvara  Tirtha  566 

199.  The  Greatness  of  Asvina  Tirtha  575 

200.  The  Greatness  of  Savitri  Tirtha  576 

201 .  The  Greatness  of  Deva  Tirtha  578 

202.  The  Greatness  of  Sikhitlrtha  579 

203.  The  Greatness  of  Koti  Tirtha  580 

204.  The  Greatness  of  Paitamaha  rirtha  580 

205.  The  Greatness  of  Kurkuri  Tirtha  582 

206.  The  Greatness  of  Dasakanya  Tirtha  583 

207.  The  Greatness  of  Suvarnabindu  Tirtha  584 


i  Skanda  Purdna 

208.  The  Greatness  of  Rnamocana  TIrtha  585 

209.  The  Greatness  of  Bharabhuti  TIrtha  586 

210.  The  Greatness  of  Punkhila  TIrtha  600 

211.  The  Greatness  of  Mundi  TIrtha  600 

212.  The  Greatness  of  Ekasala  Dindimesvara  TIrtha  602 

213.  The  Greatness  of  Amalesvara  TIrtha  603 

214.  The  Greatness  of  Sri  Kapala  TIrtha  604 

215.  The  Greatness  of  Srngl  TIrtha  605 

216.  The  Greatness  of  AsadhI  605 

217.  The  Greatness  of  Erandl  TIrtha  606 

218.  The  Greatness  of  Jamadagnya  TIrtha  606 

219.  The  Greatness  of  Koti  TIrtha  611 

220.  The  Greatness  of  Lotanesvara  TIrtha  611 

221.  The  Greatness  of  Hamsesvara  TIrtha  616 

222.  The  Greatness  of  Tiladesvara  TIrtha  618 

223.  The  Greatness  of  Vasavesvara  TIrtha  620 

224.  The  Greatness  of  Kotlsvara  TIrtha  621 

225.  The  Greatness  of  Alikesvara  TIrtha  622 

226.  The  Greatness  of  Vimalesvara  TIrtha  624 

227.  Special  Injunctions  regarding  the  Pilgrimage  626 

228.  The  Benefit  of  Pilgrimage  by  Proxy  632 

229.  The  Benefit  of  Listening  to  this  Purana  633 

230.  The  Series  of  TIrthas  Enumerated  636 

231.  The  Number  of  TIrthas  Enumerated  642 

232.  The  Finale  of  the  Reva  Khanda  646 

INDEX  651 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Common  and  self-evident  abbreviations  such  as  Ch  (s)  Chapter (s), 
p  page,  pp  pages,  v  verse,  w  verses,  Ftn  Footnote,  Hist.  Ind.  Philo. 
History  of  Indian  Philosophy  are  not  included  in  this  list. 

AGP  S.M.  Ali’s  The  Geography  of  Puranas,  PPH,  New  Delhi, 

1973 

AIHT  Ancient  Indian  Historical  Tradition,  F.E.  Pargiter, 
Motilal  Banarsidass  (MLBD),  Delhi 
AITM  Ancient  Indian  Tradition  and  Mythology  Series,  MLBD, 
Delhi 

AP  Agni  Purana,  Guru  Mandal  Edition  (GM),  Calcutta, 

1957 

AV  Atharva  Veda,  Svadhyaya  Mandal,  Aundh 

Bdp  Brahmanda  Purana,  MLBD,  Delhi,  1973 

BG  Bhagavadglta 

BhP  Bhagavata  Purana,  Bhagavat  Vidyapeeth,  Ahmedabad 

Br  Brahmana  (preceded  by  name  such  as  Satapatha) 

BsP  Bhavisya  Purana,  Vishnu  Shastri  Bapat,  Wai 

BVP  Brahma  Vaivarta  Purana,  GM,  1955-57 

CC  Caturvarga  Cintamani  by  Hemadri 

CVS  Carana  Vyiiha  Sutra  by  Saunaka,  Com.  by  Mahdasa 

DB  Devi  Bhagavata,  GM,  1960-61 

De  or  The  Geographical  Dictionary  of  Ancient  and  Medieval 

GDAM1  India,  N.L.  De/Dey,  Oriental  Reprint,  Delhi,  1971 
DhS  Dharma  Sutra  (preceded  by  the  author's  name  such  as 

Gautama) 

GP  Garuda  Purana,  ed.  R.S.  Bhattacharya,  Chowkhamba, 

Varanasi,  1964 

GS  Grhya  Sutra  (preceded  by  the  name  of  the  author  such 

as  Apastamba) 

HD  History  of  Dharma  Sastra,  P.V.  Kane,  G.O.S. 

jp  Purana  (Journal  of  the  Kashiraj  Trust),  Varanasi 

KA  Kautilya  Arthasastra 

KP  Kurina  Purana,  Veiikatesvara  Press  Edn.,  Bombay;  also 

Kashiraj  Trust  Edn.,  Varanasi,  1971 


Skanda  Purana 


Xll 


LP 

Liriga  Purana,  GM,  1960;  also  MLBD,  Delhi,  1981 

Manu 

Manusmrti 

Mbh 

Mahabharata,  Gita  Press,  Gorakhpur,  VS  2014 

MkP 

Markandeya  Purana 

MN 

Mahabharata  NamanukramanI,  Gita  Press,  Gorakhpur, 
VS  2016 

MtP 

Matsya  Purana,  GM,  1954 

MW 

M.  Monier-Williams'  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary, 
MLBD,  Delhi,  1976 

NP 

Naradlya  or  Narada  Purana,  Venkatesvara  Press,  Bom¬ 
bay 

PdP 

Padma  Purana,  GM,  1957-59 

PE 

Puranic  Encyclopaedia,  V.  Mani,  English  Version, 
MLBD,  Delhi,  1975 

PR  or 

Puranic  Records  on  Hindu  Rites  and  Customs, 

PRHRC 

R.C.  Hazra,  Calcutta,  1948 

£V 

Rg  Veda,  Svadhyaya  Mandal,  Aundh 

Sat  Br 

Satapatha  Brahmana 

SC  or  SMC 

Smrti  Candrika  by  Devanna  Bhatta 

SkP 

Skanda  Purana 

SP 

Siva  Purana 

VaP 

Vayu  Purana 

VR 

Valmiki  Ramayana 

VdP 

Visnudharmottara  Purana 

VmP 

Vamana  Purana 

VP 

Visnu  Purana 

VrP 

Varaha  Purana 

SKANDA  PURANA 
Book  V:  AVANTYA  KHAN  DA 
Section  III:  REVA-KHANDA 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  ONE 
The  Greatness  of  Sahkarsana  Tirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  an  extremely 
splendid  Tirtha  on  the  northern  bank  of  Narmada  in  the  centre 
of  Yajnavata  (sacrificial  hall) ,  well-known  on  the  earth  as  Sahkarsana. 
It  is  destructive  of  sins.  Formerly,  O  king,  a  penance  was  performed 
by  Balabhadra  there. 

Devas  are  present  there  itself  in  the  vicinity,  O  prince.  Sambhu 
is  stationed  there  along  with  Uma.  Kesava  too  is  present  there. 

By  way  of  rendering  help  to  all  living  beings,  Sankara,  the 
destroyer  of  sins,  has  been  installed  there  by  Balabhadra  with 
great  devotion,  O  great  king. 

Subduing  anger  and  all  the  sense-organs,  a  devotee  should 
take  his  holy  bath  on  the  eleventh  day  in  a  bright  fortnight 
(of  a  month).  He  should  bathe  Siva  with  honey.  One  who 
devoutly  performs  Sraddha  unto  the  Pitre  there  itself  goes  to 
the  highest  region  in  accordance  with  the  words  of  Balabhadra. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWO 
The  Glory  of  Manmathesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  a  person  should  go  to  Manmathesa  Tirtha 
bowed  down  to  by  all  the  Devas.  Merely  by  taking  holy  bath, 
O  king,  the  man  will  not  see  the  world  of  Yama. 

A  woman  having  no  child,  who  takes  her  holy  bath  there, 
O  son  of  Pandu,  obtains  a  son  truthful  and  steadfast  in  his  Vratas. 


334 


Skanda  Purana 


A  man  who  takes  the  holy  bath  there,  remains  clean  and 
mentally  controlled  and  observes  fast  for  a  night,  O  king,  obtains 
the  benefit  of  (gifting)  a  thousand  cows. 

A  king  of  Tlrthas  fulfilling  all  desires  like  it  will  never  be. 
One  who  observes  fast  for  three  nights,  O  king,  shall  obtain 
the  benefit  of  (the  Dana  of)  a  hundred  thousand  cows. 

The  devotee  should  make  arrangements  for  dance.  Paramesvara 
is  pleased  with  the  sounds  of  vocal  and  instrumental  music  and 
keeping  awake  at  night. 

Mahadeva  called  Manmathesvara  was  seen  by  me  at  Erandl. 
Even  if  Yama  be  angry,  he  is  not  capable  of  doing  anything. 
A  good  man  sees  everything  good. 

Sambhu  was  installed  by  Kama.  Hence,  O  king,  he  is  the 
bestower  of  cherished  desires.  Manmathesvara  is  a  flight  of 
stairs  extending  from  the  earth  to  the  heavenly  path. 

8-12.  The  speciality  here,  O  son  of  Bharata,  is  in  the  perfor¬ 
mance  of  Sraddha  at  dusk.  By  the  gift  of  cooked  food,  O  great 
king,  an  excellent  benefit  has  been  proclaimed. 

Thus  everything  has  been  recounted  to  you  due  to  your 
devotion,  O  descendant  of  Bharata.  Manmathesvara  is  well- 
known  all  over  the  ocean-bound  earth.  O  excellent  one  among 
the  sons  of  Pandu,  (devotees)  should  make  a  gift  of  cows  on 
the  thirteenth  lunar  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of 
Caitra. 

A  devotee  goes  there  with  the  sense-organs  well-controlled, 
keeps  awake  at  night  before  the  deity,  O  excellent  king,  and 
devoutly  offers  light  before  the  deity  with  ghee.  The  benefit 
thereof  is  the  same  whether  the  devotee  is  a  woman  or  a  man. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THREE 

The  Greatness  of  the  Confluence 
( Of  Erandl  and  Narmada) 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  exalted 
confluence  of  Erandl.  The  account  of  this  was  heard  formerly 
by  me,  O  king,  even  as  Siva  was  recounting  it. 


V.iii.  103.9-1 6 


335 


Earlier  Sankara  was  asked  this  very  question  by  Gauri.  O 
tiger  among  kings.  The  Lord  spoke  about  it,  (though)  it  is  a 
very  splendid,  great  secret. 

Isvara  said: 

Listen,  O  goddess,  to  this  greatest  of  secrets  not  mentioned 
to  anyone  by  me.  There  is  an  extremely  splendid  Tlrtha  on  the 
northern  bank  of  Reva.  O  goddess;  it  destroys  the  sin  of  foeticide. 
It  yields  cherished  desires  and  causes  increase  in  the  number 
of  sons. 

Pdrvati  said : 

Recount,  O  Mahadeva,  the  details  of  the  extremely  splendid 
Tlrtha.  How  is  it  destructive  of  the  sin  of  foeticide?  How  does 
it  accord  cherished  desires?  How  is  it  a  guide  to  heaven? 

Isvara  said: 

O  great  goddess,  there  is  a  mental  son  of  Brahma  named 
Atri.  He  is  always  engaged  in  Agnihotra.  He  adored  Devas  and 
guests.  Seven  Somasarhsthas  (variety  of  Soma  Sacrifice)  were 
performed  by  the  Brahmana,  O  Parvatl. 

His  wife,  well-known  by  the  name  Anasuya  is  endowed  with 
all  good  qualities.  She  is  a  chaste  lady  always  engaged  in  the 
duties  and  welfare  of  her  Lord.  In  fact,  her  husband  is  her  very 
vital  breath.  Thus  they  spent  their  days.  They  had  neither  a 
son  nor  a  daughter. 

Once,  in  the  afternoon,  O  great  goddess,  O  beautiful  lady, 
they  were  comfortably  seated  talking  about  what  had  befallen 
them  earlier,  both  happiness  and  misery. 

Atri  said: 

9-16.  O  my  beloved,  (you  are)  a  splendid,  gentle  lady  of 
great  beauty  in  all  the  limbs,  richly  endowed  with  learning  and 
humility,  having  the  eyes  resembling  petals  of  a  lotus,  with  a 
face  resembling  the  full  moon,  walking  slowly  with  the  weight 
of  the  huge  hips!  There  is  no  other  woman  like  you  in  all  the 
three  worlds  consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile  creatures. 
It  is  cited  by  expounders  of  the  Vedas  that  a  woman  is  one 


336 


Skanda  Purana 


who  gives  sexual  pleasure  and  a  son.  O  beautiful  lady,  my 
happiness  is  that  happiness  which  can  be  expected  of  a  person 
without  a  son. 

I  have  no  son  even  as  clever  in  all  the  rites  as  I  am.  O 
beautiful  lady,  even  by  his  very  birth  a  son  saves  his  father 
about  to  fall  into  the  Naraka  named  Put  if  he  happens  to  be 
a  great  sinner. 

Excellent  sons  redeem  their  grandfathers  who  being  engaged 
in  evil  actions  had  fallen  into  terrible  plights,  even  if  they  have 
gone  to  Vaitaranl. 

One  wins  over  the  worlds  through  one’s  sons.  One  attains 
the  highest  goal  through  a  grandson.  Then  through  the  grand¬ 
son  of  the  son  one  attains  the  eternal  Brahman.  There  is  no 
other  kinsman  on  a  par  with  a  son  whether  in  this  world  or 
in  the  other. 

I  am  worried  over  this  during  day  as  well  as  midnight,  nay 
always.  My  limbs  are  dried  up  like  waters  of  a  river  during 
summer. 

Anasuyd  said: 

17-20.  O  Brahmana,  what  you  bewail  I  too  grieve  over;  what 
gives  you  great  anguish  burns  me.  within  my  mind. 

Think  about  that  rite  whereby  long-lived  sons  endowed  with 
good  qualities  will  be  born  and  whereby  Prajapati  (Brahma 
himself)  may  be  pleased. 

Atri  said: 

O  fair  lady,  penance  has  been  performed  by  me,  penance 
that  is  very  difficult  for  anyone  born  under  the  Sun  to  do.  I 
am  now  exhausted  in  my  body  as  a  result  of  observing  Vratas, 
fasts,  restraints  and  intake  of  mere  vegetarian  diet  of  greens. 
I  am  incapable  of  any  further  great  Vrata.  Hence  I  bewail  my¬ 
self.  The  secret  of  my  heart  has  been  divulged  to  you  by  me. 

Anasuyd  said: 

21-33.  A  chaste  lady  enhances  the  sexual  pleasure  of  her 
husband  and  makes  the  family  flourish.  She  is  the  means  of 
realizing  the  threefold  aim  of  human  life.  Hence  she  deserves 
the  praise  of  learned  persons. 


V.iii.103.21-33 


337 


Japa,  Tapas  (penance),  pilgrimage,  adoration  of  Siva,  prac¬ 
tice  of  Mantras  and  propitiation  of  deities  -  these  six  cause  the 
downfall  of  women  and  Sudras  (if  undertaken  without  the 
concurrence  of  a  husband  or  a  Brahmana  priest). 

Such  a  great  defect  is  involved  in  the  practice  of  a  Vrata  by 
women.  This  is  what  all  the  sages  say  as  has  been  cited  in  the 
Vedas. 

With  your  permission,  O  holy  Brahmana,  I  shall  perform 
even  a  very  difficult  penance.  I  shall  propitiate  the  excellent 
Suras  for  the  purpose  of  getting  a  son. 

Atri  said: 

Well,  well,  O  highly  intelligent  lady  engaged  in  doing  what 
pleases  me!  O  fair  lady,  you  have  been  commanded  by  me. 
Undertake  a  penance  for  the  sake  of  a  son  so  that  I  may  be 
free  from  indebtedness  to  Devas,  Pitrs  and  human  beings. 

In  all  the  three  worlds,  there  is  no  kinsman  on  a  par  with 
one’s  own  wife.  Therefore,  Devas  proclaim  that  there  is  no 
other  pleasure  on  a  par  with  that  of  wife.  If  wife  is  pleasant¬ 
faced,  sons  too  are  pleasant-faced.  If  wife  is  averse,  sons  too 
turn  away  their  faces.  Hence  all  people  including  Devas,  Asuras 
and  human  beings  praise  wife. 

O  lady  of  exalted  Vratas,  O  highly  intelligent  lady,  O  lady 
of  auspicious  vision  and  Sattva  quality!  At  my  bidding  do  perform 
a  penance  quickly  for  the  sake  of  a  son. 

Isvara  continued: 

At  the  conclusion  of  these  words  of  her  husband,  she  prostrated 
before  him  with  eight  limbs  touching  the  ground  and  said: 
"With  your  favour,  O  eminent  Brahmana,  I  shall  attain  all  the 
cherished  desires." 

That  fawn-eyed  lady  of  excellent  complexion  and  graceful 
gait  of  a  swan  observed  holy  vows  and  came  to  River  Narmada, 
the  divine  river  originating  from  Siva’s  perspiration  and  capable 
of  destroying  all  sins.  Merely  by  perceiving  her,  masses  of  sins 
perish.  Merely  by  taking  the  holy  bath  therein,  one  obtains  the 
benefit  of  a  horse-sacrifice. 

O  great  goddess,  those  men  with  faith  who  drink  her  auspicious 
water  (obtain  great  benefit).  Drinking  her  water  is  on  a  par 


338 


Skanda  Purana 


with  drinking  the  Soma  juice.  No  doubt  need  be  enteitained 

(about  this).  . 

34.44.  Those  who  remember  her  (Narmada)  day  and  night 

even  from  a  distance  of  hundreds  of  Yojanas,  are  libeiated 
from  all  sins.  They  go  to  Rudraloka. 

In  the  vicinity  of  Narmada,  within  a  pair  of  Yojanas  are 
those  two  (?  Rudraloka  and  Soma  juice).  O  lady  of  excellent 
complexion,  those  who  die  there  do  not  see  Yama. 

Then,  O  beautiful  lady,  the  lady  with  wide  eyes  began  to 
observe  holy  restraints  on  the  northern  bank  at  the  auspicious 
confluence  of  Erandi,  taking  a  diet  of  only  vegetarian  food  (of 
mere  greens).  By  means  of  auspicious  Vratas  and  Stotras  she 
propitiated  the  three  Devas. 

O  great  goddess,  during  summer  she  performed  the  pen¬ 
ance  within  the  five  fires.  During  rainy  season,  she  performed 
Candrayana  Vrata  with  wet  clothes  on.  When  Hemanta  (win¬ 
ter)  set  in,  she  remained  in  the  midst  of  watei  always. 

She  took  the  holy  bath  in  the  morning;  then  performed  the 
Sandhya  prayers;  then  she  offered  libations  to  Devas  and  Sages. 
After  performing  the  adoration  of  Devas,  she  performed  Homa 
in  accordance  with  the  injunctions.  She  worshipped  the  Vaisnava 
worlds  by  means  of  Snana  (holy  bath) ,  Japa  and  Homa. 

When  a  hundred  years  passed  off  thus,  Rudra,  Visnu  and 
Pitamaha  assumed  the  forms  of  Brahmanas  and  came  there, 
O  my  beloved,  to  the  confluence  of  Erandi.  They  stood  in 
front  of  her  and  began  to  recite  Vedic  passages. 

Anasuya  discontinued  her  Japa,  saw  them  carefully  again 
and  again,  duly  offered  Argha,  and  remained  standing. 

The  lady  of  wide  eyes  said:  “Now  my  birth  has  become  fiuit- 
ful.  Now  my  penance  has  become  fruitful.  By  seeing  Brahmanas 
one  is  rid  of  all  sins.” 

Then  she  circumambulated  them  and  prostrated  before  them. 
She  said:  “I  shall  offer  to  you,  O  sages  of  purified  souls,  bulbuous 
roots,  roots,  fruits,  greens  and  the  sacred  Nivara  rice  grains. 

The  Brahmanas  said: 

45-51.  O  lady  of  excellent  Vratas,  we  are  satisfied  with  your 
wonderful  penance  and  the  truthfulness  of  the  penance.  Further, 
through  seeing  you  all  our  desires  are  fulfilled. 

We  were  rather  curious  to  know  why  you  have  undertaken 


V.iii.103.52-62 


339 


the  Vrata  of  sages.  Were  you  performing  the  severe  penance 
for  the  sake  of  heaven,  salvation  or  for  the  sake  of  a  son? 

Anasiiyd  said: 

Svarga  is  achieved  through  penance.  The  highest  goal  (Moksa) 
is  attained  through  penance.  Wealth  and  love  can  be  acquired 
through  penance.  A  son  of  very  good  qualities  can  be  obtained 
through  penance.  O  Brahmanas,  penance  alone  bestows  the 
benefits  of  all  cherished  desires. 

The  Brahmanas  said: 

You  are  a  lady  beautiful  in  every  limb.  You  are  slender,  dark- 
complexioned,  one  having  wide  eyes  and  supple  limbs.  You 
have  good  physical  form  and  the  graceful  gait  of  a  swan.  What 
have  you  to  do  with  penance?  Why  do  you  subject  yourself  to 
sufferings? 

Anasuyd  said: 

I  notice  the  sign  as  though  you  are  Rudra,  Visnu  and  Pitamaha 
(Brahma)  himself  in  disguised  forms. 

Jsvara  continued: 

At  the  end  of  her  speech  they  revealed  their  own  forms.  The 
Devas  with  the  refulgence  of  a  crore  of  suns  stood  there  in 
their  own  forms. 

52-62.  O  great  goddess,  there  was  Janardana  having  four 
arms  holding  conch,  discus  and  club,  clad  in  yellow  robes  and 
having  the  complexion  of  an  AtasI  flower.  Hari  who  had  the 
vehicle  of  Garuda  was  accompanied  by  Sri.  The  glorious  Lord 
was  standing  in  his  own  form  with  a  beaming  face. 

O  great  goddess,  Brahma,  the  grandfather  of  the  worlds, 
came  to  the  banks  of  Narmada,  clad  in  yellow  robes.  He  had 
four  faces  resembling  lotus.  He  was  riding  on  his  swan.  He  had 
a  rosary  in  his  hand. 

There  was  Mahesvara  himself,  the  omnipresent  Lord,  riding 
on  his  bull.  He  had  ten  arms.  His  complexion  was  beautified 
by  the  holy  ash  smeared  over  the  limbs;  the  Three-eyed  Lord 
with  five  faces  had  matted  hairs  for  a  crown.  The  crescent 


340  Skanda  Parana 

moon  adorned  his  head.  The  omnipresent  Mahesvara  appeared 
in  this  form. 

On  having  a  grand  vision  like  this  of  the  Devas,  the  chaste 
lady  Anasuya  trembled  and  looked  at  them  again  and  again. 

Anasuya  said: 

What  are  the  features  and  functions  of  Visnu,  Rudra  and 
Pitamaha?  I  would  rather  listen  to  this.  Do  tell  me  entirely. 

Brahma  said: 

I  am  Brahma,  the  rainy  season.  The  waters  are  glorified  (as 
my  form).  I  have  been  declared  as  one  having  the  form  of 
clouds.  I  cause  downpour  of  rain  on  the  surface  of  the  earth. 
During  the  twilight  of  dawn,  when  the  Sun  rises,  I  (develop) 
all  the  seeds.  This  is  the  cause.  The  great  secret  has  been 
mentioned  entirely. 

Visnu  said: 

Visnu  shall  be  Hemanta  (winter).  He  has  the  form  of  the 
universe  consisting  of  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings.  He  is 
for  the  protection  of  the  entire  universe.  This  is  the  excellent 
greatness  of  Visnu. 

Rudra  said: 

63-72.  I  have  been  declared  the  Summer  season,  the  cause 
of  the  destruction  of  all  living  beings.  O  saintly  lady,  in  the 
form  of  Rudra,  I  pull  and  drag  the  entire  universe  (within  me). 

Thus,  O  lady  of  great  Vratas,  the  three  Devas,  Brahma,  Visnu 
and  Rudra,  are  the  three  Sandhyas  (junctions,  twilights?),  three 
divisions  of  time  (seasons)  and  three  fires  (Garhapatya,  Ahavanlya 
and  Daksina). 

Similarly  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Rudra  amalgamated  into  one 
Self.  O  fair  lady,  they  shall  grant  you  the  boon,  whatever  is 
cherished  in  your  mind. 

Anasuya  said: 

I  am  blessed,  I  am  meritorious.  I  am  praiseworthy  and  worthy 
of  reverence  always.  If  the  three  Devas  are  pleased,  let  them 


V.iii.  103.73-79 


341 


take  pity  on  me,  be  present  in  this  TIrtha  and  be  the  bestowers 
of  boons  always. 

Rudra  said: 

Let  your  words  be  true,  O  auspicious  lady;  what  you  have 
requested  for  will  take  place.  What  is  named  Erandl  is  the 
visible  Maya  of  Visnu.  Merely  by  perceiving  it  all  the  accumulation 
Of  sins  can  be  destroyed.  In  the  month  of  Caitra,  one  should 
observe  fast  for  a  day  and  a  night  after  taking  holy  bath  at  the 
confluence  of  Erandl.  He  dispels  the  sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter. 
He  should  keep  awake  during  the  night  and  feed  Brahmanas 
in  the  morning  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions.  He  should 
offer  balls  of  rice  duly.  After  circumambulation  he  should  make 
gifts  of  gold,  cloth,  silver,  cows  and  plots  of  land.  Everything 
is  proclaimed  as  having  crore  times  the  benefit.  So  said 
Svayambhuva. 

73-79.  The  men  who  die  at  the  splendid  confluence  of 
Erandl,  O  goddess,  reside  in  the  Rudraloka  for  a  thousand 
Yugas. 

After  observing  fast  for  a  day  and  a  night  the  devotee  should 
recite  the  Vedic  passages  of  Rudra  numbering  eleven  and  one 
and  named  too  accordingly.  He  attains  the  greatest  goal. 

A  seeker  of  learning  acquires  learning;  a  seeker  of  wealth 
obtains  wealth;  a  seeker  of  sons  gets  sons  and  all  desires  cherished 
by  him. 

Even  great  sinners  attain  the  great  goal  by  taking  the  holy 
bath  in  the  pure  waters  of  Reva  at  the  confluence  of  Erandl. 

Anasuya  said: 

Urged  by  my  devotion,  if  all  the  three  Devas  are  pleased, 
let  Hari,  Rudra  and  Pitamaha  become  my  sons. 

Visnu  said: 

This  has  never  been  heard  by  me  that  the  venerable  ones 
attain  the  status  of  sons.  O  splendid  lady,  I  shall  grant  you  sons 
possessing  the  valour  of  Devas,  who  will  be  handsome,  equipped 
with  good  qualities,  well-versed  in  the  Vedas  and  capable  of 
performing  Yajnas. 


342 


Skanda  Parana 


Anasuya  said: 

O  Hari,  what  has  been  desired  and  requested  for  by  me 
should  be  granted.  My  Putraisana  (desire  for  a  son)  should  not 
be  altered  into  something  else. 

Visnu  said: 

80-87.  Formerly  in  the  course  of  a  dialogue  with  Bhrgu 
(I  incurred  the  curse  of)  staying  in  the  womb  (and  taking  birth 
as  a  mortal).  O  splendid  lady,  I  do  not  see  a  means  of  redemp¬ 
tion  from  it.  But  remembering  the  earlier  episode  I  think  about 
it  again  and  again. 

After  considering  this  the  other  (two)  Devas,  Pitamaha  and 
Mahesvara,  said:  “O  lady  of  excellent  countenance,  we  shall 
become  your  sons  but  not  womb-born  ones.  O  lady  of  great 
intellect,  Devas  do  not  take  up  residence  in  womb.  We  shall 
be  the  bestowers  of  boons  on  the  worlds  by.  our  presence  at 
the  confluence,  O  fair  lady,  you  will  be  visible  Vaisnavl  Maya 
of  Erandf.” 

Saying  thus  the  three  Devas  stationed  themselves,  O  son  of 
KuntI,  on  the  northern  bank  of  Reva.  After  receiving  the  boons 
that  honoured  lady  went  to  Mahendra  Mountain. 

In  her  performance  of  the  penance  the  lady  of  splendid 
eyes  wore  the  sacred  thread.  Gradually  she  became  tired  in  her 
limbs.  She  became  terrible  in  appearad  with  the  hairs  turned 
rough  and  dishevelled  and  the  body  emaciated  and  pallid. 

Her  husband  who  was  brilliant  and  glorious  and  occupied 
a  slab  of  stone  saw  her  and  became  delighted.  She  said,  “Get 
up,  get  up”. 

Atri  said: 

Excellent!  Excellent!  O  Anasuya  of  great  intellect  and  noble 
vows,  you  have  obtained  a  boon  that  cannot  be  even  thought 
of  by  Galava  and  others. 

Anasuya  said: 

88-100.  With  your  favour,  O  celestial  sage,  I  have  obtained 
a  rare  boon.  Hence  the  Devas,  Siddhas  and  pure  sages  praise  (us). 


V.iii.103.101-108 


343 


Isvara  continued: 


After  saying  this  the  honoured  lady  became  highly  delighted 
and  looked  at  her  beloved  husband.  That  lady  of  splendid 
appearance  too  was  looked  at  by  him. 

By  this  mutual  seeing  an  auspicious  halo  took  shape  on  the 
forehead.  The  sphere  of  halo  was  nine  thousand  Yojanas  in 
extent  and  was  full  of  rays.  The  circumference  was  three-fold 
and  had  the  shape  of  Kadambagolaka  (buds  of  Kadamba  tree 
bursting  forth  simultaneously) .  O  goddess  of  Devas,  there  was 
a  person  of  divine  form  in  its  centre.  He  had  the  colour  of  gold 
and  was  full  of  nectarine  juice  and  the  lustre  of  a  crore  of  suns. 
He  was  Pitamaha  himself  who  became  the  first  son  of  Anasuya, 
well-known  as  Candramas  (Moon)  in  the  form  of  Soma,  O 
Prince  (?)' 

In  the  course  of  Istapurta,  O  Mahesvarl,  all  his  sixteen  Kalas 
gather  together  successively  Pratipat,  Dvitlya,  Trtiya,  CaturthI, 
PancamI  and  the  imperishable  sixteenth  Kala  (obscure).  In  his 
subtle  form  he  is  the  protector  of  the  world  of  four  types.  O 
lady  of  excellent  countenance,  he  causes  delight  to  the  entire 
universe,  the  three  worlds  consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile 


beings.  .  . 

Everything  offered  as  Homa  and  Dana  becomes  stationed  in 

the  moon  and  everyone  makes  use  of  it  to  sustain  itself.  When 
Soma  is  in  the  state  of  Vanaspati  i.e.  New  Moon  (Amavasya), 
O  lady  of  excellent  countenance,  if  a  wealthy  man  takes  food 
in  another  man’s  house,  he  is  deluded  and  forfeits  the  merit 

of  a  year. 

If  men  cut  or  chop  off  trees  and  plants  on  the  new-moon 
day  O  goddess  of  Devas,  they  go  to  Yama’s  abode  due  to  that 
sin  ’  If  anyone  indulges  in  sexual  intercourse  on  a  new-moon 
day  he  incurs  a  sin  on  a  par  with  that  of  murder  of  a  Brahmana 
undoubtedly.  If  anyone  churns  curds  with  a  churning  rod  on 
a  new-moon  day,  his  cows  collected  before  perish  If,  on  a  new- 
moon  day,  a  person  undertakes  a  journey,  his  Purs  will  have 

only  dust  particles  for  food  for  a  period  of  one 

101-108.  O  MahadevI,  if  a  person  performs  a  Sraddha  on  a 


1  This  is  a  slip  m.  the  pari  of  the  author,  as  the  dialogue  here  is  supposed 
to  be  between  Siva  and  Parvali,  not  between  Markandeya  and  Yudhisthira. 


Skanda  Parana 

new-moon  day,  certainly  his  Pitre  become  propitiated  for  a 
year,  O  lady  of  wide  eyes.  If  he  gifts  gold,  silver  or  cloth  to 
Brahmanas,  O  goddess,  everything  shall  undoubtedly  increase 
a  hundred  thousand  times. 

Thus  the  Patriarch  in  the  form  of  the  Moon,  became  the 
first  son  of  Anasuya. 

The  second  one,  O  great  goddess,  was  named  Durvasas.  He 
is  (an  incarnation  of)  Mahesvara  himself,  the  cause  of  creation 
and  annihilation.  O  fair  lady,  in  the  middle  of  the  sages  he 
performs  a  severe  penance.  When  the  annihilation  of  all  living 
beings  takes  place,  he  attains  Rudratva.  It  was  by  this  Durvasas 
that  even  Indra  was  cursed,  O  lady  of  excellent  countenance. 
Thus  the  birth  of  the  second  son  has  been  recounted  by  me. 

In  the  form  of  Dattatreya  (manifested  there)  Lord  Madhusudana 
himself,  Lordjanardana,  the  omnipresent  Lord  of  the  universe. 

Thus,  O  Mahesvarl,  the  Devas  took  incarnations  on  the  earth, 
by  way  of  granting  boons  to  Anasuya.  They  became  her  three 
sons. 

Mdrkandeya  said: 

109-120.  O  son  of  KuntI,  a  Tlrtha  was  created  by  Anasuya 
on  the  northern  bank  of  Reva.  It  causes  the  acquisition  (birth) 
of  a  son  and  destruction  of  all  sins. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

This  is  an  ancient  Tlrtha  of  wonderful  efficacy  on  Narmada 

m  this  world.  O  king,  a  Brahmana’s  sin  of  foeticide  was  dispelled 
there. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

May  that  story  be  told,  the  story  that  dispels  all  the  sins  in 
this  world,  of  any  person  distressed  with  misery.  O  sinless  excellent 
Brahmana,  do  narrate  that  Itihasa  to  me. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

A  farmer  named  Govinda,  born  in  the  family  of  Gautama, 
lived  in  the  village  of  Suvarnasilaka  along  with  his  wife  and 
son.  He  was  always  engaged  in  protecting  his  house  and  field. 
One  day,  he  came  home  in  a  cart  filled  with  wood.  The 


V.iii.103.121-140 


345 


wood  was  unloaded  by  him  single-handedly  and  he  became 
hungry.  On  hearing  the  sound  of  father’s  arrival  the  son  came 
there  crawling  and  was  soon  covered  with  the  pieces  of  wood. 
He  was  not  seen  by  the  father.  The  cart  and  the  bullock  tied 
with  rope  weie  left  at  the  doorway.  The  thirsty  father,  O  king, 
entered  the  house  in  haste.  The  obedient  wife  who  was  aware 
of  the  feelings  of  her  husband  became  engaged  in  serving  him. 
On  seeing  the  son  fallen  down  with  the  head  crushed  by  the 
pieces  of  wood,  she  put  him  in  a  hammock  compassionately 
but  uttering  nothing. 

When  the  husband  finished  his  bath  and  meal  and  went  to 
sleep,  the  lady  tried  to  make  the  son  get  up.  The  son  had  died 
and  did  not  get  up.  The  sad  lady  cried  and  swooned. 

121-130.  On  hearing  the  sound  of  lamentation,  Govinda  became 
frightened.  He  fell  down  on  the  ground  crying  “What  is  this?” 

Both  of  them  fell  on  the  ground,  O  king,  with  tresses  of 
hairs  left  loose.  They  heaved  deep  sighs  and  lamented,  O  great 
king: 

“Whom  else  shall  we  see  as  the  son  eagerly  playing  about? 
How  shall  we  sustain  the  heart  broken  due  to  you?  The  line 
of  the  family  will  be  perpetuated.  I  had  this  faith  when  you 
were  born.  Now  whom  shall  we  look  up  to  for  the  purpose  of 
attaining  the  highest  goal  after  becoming  free  from  indebted¬ 
ness?  O  my  son,  I  have  become  old  and  wretched  and  you 
ought  to  have  been  my  support.  All  the  cherished  desires  of 
the  mind  have  become  futile.  Your  mother  is  wretched,  bereft 
of  her  son  and  kinsmen.  She  has  fallen  down  lamenting  on  the 
ground;  save  her. 

A  son  saves  the  father  from  the  Naraka  called  Put.  So  he  is 
called  Putra  by  the  Self-born  Lord  himself.  The  house  of  a  man 
without  a  son  is  a  void.  The  quarters  are  void  when  there  are 
no  kinsmen.  The  heart  of  a  fool  is  a  void.  If  there  is  poverty 

there  is  a  void  in  everything. 

The  world  says  that  sandalpaste  is  cool.  It  is  wrong.  The 
close  embrace  of  the  limbs  of  a  son  is  cooler  than  sandalpaste. 

Men  without  merit  do  not  see  a  son  sitting  on  their  laps  with 
dust  particles  making  the  face  dirty  and  playing  with  the  whiskeis. 

131-140.  Men  without  merit  do  not  see  a  son  resembling  the 
Holder  of  Ganga  (Siva)  with  the  quarters  for  clothes  (naked), 
bereft  of  shame,  dusty  and  matted  locks  of  hair  (wafted  about). 


346 


Skanda  Purdna 


The  note  of  a  musical  instrument,  of  a  lute,  is  heard  as  very 
charming  (to  the  ears).  But  the  cry  of  a  child  is  more  delight¬ 
ful  than  that. 

Learned  men  say  that  even  among  crows,  animals  and  birds, 
the  young  one,  the  calf  is  very  endearing  (to  them).  Fishes, 
horses,  tortoises,  crocodiles  etc.  are  pleased  when  young  ones 
are  born  and  become  distressed  when  some  danger  befalls 
them. 

Devas  and  Gandharvas  take  delight  when  sons  are  born. 
They  bewail  at  the  time  of  their  death.  O  son,  I  am  very  un¬ 
lucky. 

King  Raghava  (i.e.  Dasaratha)  convened  an  assembly  of  sages 
for  the  sake  of  (obtaining)  a  son  since  the  seat  of  Indra  oc¬ 
cupied  by  him  was  purified  by  sprinkling  water.  Residence  in 
Svarga  is  not  (possible)  without  a  son,  O  son  of  Pandu.  Hence 
Dasaratha  performed  an  excellent  Yajna  for  the  sake  of  sons. 
Rama,  Laksmana,  Satrughna  and  Bharata  were  born  to  him. 

Even  while  he  was  only  eight  years  old  Ramacandra  defeated 
Parasurama  of  unmeasured  brilliance,  by  whom  Kartavlrya  had 
been  conquered  earlier.  Vali,  the  monkey  who  was  invincible 
to  enemies,  was  killed  by  him  single-handed.  Ramacandra  killed 
Ravana,  the  son  of  Brahma,  along  with  his  sons  and  kinsmen 
of  whom  the  three  worlds  were  afraid. 

141-150.  Thus,  without  a  son  there  is  no  happiness  in  the 
mortal  world.  He  who  indulges  in  sexual  intercourse  for 
perpetuating  the  line,  who  makes  use  of  learning  to  attain 
Svarga,  who  prepares  excellent  sweet  food  for  the  sake  of  Brahmanas 
attains  residence  in  heaven.  There  is  no  greater  sin  than 
Brahmahatya  and  no  greater  meritorious  thing  than  a  horse- 
sacrifice.  There  is  no  greater  happiness  than  birth  of  a  son  and 
no  greater  calamity  than  danger  to  his  life.  Why  should  I  speak 
in  this  vein  more,  O  dear  one?  Without  a  son  there  is  no 
happiness.” 

After  lamenting  thus  again  and  again  in  various  ways,  the 
Brahmana  was  consoled  by  the  people.  He  took  the  body  of 
the  boy  and  went  out. 

Afterwards  they  cremated  the  child  in  accordance  with  the 
injunctions.  Extremely  distressed,  they  came  back  to  the  abode 
together. 

Thus,  when  the  Brahmana  came  home.  O  Yudhisthira,  night 


V.iii.103.151-161 


347 


had  already  set  in.  Govinda  afflicted  with  the  grief  for  his  son, 
lay  asleep  on  the  ground.  When  the  wife  looked  at  her  hus¬ 
band  afflicted  with  misery,  she  saw  him  infested  with  clusters 
of  worms.  On  seeing  him  overwhelmed  with  sins,  she  became 
all  the  more  distressed.  Even  as  she  was  thus  immersed  in 
grief,  the  night  came  to  an  end. 

The  servant  who  looked  after  the  cattle  went  to  the  forest 
for  leaving  the  buffaloes  (to  graze)  and  having  kept  them  there 
he  returned  home. 

Govinda,  the  excellent  Brahmana,  was  informed  by  the  cow¬ 
herd,  “O  master,  even  as  I  take  food,  kindly  look  after  the 
buffaloes.” 

151-161.  Then  the  Brahmana  hastened  towards  the  buffa¬ 
loes.  He  did  not  see  the  buffaloes  there.  Then  he  rushed  towards 
the  field.  On  his  way  he  came  to  the  confluence  of  Erandi  and 
Reva  and  entered  the  waters. 


Excessively  thirsty  he  drank  some  water.  After  washing  the 
eyes  well  and  drinking  the  water  without  any  desire  (for  sacred 
results)  he  came  home  towards  the  close  of  the  day.  With  great 
rinvinrla  went  to  bed  at  night  after  taking  food. 


The  xuife  said: 


same. 


348 


Skanda  Purana 


162-169.  Thinking  about  this  like  this  I  spent  the  night  in 
great  terror.  What  can  I  say  and  to  whom  about  you  infested 
with  a  crowd  of  worms?  Again  you  were  seen  today  infested 
with  the  worms  of  foeticide  (infanticide).  In  some  places  they 
bite  into  the  body  and  in  some  places  they  have  disappeared 
altogether. 

I  recollect  this  now  and  then  and  ponder  over  it  again  and 
again.  But  I  fail  to  notice  the  cause  thereof.  May  I  ask  you? 
Will  you  kindly  let  me  know?  This  is  what  I  feel.  This  is  the 
effect  of  either  the  adoration  of  a  deity  or  taking  the  holy  bath 
in  a  lake  or  river  or  a  holy  Tlrtha  you  may  have  visited  and 
not  due  to  anything  else. 

Sri  Markandeya  continued: 

On  being  told  thus,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  the  Brahmana 
told  his  wife  what  had  happened  in  the  course  of  the  day,  O 
excellent  king,  because  he  himself  had  certain  suspicions. 

‘Today  I  had  gone  with  the  buffaloes.  I  visited  Erandl  confluence 
and  stood  in  the  water  coming  upto  my  navel.  I  drank  much 
water  as  well.  I  do  not  know  of  any  other  Tlrtha,  lake  or  river. 
This  is  the  truth.  This  is  the  truth.  O  beautiful  lady,  the  truth 
has  been  averred.” 

The  lady  understood  everything  and  began  to  observe  fast. 
O  lady  of  excellent  complexion  (?),  the  Brahmana  went  to  the 
confluence  along  with  his  wife. 

170-180.  After  taking  the  holy  bath  in  the  charming  water 
and  bowing  to  Lord  Bhaskara,  he  bathed  Sankara,  the  Lord  of 
Devas,  along  with  Uma  with  Pancagavya1,  ghee,  milk,  curds, 
honey,  ghee  (sic)  and  water.  Then  he  worshipped  the  Lihga 
identical  with  the  Vedas  and  the  auspicious  goddess  KatyayanT 
with  fragrant  flower  garlands,  incense  and  splendid  Naivedyas. 
After  keeping  awake  in  the  whole  of  the  night  along  with  her 
husband,  the  chaste  lady  honoured  the  Brahmanas  assiduously 
when  the  day  dawned  clearly.  Govinda  honoured  the  excellent 
Brahmanas  in  accordance  with  his  capacity  by  means  of  the 
gifts  of  cows,  gold,  cloth  and  food,  O  descendant  of  Bharata. 
Accompanied  by  his  wife,  he  came  home  rid  of  all  sins. 


1.  Five  cow  Products,  viz.  milk,  curds,  butter  and  liquid  and  solid  excreta. 


V.iii.103.1 81-190 


349 


If  anyone  devoutly  listens  to  or  reads  with  great  devotion, 
this  excellent  story  of  Govinda,  the  sin  of  foeticide  perishes. 
He  sports  about  in  the  world  of  Sankara  until  the  annihilation 
of  all  living  beings. 

The  person  should  control  his  sense-organs  and  observe  fast 
on  the  seventh  lunar  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of 
Asvayuj  or  Caitra,  O  excellent  king.  He  must  adopt  all  Sattvika 
feelings  and  emotions. 

In  the  shrine  of  Siva,  he  must  meditate  upon  the  Odd-eyed, 
Trident-bearing  Lord.  Then  he  should  meditate  upon  Lord 
Visnu  who  slew  Kariisa  and  who  holds  the  conch-shell,  discus 
and  club  and  rides  on  the  Lord  of  birds  and  bestows  boons  on 
the  three  worlds. 

Then  he  should  meditate  on  the  four-faced  Pitamaha  who 
rides  on  the  swan.  He  is  the  creator  of  everything;  he  is  re¬ 


splendent  on  the  lotus-seat.  The  devotee  should  stay  in  that 
excellent  spot  of  Triyama  (of  threefold  mental  control). 

181-190.  After  the  day  has  dawned  clearly  on  the  eighth  day, 
O  king,  the  devotee  should  honour  Brahmanas  devoid  of  all 
faults  or  disqualifications.  They  should  have  all  the  limbs  and 
organs  complete.  They  should  be  adepts  in  all  scriptures.  They 
should  be  regularly  practising  study  of  the  Vedas  and  th«y 
should  be  devoted  to  their  own  wives.  The  Brahmanas  should 
be  deserving  ones  for  Sraddha,  Dana  and  Vrata,  O  son  of 

He  should  begin  the  adoration  of  the  departed  ones  afte 
that  of  the  Devas.  With  the  offering  of  balls  of  rice  and  liba¬ 
tions  in  Erandl  one  is  rid  of  ghosthood.  ,, 

Dana  (gifts)  with  cooked  foods  as  the  chief  item  should 

always  be  made  (along  with)  gold,  plot  of  land  a  W 
of  bullocks  of  splendid  features  with  a  ploughshare,  foodg 
weighing  so  many  Dronakas.  An  adorned  young  cow  yielding 
plenty  of  milk  should  be  gifted  along  with  her  catf.  She  may 
L  white,  red,  black,  pink  or  tawny  in  colour.  A 
of  brass  should  invariably  be  given.  e  oo  s  covere<j  with 

be  adorned  with  (plates  of)  gold  and  the  horns  cohered  with 

gold  top.  The  same  should  be  ma  Harat  Rrsna  and 

the  Mantra:  “May  the  Lords  of  >  Surabhi,  the 

Pitamaha,  be  pleased  with  me.  May  tne  a 

saviour  of  the  world,  redeem  me. 


350 


Skanda  Purdna 


If  women  desire  progeny  and  take  the  holy  bath  at  the 
confluence  of  Erandl,  the  Rudrasuktas  of  all  the  four  Vedas 
should  be  recited  by  four  Brahmanas  or  at  least  two  in  a  praiseworthy 
manner.  The  couple  should  be  sprinkled  with  a  single  well- 
filled  pot. 

191-202a.  The  person  showering  with  the  water-pot  shall 
be  one  well-versed  in  astrology  or*  one  who  can  sing  Sama 
verses.  The  water-pot  must  contain  five  jewels.  The  water  should 
be  rendered  fragrant  with  sweet  scent.  All  types  of  herbs  and 
medicines  should  be  put  therein.  Leaves  or  sprouts  of  mango 
and  Asvattha  or  Madhuka  should  also  be  put  there. 

It  should  be  covered  with  a  white  cloth  and  white  sandalpaste 
applied  over.  White  flowers  should  be  strewn  and  white  mus¬ 
tards  should  be  scattered  in  the  middle. 

Everything  should  be  put  by  a  seeker  of  progeny  in  a  vessel 
of  brass  to  be  placed  (before)  the  excellent  preceptor. 

A  cloth  that  has  been  worn  once  should  be  taken  off  and 
placed  there  along  with  bangles  or  other  ornaments  in  the 
Mandala  (mystic  diagram)  for  the  sake  of  one’s  own  fulfilment. 
He  bows  down  to  Bhaskara  at  the  outset  and  then  to  the  Acarya 
who  is  Rudra  personified. 

In  the  excellent  shrine  of  the  goddess  the  dovotee  tastes 
something  sweet  and  makes  gifts  of  fruits,  betel  leaves,  um¬ 
brella,  shoes  or  vehicles  to  a  Brahmana.  He  shall  become  free 
from  misery.  He  sports  about  in  the  world  of  Bhaskara  until 
all  the  living  beings  are  annihilated. 

All  Danas  whether  auspicious  or  inauspicious  shall  have  a 
crore  times  benefit.  Just  as  rivers  ultimately  fall  into  the  ocean 
and  get  merged,  so  also  the  sins  of  men  perish  at  the  confluence 
of  Erandl.  Sankara  has  said  that  a  sin  on  a  par  with  foeticide 
perishes  at  the  confluence  of  Erandl  and  within  a  radius  of  an 
arrow’s  throw  all  round. 

Immolation  of  one’s  life  should  be  carried  out  in  fire  with 
devotion.  Death  due  to  voluntary  starvation  or  voluntary  drowning 
come  thereafter  (?  in  efficacy). 

If  the  death  is  in  fire,  the  devotee  enjoys  five  thousand 
years  stay  (in  the  divine  world);  if  it  is  in  water,  three  thou¬ 
sand  years;  and  if  by  starvation,  sixty  thousand  years. 

202b-210.  Even  crows,  cranes,  doves,  owls  and  animals  attain 
the  highest  goal  after  coming  into  contact  with  the  waters  of 


V.iii.104.1-8 


351 


the  confluence.  Trees  go  to  that  region  which  Yogins  will  attain 

after  realization.  , 

O  goddess (?),  Erandika  is  the  divine  Maya.  If  Manmathesvara 
is  visited,  even  angry  Yama  is  incapable  of  doing  anything.  The 
gentle  one  sees  all  weal. 

If  the  devotees  apply  the  clay  taken  out  of  the  confluence 
all  over  the  body  everyday,  all  the  sins  such  as  that  of  foeticide 

perish.  There  is  no  doubt  about  this. 

A  man  who  rolls  about  at  the  confluence  of  Erantji  shall 
become  rid  of  all  sins  and  attain  the  region  free  from  ailment. 

If  staying  in  hermitages,  men  glorify  the  confluence  of  Erandi, 
they  become  free  from  sins.  Such  is  the  truthful  statement  o 
Sankara.  One  dispels  sins  by  perceiving  the  tips  of  Er^P  _ 

Those  men  who  read  this  meritorious  narrative  o 

and  those  others  who  listen  to  it  devoutly,  become  rid  of  sins. 

Thus  the  entire  details  of  Erandlsahgama  havebeen  recounted 
to  you,  O  king.  I  shall  further  describe  another  Tirtha  tha 

destroys  all  sins. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FOUR 
The  Greatness  of  Suvamasila  Tirtha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

^  ft  Thereafter,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent  Sauvamasila 

Tirtha,  “  It  h  ^  <°f  *"*)  and  “ 

by  groups  of  sagos  near  the 
confluence  Within  a  radius  of  a  hundred  steps  ail  round.  It  , 

a  very  rare  sp°‘ f cubit  in  length  is  considered  a  holy 

EV^ab.Sp0t  After  taking  holy  bath  in  Suvarnasila  (Suvarna- 
spot,  O  king^A  t  Lyord  Mahesvara,  Sun-god  should 

silaka)  and  ador  g  the  devotee  should  perform  Homa 

inhoT;effre  wUh  a  Bilva  fruit  mixed  with  ghee  or  with  the  leaves 

°fTheV  Mantra  to  be  uttered  is  “May  the  Lord  of  the  universe 
be  phased.  May  my  ailment  perish  positively. 


Skanda  Purana 

Listen  to  the  benefit  when  gold  is  gifted  to  a  Brahmana 
(there).  He  who  gifts  gold  obtains  all  the  excellent  benefit  that 
has  been  mentioned  as  accruing  from  a  Yajna  with  much  gold 
as  Daksina. 

By  that  Dana  a  devotee  becomes  a  purified  soul  and  on 
death  he  shall  attain  Svarga.  He  will  become  an  attendant  of 
Rudra  for  a  period  equal  to  fourteen  Indras’  reign. 

After  coming  down  from  Svarga,  he  is  born  in  a  celebrated 
family  richly  endowed  with  wealth  and  foodgrain.  He  then 
remembers  that  holy  Tlrtha  once  again. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIVE 
The  Greatness  of  Karahja  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Thereafter  one  goes  to  the  Tirtha  called  Karania.  There 
e  takes  the  holy  bath,  O  great  king,  and  observes  fast  with 

the  sense-organs  completely  controlled.  He  is  liberated  from 
all  sms. 

He  should  adore  Mahadeva  and  make  gifts  devoutly  of  gold, 
bed^h^6 v  Pea[  S’  C°ral>  sandals>  shoes,  umbrella,  quilt  and 

d"ubf S,1  «s.eCOmeS  Cror“  0f  Um'S  benrfidal-  Th'"= 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIX 

The  Greatness  of  Kamada  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

exceUem  ^heavenly  "nttha^thtu^condt  *°  “  ‘h<!  excessive,>' 
and  fascinating  J  both  bHSS 

o  excellent  king,  if  an  unfortunate  man  nr 
wretched  state  takes  the  holy  bath  and  L  T?  WOman  in 
conjugal  bliss  accrues  ,o  him  „r  h"r  mS  “■*  Rudra’ 


V.iii.106.8-19 


353 


The  person  should  control  his  sense-organs  and  observe  fast 
for  a  day  and  a  night  on  the  third  lunar  day.  He  should  devoutly 
invite  a  Brahmana  of  handsome  features  along  with  his  wife. 

He  should  be  adorned  with  fragrant  garlands  and  rendered 
sweet-smelling  with  incense  etc.,  and  clad  in  good  garments. 

He  should  be  devoutly  fed  with  milk  pudding  and  Krsara 
(milk,  gingelly  seeds  and  rice  mixed  and  cooked  well)  and 
then  duly  circumambulated. 

He  should  recite  in  his  mind  this  Mantra:  “May  the  bull- 
emblemed  Mahadeva  along  with  his  wife,  be  pleased  with  me. 
O  Lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  be  kind  to  me  and  see  that  there 
is  no  separation  at  any  time  (between  us),  just  as  there  is  none 
in  your  case.” 

If  this  is  done,  the  merit  that  is  said  to  accrue  to  him  I  shall 
recount  entirely  to  you,  as  has  been  stated  by  the  Lord. 

8-19.  O  Yudhisthira,  none  of  the  following  (evil  things) 
shall  occur  to  him  in  the  course  of  seven  births:  misfortune, 
wretchedness,  penury,  grief-incurring  bondage  and  infertility. 

He  who  devoutly  goes  there  (specially)  on  the  third  lunar 
day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of  Jyestha  and  practises 
the  penance  of  the  five  fires,  undoubtedly  becomes  free  from 
all  sins. 

The  devotee  should  have  full  concentration  of  the  mind  and 
burn  Guggula  (fragrant  gum-resin).  If  in  the  vicinity  of  Gaurl, 
the  devotee  splits  his  body  and  if  this  ends  in  the  departure 
of  the  soul,  even  as  he  is  engaged  in  that  activity,  he  shall  go 
to  Svarga  on  death  here.  So  said  Sankara. 

Regarding  the  Brahmana  couple  (woman  and  man)  as  Gaurl 
and  Siva  in  physical  form,  he  should  honour  them  with  splendid 
garments  of  white,  red  and  yellow  colours.  He  should  adore 
them  duly  with  different  kinds  of  flowers  and  splendid,  fragrant 
incense.  A  golden  necklace  should  be  offered.  They  should  be 
smeared  with  saffron.  After  giving  them  a  fine  appearance 
thus,  gifts  are  offered,  such  as  bangles,  earrings,  necklaces  and 
rings.  Seven  kinds  of  cereals  are  gifted  and  they  are  fed,  O 
excellent  king. 

The  devotee  may  make  other  gifts  as  well  at  that  Tirtha. 
There  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  he  will  attain  that  merit 
which  is  incurred  by  making  the  gift  of  everything  (all  posses¬ 
sions).  Everything  becomes  a  thousand-fold  in  merit. 


354 


Skanda  Purana 


He  enjoys  pleasures  of  great  excellence  in  the  company  of 
Sankara.  He  then  derives  immense  conjugal  bliss.  There  is  no 
doubt  there  (about  this). 

He  who  is  sonless  gets  a  son;  one  without  wealth  gets  wealth. 
O  great  king,  the  TIrtha  that  fulfils  cherished  desires  is  estab¬ 
lished  on  Narmada. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Bhandan  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Bhandan  Tirtha.  It  is  the  means  of  averting  poverty  for 
a  period  of  nineteen  Yugas. 

Dhanada  (Kubera)  performed  a  penance  whereby  the  Lo¬ 
tus-born  Lord  was  pleased.  By  making  a  small  gift,  he  attained 
the  lordship  of  wealth. 

He  who  goes  there  and  takes  holy  bath  devoutly  and  then 
makes  the  gift  of  wealth,  will  regain  enormous  wealth  which 
will  never  be  lost  or  become  limited  in  quantity. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Rohini  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  O  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent 
Rohini  Tirtha  well-known  in  all  the  three  worlds  and  extremely 
destructive  of  all  sins. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

I  wish  to  hear  the  greatness  of  Rohini  Tirtha  that  is  destruc¬ 
tive  of  all  sins.  I  wish  to  hear  it  succinctly.  It  behoves  you  to 
recount  it  to  me. 


V.iii.  108.8-22 


355 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

At  the  time  of  the  close  of  the  Kalpa,  when  all  mobile  and 
immobile  beings  became  dissolved  in  a  terrible,  single,  vast 
expanse  of  water,  the  Discus-bearing  Lord  of  Devas  lay  down 
in  the  ocean.  A  lotus  grew  from  his  navel.  It  resembled  the  disc 
of  the  sun.  It  had  pericarp  and  Filaments.  It  was  adorned  with 
petals. 

Brahma  with  four  lotus-like  faces  came  into  being  there.  He 
said,  “O  Lord  of  Devas,  let  me  be  commanded  what  I  should  do.” 

On  being  requested  thus,  the  Conch-discus-club-bearing  Lord 
of  Devas  spoke  these  sweet  words  to  Lord  Pitamaha: 

“O  mighty-armed  one,  at  my  behest,  beget  in  Sarasvatl  the 
world  consisting  of  all  the  groups  of  living  beings,  the  world 
capable  of  coming  up,  abiding  and  getting  dissolved.” 

8-13.  These  words  of  the  Lotus-navelled  One  were  listened 
to  by  Lord  (Brahma),  O  descendant  of  Bharata.  He  remem¬ 
bered  (seven  sages  and)  mentally  created  the  seven  sages  with 
a  desire  for  the  welfare  (of  the  worlds).  These  wise  ones  were 
remembered  in  this  order:  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Pracetas, 
Vasistha,  Bhrgu  and  Narada. 

Daksa,  the  patriarch  of  great  refulgence,  was  born  of  Pracetas. 
O  sinless  one,  fifty  daughters  were  born  to  Daksa.  He  gave  ten 
to  Dharma,  thirteen  to  Kasyapa  and  twenty-seven  to  Indu  (Moon- 
god). 

Among  them,  O  king,  the  daughter  named  RohinI  was  not 
liked  by  any  of  the  other  women  and  by  the  husband  also  in 
particular.  Thereupon,  she  developed  extreme  aversion  to  Samsara, 
O  excellent  king.  She  came  to  the  banks  of  Narmada  and 
performed  an  elaborate  penance. 

14-22.  She  made  her  body  emaciated  through  fasts  for  a 
single  night,  three  nights  together,  six  nights,  twelve  nights, 
a  fortnight  and  even  for  months. 

She  propitiated  the  holy  goddess,  the  destroyer  of  Demon 
Mahisa,  the  destroyer  of  all  distresses. 

She  regularly  took  the  holy  baths  in  the  waters  of  Narmada. 
(Thus  the  lady  of  pure  smiles  performed  the  penance.)  Thereat 
the  highly  illustrious  Goddess  Narayani  became  pleased,  O 
king. 

She  said:  aO  fortunate  lady,  I  am  pleased  with  your  Vrata 
and  holy  observances.”  On  hearing  this,  RohinI  said:  mO  bestower 


356 


Skanda  Purdna 


of  honour,  let  it  be  so  that  I  ere  long  become  the  beloved  of 
Sasin  (Moon).”  After  saying,  ‘‘Let  it  be  so”,  Bhavani,  the  beloved 
of  her  devotees,  vanished  there  itself,  even  while  being  eulogized 
by  groups  of  sages. 

Ever  since  then  thatTIrtha  became  well-known.  RohinI  became 
the  permanent  beloved  of  Sasin  (Moon-god) ,  O  excellent  king. 

A  woman  who  devoutly  takes  her  holy  bath  in  that  TIrtha 
becomes  beloved  of  her  husband  like  RohinI.  A  man  who 
regularly  bathes  in  that  TIrtha  becomes  the  lover  of  the  woman 
(wife) . 

If  a  man  casts  off  his  life  in  the  TIrtha,  he  will  never  have 
a  broken  marriage  at  any  time  in  the  course  of  seven  births. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINE 
The  Greatness  of  Cahra  Tirlha 
Sri  Marliandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent 
Cakra  TIrtha  well-known  as  Senapura.  It  is  conducive  to  the 
destruction  of  all  sins. 

The  Discus-bearing  Lord  of  Devas  duly  propitiated  leading 
Brahmanas  with  the  gift  of  lands  and  brought  Mahasena 
(Karttikeya)  for  ceremonially  crowning  him  as  the  commander- 
in-chief  (of  the  army  of  Devas)  for  slaying  Danavas  in  order 
to  bring  about  victory  of  the  Heaven-dwellers. 

Mahasena  was  brought  there  along  with  the  Devas  accom¬ 
panied  by  Indra  as  their  leader,  to  the  accompaniment  of  the 
sounds  of  conch-shells,  Bherl  and  Pataha  drums,  the  notes  of 
flutes,  lutes,  Mrdangas  and  auspicious  Jhallarls  (cymbals). 

Thereupon  the  Danava  named  Ruru  who  was  proud  on  account 
of  his  strength  gave  out  a  terrible  roaring  shout  and  came 
there  to  create  obstacles  at  the  coronation  ceremony. 

His  army  consisting  of  elephants,  horses,  chariots  and  foot- 
soldiers  filled  all  the  ten  quarters  and  a  great  battle  ensued. 

7-17.  The  various  weapons  used  by  him  were  Sakti,  Rsti, 
Pasa,  Musala,  Khadga  (sword),  Tomara  (iron  rod),  Tahkana 


V.iii.  109.7-1 7 


357 


(axe) ,  Bhalla  (spear) ,  Karnika,  Naraca  etc.  Everywhere  headless 
bodies  were  scattered  on  the  battlefield. 

Within  a  moment  Lord  Visnu,  the  destroyer  of  hosts  of  en¬ 
emies,  annihilated  the  army  of  enemies  with  arrows  discharged 
from  the  bow.  The  elephants,  horses  and  chariots  were  de¬ 
stroyed  and  the  noble-souled  Lord  took  up  his  discus. 

Discharged  from  the  hand  of  the  Slayer  of  Madhu,  the  terrible, 
blazing,  sharp,  discus  Sudarsana,  easily  discernible  by  the  Suras 
and  Asuras  in  the  battlefield,  cut  off  the  head  of  the  Daitya. 

On  perceiving  this  sudden  obstacle  to  his  coronation,  the 
Six-faced  Lord  abandoned  the  place  and  performed  an  elabo¬ 


rate  penance. 

The  discus  discharged  by  Hari,  the  sustainer  of  the  worlds, 
for  destruction  of  the  Danava,  split  him  into  two  and  fell  down 
in  the  pure  waters. 

Ever  since  then  that  TIrtha  is  well-known  as  Cakratirtha 
created  by  the  omniformed  Lord  for  the  purpose  of  destroying 
all  the  sins. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Cakratirtha  and  adores 
Acyuta,  the  Lord,  obtains  the  merit  of  a  Pundarlka  Yajna. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  the  TIrtha  there  and  honours 
splendid  Brahmanas  having  control  over  the  mind,  sense-organs 
and  angry  temperament,  attains  the  benefit  of  a  crore  of  meritorious 

deeds.  .  ,  __  ,  , 

He  who  devoutly  casts  off  his  body  into  the  TIrtha  there, 

goes  to  Visnuloka  after  death,  to  the  accompaniment  of  aus- 


picious  shouts  of  victory  etc. 

After  sporting  about  as  he  pleases  and  duly  honoured  by 
Devas  and  Gandharvas,  he  returns  here  once  again  and  is  reborn 

in  a  large  family.  ,  .  ...  „  . 

Thus  a  meritorious  ancedote  that  is  conducive  to  wealth  and 

destructive  of  sins  and  miseries  has  been  recounted  to  you,  O 

blessed  one.  Listen  further  from  me. 


358 


Skanda  Purana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TEN 
The  Greatness  of  Dhautapapa  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  one  should  go  to  Dhautapapa  Tirtha  that 
destroys  great  sins.  It  was  created  by  Visnu  formerly  and  is  very 
near  to  Cakra  Tirtha. 

Janardana,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  incurred  (enormous)  sin  as 
a  result  of  the  slaughter  of  the  terrible  Danavas.  It  was  to 
dispel  that  sin  that  he  made  this  Tirtha  and  performed  a  severe 
penance  at  that  Tirtha  after  subduing  anger. 

He  observed  the  vow  of  silence,  too  difficult  for  Devas  and 
Danavas.  He  took  the  holy  bath  and  made  different  kinds  of 
gifts  to  Brahmanas.  Instantly  he  was  liberated  from  the  sin  and 
he  went  to  his  Vaisnava  region. 

Similarly  one  who  commits  grave  sin  but  takes  the  holy  bath 
there  and  performs  Japa  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions, 
becomes  free  from  the  sin. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  ELEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Skanda  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  There  is  an  extremely  splendid  Tirtha  on  the  southern 
bank  of  Narmada.  It  was  formerly  created  by  Skanda  after 
performing  a  very  severe  penance. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

O  excellent  Brahmana,  do  recount  truthfully  the  entire  story 
of  Skanda'  beginning  with  his  birth  as  well  as  the  details  of  the 
procedure  of  the  pilgrimage  to  the  Tirtha. 


1.  W  3-21  describe  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Skanda.  If  differs  from  a  similar 
siory  in  Mbh  and  other  Puranas  on  the  following  points: 
i.  Siva  invites  Smara  (god  of  Love)  to  inspire  him  sexually. 


V.iii.l  11.7-1 5 


359 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 


Formerly  penance  was  performed  by  the  Lord  of  Devas,  O 
Yudhisthira,  but  on  being  requested  by  all  the  Suras,  Goddess 
Uma  was  married  by  him. 

They  said,  “O  excellent  one  among  Suras,  Devas  have  no 
commander-in-chief.  All  the  Devas  including  Vasava  are  being 
carried  away  by  the  terrible  Danavas. 

Just  as  night  without  the  Moon  and  day  without  the  Sun,  so 
also  army  without  a  leader  does  not  shine  even  for  a  short 
while. 

After  realizing  this,  O  Mahadeva  having  great  compassion, 
may  a  commander  of  the  army  bound  to  be  well  known  in  all 
the  three  worlds  be  granted  to  us.” 

7-15.  On  hearing  these  splendid  words  of  the  Devas, 
Paramesvara  who  was  enamoured  of  Goddess  Uma  mentally 
recollected  Smara  (god  of  Love). 

With  all  his  limbs  intensely  excited  by  him  (Smara),  the 
preceptor  of  the  universe  assumed  a  loving  form  and  made 
love  to  Rudrani  for  a  period  of  a  hundred  divine  years. 

After  coming  to  know  that  Hara  was  engaged  in  a  long- 
drawn  coition,  Devaraja  Indra  had  consultation  with  other  Devas 
and  despatched  Jatavedas  (Fire-god). 

He  went  and  saw  Mahadeva  engrossed  in  the  greatest  bliss. 
On  being  noticed  thus  suddenly,  the  Lord  got  up  exclaiming 


“Ha-Ha”.  J  . 

Infuriated  on  that  account,  the  great  goddess  uttered  1m- 
precatory  words  even  as  she  trembled  much,  O  great  king. 

Listen,  I  shall  tell  you  what  she  uttered. 

“I  was  requested  earnestly  by  all  the  Suras  for  producing  a 
son,  but  by  sendingjiitavedas  my  experience  of  sexual  bhss  has 
been  spoiled  and  rendered  ineffective.  Hence  all  the  Suras  mil 
undoubtedly  be  sonless.” 

Thereupon  Vahni  (Fire)  was  told  by  Hara,  Take  up  o 


11. 


iii. 


Siva  when  disturbed  in  his  sexual  intercourse  advises  Agni  that  if 
he  (Zn  finds  his(Siva’s)  semen  unbearable,  he  should  deposit  . 

i„  S.  U  i.  after  giving  Ihis  advice  .ha.  he  give.  Agm  an  ora, 

Skanda's'penance  on  the  hank  ot  Nacnadk  « ■  P'e- 

and  creating  a  TTrtha  after  his  name  on  the  bank  of  Narmada. 


360 


Skanda  Purana 


seed.  It  behoves  you  to  do  what  usually  happens  in  the  worlds. 
O  excellent  one  among  Suras,  it  should  be  possible  for  you  to 
take  up  and  bear  our  fiery  refulgence  for  the  purpose  of  doing 
the  task  of  the  Devas.  In  all  the  three  worlds,  there  is  no  one 
else  competent  enough  to  do  so.” 

Agni  said: 

O  Lord  Supreme,  what  power  do  I  have  for  carrying  your 
fiery  refulgence?  It  will  reduce  to  ash  all  the  three  worlds 
consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile  beings. 

Isvara  said: 

16-26.  If  there  is  any  pain  caused  by  our  seed  deposited 
in  your  belly,  cast  off  that  fiery  refulgence  in  the  waters  of 
Ganga,  O  Hutasana  (Fire). 

After  saying  this  Mahadeva  deposited  into  the  mouth  of 
Havyavaha  (Fire-god)  his  excellent,  never-failing  seed.  Then 
he  vanished. 

When  the  Lord  had  vanished,  Hutasana  experienced  burn¬ 
ing  sensation.  He  deposited  the  seed  into  the  waters  of  Ganga 
and  went  to  his  own  abode. 

Unable  to  bear  that  fiery  refulgence,  Ganga,  the  most 
excellent  one  among  rivers,  deposited  it  among  the  Sara  reeds 
and  went  on  her  way. 

On  seeing  the  child  born  there,  all  the  Devas  including 
Vasava  sent  the  Krttikas  to  feed  him  with  breast  milk. 

On  seeing  all  of  them  arrived,  the  highly  intelligent  god 
born  of  the  womb  of  Ganga,  became  six-faced  and  drank  the 
milk  of  the  breasts  through  his  six  mouths,  as  he  was  so  eager 
to  drink. 

The  Lotus-born  Lord  performed  all  the  consecratory  rites 
beginning  with  the  post-natal  rite  as  enjoined  in  the  Vedas,  in 
accordance  with  the  injunctions. 

He  was  named  Sanmukha 1  because  he  had  six  faces,  Karttikeya 
because  he  was  nursed  by  the  Krttikas,  Kumdra  because  he  was 
still  a  child.  He  was  also  called  Gangagarbha  and  Agnija . 


1 .  Etymologies  of  the  different  names  of  Skanda. 


V.iii.l  11.27-35 


361 


Thus  without  formal  study  he  became  well-versed  in  the 
Vedas  and  many  scriptures.  He  performed  a  severe  penance. 

Then  he  travelled  through  divine  forests,  rivers  and  all  the 
TIrthas  of  the  earth  as  well  as  oceans,  O  descendant  of  Bharata. 
Ultimately  in  due  course,  he  reached  the  banks  of  Narmada. 
On  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada,  he  performed  a  severe 
penance. 

27-35.  Day  and  night  he  muttered  ritualistically  passages 
from  Rk,  Yujus  and  Saman.  He  meditated  upon  Mahadeva  with 
great  purity.  He  became  so  emaciated  that  all  his  veins  became 
visible. 

When  the  period  of  a  thousand  years  was  completed  Lord 
Mahesvara  came  there  along  with  Uma  and  spoke  these  words: 

Isvara  said: 

I  am  the  bestower  of  boons  on  you.  O  dear  child,  Gaurl  is 
your  mother  and  I  am  your  father.  Choose  your  boon  whatever 
is  desired  by  you,  even  if  it  be  the  rarest  thing  in  all  the  three 

worlds. 


Sanmukha  said: 

O  Mahadeva,  O  Sankara,  if  you  with  Uma  are  pleased  with 
me,  O  my  parents,  I  choose  this  boon.  In  my  opinion  I  don  t 
have  any  other  goal  (except  you). 


On  hearing  these  splendid  words  that  came  out  of  the  mouth 
of  his  son,  the  Lord  said,  “Let  it  be  so"  and  embraced  him  with 

great  affection.  _  -  . .  .  , 

Sniffing  at  his  head  along  with  Uma,  Sankara  said. 


Isvara  said: 

You  will  be  immutable  and  everlasting  eommander-in-chmf 
A  peacock  of  divine  form  is  being  given  to  you  as  vehicle.  It 
wifi  hold  the  Sakti  in  the  battle.  Be  victorious  over  Suras  and 

Asuras. 


After  saying  this,  the  noble  soul  t«ent  to  the  excellent  Kailasa 
mountain. 


362 


Skanda  Purdna 


When  the  Lord  vanished,  the  Peacock-vehicled  One  installed 
Mahadeva  (Linga)  and  went  to  the  presence  of  the  Suras. 

36-44.  Ever  since  then  that  Tlrtha  became  well-known  as 
Skandatlrtha.  It  is  the  rarest  meritorious  Tlrtha  unto  the  men 
of  the  earth.  It  is  destructive  of  all  sins. 

O  king,  one  who  devoutly  takes  his  holy  bath  in  the  Tlrtha 
there  and  adores  Siva  with  sweet-smelling  garlands  and  Abhiseka 
(ritualistic  bathing)  shall  obtain  the  benefit  of  a  Yajna. 

Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  obtained  by  one  who  takes 
his  holy  bath  in  Skanda  Tlrtha  and  worships  Pitrs  and  Devatas 
with  water  mixed  with  gingelly  seeds. 

By  means  of  a  single  ball  of  rice  offered  in  accordance  with 
the  injunctions,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  the  Pitrs  become 
pleased  with  him  for  twelve  years.  There  is  no  doubt  about 
this. 

O  great  king,  whether  it  is  splendid  or  otherwise,  everything 
offered  at  the  Tlrtha  there  becomes  everlasting  in  this  as  well 
as  the  other  world. 

Whoever  casts  his  life  there  in  the  Tlrtha  in  accordance  with 
the  scriptural  injunctions  goes  to  the  world  of  Siva.  After  staying 
there  for  a  Kalpa  duly  honoured  by  Devas  and  Gandharvas,  he 
is  reborn  in  Bharatavarsa  in  a  pure  family.  He  will  be  conversant 
with  the  principles  of  the  Vedas  and  Vedangas.  He  will  be 
devoid  of  all  ailments.  Accompanied  by  sons  and  grandsons  he 
will  live  for  a  hundred  years. 

Thus,  O  king,  the  origin  of  Skanda  Tlrtha  has  been  recounted 
to  you.  It  is  conducive  to  wealth,  fame  and  longevity.  It  is 
excellent.  It  eradicates  all  miseries  and  sins.  It  is  meritorious 
as  told  by  the  Lord  himself. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWELVE 
The  Greatness  of  Ahgirasa  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said : 

1-11.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the 
Tirtha  of  Ahgirasa.  It  is  situated  on  the  northern  bank  of  Narmada 
and  is  destructive  of  all  sins. 


V.iii.113.1-3 


363 


Formerly  there  was  a  Brahmana  named  Angiras  who  had 
mastered  the  Vedas.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Yuga,  he  per¬ 
formed  a  severe  penance  for  obtaining  a  son.  v 

Everyday  he  took  three  holy  baths.  He  performed  the  Japa 
of  the  eternal  Lord.  He  worshipped  Mah'adeva  and  observed 
the  vows  like  Krcchra  Candrayana  etc. 

When  the  period  of  twelve  years  was  completed  Paramesvara 
became  pleased.  He  asked  the  Brahmana  Angiras  to  request 
for  any  boon  he  wanted. 

He  requested  Mahadeva  for  an  excellent  son  who  should  be 
well-versed  in  the  Vedic  lore,  expert  in  observing  Vratas  and 
a  master  of  all  scriptures;  who  would  become  advisor  to  Devas, 
O  king,  and  honoured  in  all  the  worlds;  who  would  be  a  permanent 
abode  of  Brahmanical  splendour  and  immortal  too. 

Hara  told  him,  “A  son  so  desired  and  expert  in  all  lores 
shall  be  born.  There  is  no  doubt  (in  this  matter).”  After  saying 
so,  Hara  went  away. 

Due  to  the  boon,  Bi-haspati  was  born  to  Angiras  as  the  son 
so  desired  and  an  expert  in  the  Vedas  and  Vedangas.  After  the 
birth  of  the  son,  Angiras  installed  Sankara  there.  With  a  de¬ 
lighted  and  contented  mind,  he  went  to  the  northern  moun¬ 
tain.  .  . 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  the  Angirasa  Tlrtha  and  wor¬ 
ships  Siva,  shall  be  rid  of  all  sins  and  go  to  Rudraloka.  A  man 
without  a  son  shall  obtain  a  son;  a  man  without  wealth  shall 
attain  wealth.  Whatever  the  man  may  desire,  he  will  attain  it. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Koli  Tirtha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1  3  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Tirtha  named  Kotitirtha.  A  crore  of  sages  attained  great 

Siddhi  (spiritual  perfection)  there. 

A  person  should  take  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha, 
remain  pure  and  feed  Brahmanas.  Even  if  one  Brahmana  is 
fed  it  is  as  good  as  feeding  a  crore  of  Brahmanas. 


364 


Skanda  Parana 


A  devotee  should  take  his  holy  bath  there  in  thatTirtha  and 
adore  Pitrs  and  Devatas  (or  Pitrs  as  Devatas).  When  Mahadeva 
is  adored  the  devotee  shall  attain  the  benefit  of  a  Vajapeya 
(sacrifice) . 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FOURTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Ayonisambliava  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the 
extremely  splendid  Ayonija  Tirtha  of  great  merit,  that  is  de¬ 
structive  of  all  sins. 

The  man  should  take  bath  in  the  Ayonija  (Tirtha)  and  worship 
Paramesvara.  After  performing  the  adoration  of  Pitrs  and  Devas, 
he  is  liberated  from  all  sins. 

He  who  casts  off  his  life  there  in  the  Tirtha  as  per  pre¬ 
scribed  procedure,  O  great  king,  will  never  thereafter  see  the 
opening  of  vagina  (i.e.  will  not  be  reborn). 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Ahgdralia  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-11.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the 
great  Angaraka  Tirtha  that  accords  handsome  features  to  all 
people.  It  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  Narmada  and  is  well- 
known. 

It  is  said,  O  great  king,  that  penance  was  performed  by 
Angaraka  (Mars)  for  millions,  billions  and  trillions  of  years. 
Thereupon,  Mahadeva  was  pleased  and  was  filled  with  great 
compassion.  Appearing  before  him  in  person  directly,  the  Lord 
spoke  to  the  son  of  Earth  (i.e.  Mars): 

“O  blessed  one,  I  am  the  bestower  of  boon  even  if  it  be  very 


V.iii. 116.1-3 


365 


difficult  for  even  Devas.  O  dear  one,  tell  me.  What  has  been 
desired  by  you.  I  shall  grant  you  that  boon.” 


Angaraka  (Mars)  said: 

O  Lord  of  Devas,  O  great  Lord  of  all  the  worlds,  with  your 
favour,  I  shall  always  move  about  in  the  firmament  amidst  the 
Planets.  Let  this  boon  be  of  everlasting  benefit  to  me  as  long 
as  Mountain  Meru  exists  in  the  world,  as  long  as  the  Moon  and 
the  Sun  shine  and  as  long  as  the  rivers  and  oceans  flourish. 


After  granting  the  excellent  boon  saying  "Let  it  be  so”,  the 
Lord  of  Devas  went  away  through  the  sky  even  as  Suras  and 

Asuras  made  obeisance  to  him. 

The  Son  of  Earth  (Mars)  installed  Sankara  there  and  went 
to  heaven.  He  was  allotted  the  status  of  a  Planet  in  the  (stellar) 


world.  ,  ,  . 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  TTrtha,  worships 

Paramesvara,  and  performs  Homa,  with  anger  well  under  con¬ 
trol,  shall  obtain  the  benefit  of  a  horse-sacrifice. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  on  the  Angaraka  Caturtlu 
day  (Tuesday  coinciding  with  the  fourth  lunar  day)  and  wor¬ 
ships  Planet  Mars  duly,  shall  be  in  the  Angaraka  region  extend¬ 
ing  over  ten  Yojanas  and  be  endowed  with  a  comely  form.  The 
creature  that  dies  there  itself  willingly  or  unwillingly,  shall 
become  an  attendant  of  Rudra  and  rejoice  along  with  him. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Panda  Tirtha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3  Thereafter,  one  should  go  to  the  Pan<lu  Tirtha  that 
u  destructive  of  all  sin.  By  taking  his  holy  bath  there, n,  the 

m  He  who  takes'  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha.  becomes 
pure  and  then  gives  away  gold  by  way  ot  chan  y,  g 
such  as  that  of  foeticide  destroyed  undoubtedly. 


366 


Skanda  Parana 


By  offering  balls  of  rice  and  libations,  one  gets  the  benefit 
of  a  Vajapeya.  The  Pitrs  and  Pitamahas  become  highly  de¬ 
lighted  and,  therefore,  begin  to  dance. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Trilocana  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Thereafter,  O  eminent  king,  a  person  should  go  to 
the  meritorious  Trilocana  Tirtha.  It  is  there  that  the  Lord  of 
Devas  bowed  to  by  all  the  worlds,  is  stationed. 

He  who  bathes  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  devoutly  worships 
Sankara  shall  undoubtedly  go  to  the  abode  of  Rudra  after 
death. 

When  the  Ralpa  ends,  he  comes  back  here  after  sporting 
there  (in  Rudra  Loka).  He  shall  remain  unseparated  (from 
kinsmen)  and  will  be  respected  (by  all)  for  a  hundred  years. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTEEN 

¥ 

The  Greatness  of  Indr  a  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-9.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  a 
highly  resplendent  Tirtha  on  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada. 

It  is  well-known  as  Indra  Tirtha. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

I 

Why  is  the  Indra  Tirtha  on  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada?  ; 

I  wish  to  hear,  O  eminent  Brahmana,  with  full  details  from  the  f 

beginning,  through  the  middle  to  the  end. 

On  hearing  these  words  of  the  intelligent  Dharmaputra,  he 
narrated  the  old  legend  and  the  details  of  the  episodes  happening 
there. 


V.iii.ll8.10-21a 


367 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Though  Vrtra  was  an  enemy  to  Dharma  (righteousness)  that 
highly  powerful  one  was  defeated  (killed)  treacherously  by  the 
Consort  of  Sacl.  As  he  left  the  place  and  was  going  along  the 
path,  the  irrepressible  Sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter  followed  him 
tirelessly  without  resting.  He  went  all  over  the  three  worlds. 

Wherever  the  sinner  of  Brahmana-murder  went  in  his  grand 
vehicle  along  with  the  Suras,  whichever  quarter  he  passed  through, 
the  Sin  of  slaughter  did  not  leave  him  alone. 

Words  of  reproach  were  heard  by  him  such  as:  “Ways  of 
redemption  from  grave  sins  of  Brahmana-slaughter,  imbibing 
of  liquor,  theft  and  violation  of  the  chastity  of  the  preceptor  s 
wife  etc.  are  available  but  not  for  those  guilty  of  perfidy.”  ‘‘A 
man  or  woman  engaged  in  sinful  activities  gets  purified  by 
means  of  holy  bath  and  Dana  but  not  one  guilty  of  betrayal  of 
trust.”  The  king  of  Devas  heard  these  and  other  similar  words 
uttered  by  different  sorts  of  people  and  became  excessively  sad. 

10-2 la.  He  abandoned  the  kingdom  along  with  the  Suras 
and  took  to  the  practice  of  excellent  penance.  Sons,  wives, 
house,  kingdom,  different  kinds  of  riches  etc.,  are  the  fruits 
of  practice  of  Dharma  and  they  add  to  the  splendour  of  a  king. 
Even  as  people  watch  him,  a  man  must  taste  the  bitter  fruits 
of  sin  himself,  whereas  friends,  relatives  and  kinsmen  enjoy 
the  good  fruits  of  Dharma. 

Indra  eschewed  all  happiness  and  got  his  body  emaciated 
through  austerities.  The  king  of  Devas  visited  various  TTrthas 
and  shrines.  He  took  holy  baths  separately  in  various  Tirthas, 
in  Ganga,  Yamuna  and  Sarasvati,  in  all  the  oceans,  rivers,  natural 
lakes  and  ponds.  But  the  Sin  did  not  leave  him  despite  his 
association  with  Devas. 

He  went  on  bathing  in  the  Tirthas  on  either  side  °f  Narmada 
and  worshipped  Mahadeva.  Ultimately  he  reached  Skanda  Tlrtha 

Halting  there  he  observed  fasts  and  performed  the  vows  of 
Krcchra,  Candrayana  etc.  He  made  his  body  lean  and  emaci¬ 
ated  but  did  not  find  pleasure  anywhere. 

During  summers  he  performed  penance  m  the  midst :  of  five 
fires.  During  rainy  season  he  lay  down  on  bare  ground.  During 
winter  he  performed  severe  penance  wearing  wet  clothes.  Thus 
Indra  spent  ten  thousand  years,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  per¬ 
forming  penance  and  trying  to  know  the  Atman. 


S68 


Skanda  Purana 


When  the  eleventh  thousand-year-period  arrived,  O  excel¬ 
lent  king.  Lord  Paramesvara  became  pleased.Then  all  the  Suras 
with  Brahma  and  Visnu  as  their  leaders  and  also  the  Brahmana- 
sages,  Siddhas  etc  came  to  the  place  where  Satakratu  (Indra) 
was  present. 

21b-28.  On  seeing  that  all  the  Devas  and  the  sages  had 
arrived  the  highly  intelligent  preceptor  of  all  the  Devas  bowed 
down  to  them  and  said:  “It  is  already  known  to  all  of  you,  O 
Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesvara,  that  Vrtra  was  slain  formerly  at 
your  behest  and  concurrence.  Still  considering  him  as  a  Brahmana- 
slayer,  perpetrator  of  a  crime,  though  he  may  have  visited  all 
the  Tlrthas,  the  Brahmahatya  Sin  does  not  leave  him  alone. 

All  the  three  worlds  including  mobile  and  immobile  creatures, 
are  not  happy,  like  the  sky  bereft  of  the  Moon  and  the  Sun 
or  a  kingdom  without  a  leader  (i.e.  king). 

Hence,  O  ye  all  excellent  Suras,  I  have  something  to  submit 
to  you  now.  May  all  the  great  sages  declare  Sakra  free  from 
faults.” 

On  hearing  those  words  of  auspicious  nature  that  issued 
forth  from  the  mouth  of  Brhaspati,  Lord  Brahma,  the  grand¬ 
father  of  the  worlds,  said,  “This  Sin  arising  from  the  slaughter 
of  a  Brahmana  is  extremely  terrible.  I  am  now  dividing  it  into 
four  parts  and  casting  it  off  to  the  Devas  and  the  Bhutas 
(elements).”1 

After  saying  this,  that  highly  intelligent  one  hurled  (the  first 
part  of)  the  Sin  over  the  water. 

29-41.  Therefore,  waters  have  to  be  drunk  by  sensible  per¬ 
sons  after  plunging  into  them  and  not  otherwise. 

The  Lotus-born  Lord  hurled  the  second  part  over  the  earth. 
Therefore,  for  all  times  the  earth  became  unfit  to  be  eaten. 
The  next  day,  O  Yudhisthira,  the  Lord  deposited  the  next  part 
within  women  (on  the  second  day  of  their  menstruation  pe¬ 
riod)  and  said,  “Women  in  their  monthly  course  are  not  to  be 
associated  with  by  sensible  persons  during  the  four  days  on 
account  of  the  enormity  of  the  sin.”  Then  the  Lord  deposited 
the  fourth  part  in  a  Brahmana  who  serves  Sudras  through 
cultivation,  cattle  breeding  and  business  practice. 


1.  Compare  Mbh,  Udyoga,  13.19 


V.iii.l  19.1-13 


369 


Thereafter,  all  the  Devas  and  the  great  sages  honoured  Devendra 
who  was  stationed  in  the  waters  of  Narmada.  They  honoured 
him  through  pleasing  words  (of  consolation).  Then  Mahesvara 
who  was  pleased  gave  him  the  opportunity  of  choosing  a  boon 
as  he  pleased:  O  Lord  of  Devas,  I  shall  grant  you  a  boon. 
Choose  whatever  you  desire.” 

Indra  said: 

O  Lord  of  Devas,  if  you  are  pleased,  if  a  boon  has  to  be 
granted  to  me,  then  be  pleased  to  be  present  here  always.  I 
shall  install  you  here. 

Saying  Let  it  be  so”  to  him  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesvara 
went  away  entering  through  the  sky  and  they  were  eulogized 
by  the  great  sages. 

After  all  the  Lords  of  Devas  had  gone,  Satakratu,  the  Lord 
of  Devas,  installed  Mahadeva  and  went  to  heaven. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  the  Indratlrtha  and  propiti¬ 
ates  Pitrs  and  Devatas  will  be  liberated  from  all  sins  even  if 
they  are  major  ones.  He  who  takes  his  holy  ablution  in  the 
Indratlrtha  and  adores  Paramesvara,  enjoys  the  full  benefit  of 
Asvamedha  Yajna. 

Thus  the  entire  excellent  greatness  of  the  Tirtha  has  been 
recounted  to  you.  On  merely  hearing  it,  men  are  rid  of  all  sins. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Kalhodi  Tirtha 
Sn  Markandeya  said: 

1-13.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Kalhodi  Tirtha  which  is  destructive  of  all  sins.  It  is  situated 
on  the  northern  bank  of  Reva. 

Formerly  it  was  lifted  up  by  sages  through  the  power  of  their 
penance  and  established  in  the  great  waters  of  Narmada  for 
the  sake  of  the  welfare  of  all  living  beings. 

Listen  to  the  benefit  that  one  attains  by  making  a  gift  of  a 


370 


Skanda  Parana 


Kapila  (tawny-coloured)  cow,  after  taking  the  holy  ablution  in 
the  Kapila  Tlrtha  and  listening  to  the  divine  narrative  from  a 
Brahmana. 

Of  all  the  Danas,  Kapiladana  is  the  most  excellent  one.  Even 
Brahma  had  recourse  to  it  formerly  in  the  assembly  of  sages 
and  Devas. 

Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  of  one  who  eschews  anger, 
observes  fast  and  makes  the  gift  of  a  splendid  Kapila  cow  im¬ 
mediately  after  it  has  calved. 

There  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  it  is  as  good  as,  O  mighty- 
armed  one,  the  gift  of  the  entire  earth  along  with  the  caves 
and  oceans,  mountains,  forests  and  parks. 

O  king,  sins  verbal,  mental  and  physical,  committed  for¬ 
merly  in  the  course  of  seven  births,  perish  by  the  gift  of  a 
Kapila. 

Gifts  of  plots  of  land,  cash,  foodgrains,  elephants,  horses, 
gold  etc.  do  not  deserve  even  a  sixteenth  fraction  of  Kapiladana. 

A  man  who  lakes  his  holy  bath  there  and  makes  the  gift  of 
a  Kapila  cow,  goes  to  Visnu’s  city  on  death  after  being  sung 
about  by  groups  of  celestial  damsels. 

He  sports  about  for  a  long  time  in  Svarga,  for  as  many 
thousand  years  as  there  are  hairs  on  the  body  of  that  cow  as 
well  as  that  of  the  calf. 

After  descending  down  in  due  course,  he  is  born  as  a  human 
being  in  a  large  family  full  of  wealth  and  foodgrain. 

He  will  be  well-versed  in  the  Vedic  lore,  an  expert  in  all  the 
scriptures,  free  from  ailments  and  grief  etc.  He  lives  for  a 
hundred  years. 

Thus  the  excellent  KalhodI  Tlrtha  has  been  fully  described, 
by  performing  (the  pilgrimage  to)  which  one  is  liberated  from 
all  sins. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTY 
The  Greatness  of  Kaihbukesvara  Tlrtha 
Sn  Markandeya  said: 

1-9.  Henceforth  I  shall  recount  the  excellent  Kambukesvara 
Tlrtha. 


V.iii. 120.10-18 


371 


Daitya  Hiranyakasipu  who  was  arrogant  clue  to  his  might, 
was  well-known  in  all  the  three  worlds  as  one  who  could  not 
be  killed  by  anyone.  He  had  a  son  of  great  refulgence  named 
Prahlada.  With  the  favour  of  Visnu  and  due  to  his  own  devout 
nature,  he  was  established  in  the  kingdom  of  Hiranyakasipu. 

Virocana  was  his  son  and  Bali  was  Virocana’s  son.  Bana  was 
Bali’s  son  and  Bana’s  son  was  Sambara.  In  the  family  of  Sarhbara 
was  born  a  great  Asura  Kambu  by  name.  He  was  aware  of  the 
terror  originating  from  Visnu.  He  thought  that  there  was  none 
else  who  could  cause  the  destruction  of  Danavas. 

Kambu  of  great  intellect,  left  his  wife,  sons,  friends,  relatives 
and  kinsmen  and  performed  penance,  observing  the  vow  of 
silence.  He  took  up  a  rosary  of  beads  in  his  hand.  He  had  all 
the  paraphernalia  of  a  sage  such  as  a  staff,  girdle  and  tonsured 
head.  He  wore  barks  of  trees  or  antelope-skin  and  his  diet  was 
restricted  to  greens  and  barley  gruel.  Everyday  he  had  his  regular 
bath  in  the  waters  of  Narmada.  With  great  fortitude,  he  worshipped 
Mahadcva  for  one  hundred  million  years. 

Then  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  became  pleased  with 
him  and  said  to  the  Danava  in  a  majestic  voice  resembling 
thunder: 

10-18.  “O  Kambu,  O  blessed  one,  1  am  pleased  with  you. 
Silence  is  the  greatest  of  all  vows.  It  is  the  means  of  achieving 
everything.  It  is  difficult  for  both  Devas  and  Danavas  to  observe 
but  you  observed  it.  Welfare  unto  you.  Choose  a  boon,  whatever 
may  appeal  to  your  mind.” 

Kambu  said: 

If  you  are  pleased,  O  Lord  of  Devas,  if  a  boon  has  to  be 
granted  to  me,  let  me  be  indestructible  and  everlasting.  May 
I  be  free  to  move  about  as  I  please.  I  shall  never  have  to  flee 
from  battles  of  Danavas  and  Devas.  There  shall  be  no  other 
source  of  fear  than  Lord  Gadadhara. 

O  Sankara,  grant  this  boon  unto  me,  whereby  I  will  not  be 
overwhelmed  by  him  in  battle. 

Isvara  said: 

If  you  are  in  my  vicinity,  O  Danava,  there  is  no  fear  from 
Visnu.  Stay  here  free  from  fever  (anxiety).  Neither  I  nor  all 


372 


Skanda  Parana 


the  Suras  and  Asuras  can  be  a  match  in  battle  unto  that  over- 
lord  of  Devas,  the  wielder  of  conch  and  discus,  who  holds  the 
Vedas  in  his  womb. 

In  my  opinion  there  is  no  doubt  that  none  who  cherishes 
enmity  against  Hari,  the  Lord  of  Lokaloka,  can  remain  happy 
even  for  a  period  of  a  single  wink  of  the  eye.  Hence  you  should 
be  extremely  devout  and  engaged  in  the  welfare  of  all  living 
beings.  Then  you  will  live  for  a  long  time. 

After  saying  this  the  Lord  vanished. 

1 9-25.  When  the  Deva  vanished,  the  highly  intelligent  Danava 
installed  Siva,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  the  quiescent  one  free  from 
ailment,  at  that  TIrtha. 

After  installing  Mahadeva  at  that  TIrtha  he  went  to  the  heavenly 
world.  Ever  since  then,  O  son  of  KuntI,  that  became  well- 
known  as  Kambu  TIrtha.  It  is  reputed  in  all  the  worlds  as  the 
destroyer  of  great  sins.  A  man  should  take  his  holy  bath  in 
Kambu  TIrtha,  duly  worship  Bhaskara  and  eulogize  him  with 
Rk,  Yajus  and  Sama  Mantras,  O  excellent  king.  His  merit  has 
been  described  by  Brahmanas  who  have  mastered  the  Vedas. 
Listen  to  it  fully,  O  king,  even  as  I  recount  it. 

One  who  knows  only  the  Gayatrl  Mantra  attains  the  benefit 
obtained  when  Rk,  Yajus  and  Sama  Mantras  are  recited  along 
with  their  ancillaries  and  sub-divisions. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  and  propitiates  Pitrs  and 
Devatas  and  adores  Lord  Tsana,  attains  the  benefit  of  Agnistoma. 

One  who  forsakes  the  body  there  in  the  TIrtha  with  or  without 
any  desire  goes  to  Rudraloka  immediately. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTYONE 
The  Greatness  of  Soma  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  Candrahasa 
Tirtha  where  Somaraja  (Moon-god),  the  excellent  one  among 
Suras,  attained  the  greatest  Siddhi. 


V.iii.121.6-16 


373 


Yudhisthira  said: 

How  did  Somanatha,  the  Lord  of  the  universe,  attain  the 
greatest  Siddhi?  O  sinless  one,  I  wish  to  hear  about  it  entirely. 
Do  tell  me. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

O  descendant  of  Bharata,  formerly  he  (Moon-god)  was  cursed 
by  Daksa,  the  leading  sage:  “You  will  become  a  patient  of 
consumptive  disease  because  you  did  not  attend  to  your  (other) 
wives.” 

O  king,  listen  to  what  happens  to  those  men  who  do  not 
attend  to  the  wives  duly  wedded. 

A  son  is  born  by  attending  to  a  woman  during  the  monthly 
period  (i.e.  after  the  menstruation  on  the  Fifth  day).  It  is  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  Sruti  that  heavenly  pleasures  and  salvation  are 
attained  through  the  son. 

6-16.  One  not  performing  what  is  befitting  to  those  occa¬ 
sions  will  fall  into  the  Raurava  hell.  The  sinner  drinks  the 
blood  of  that  woman  for  the  duration  of  that  period  of  (un¬ 
fulfilled)  desires. 

After  coming  down  (to  earth)  on  completion  of  the  period 
of  stay  in  the  hell,  the  wicked  sinner  is  born  unlucky  in  every 
birth  he  may  take. 

Ordinarily  sexual  appetite  is  very  strong  in  women.  Espe¬ 
cially  during  menses,  they  are  afflicted  all  the  more  by  the 
arrows  of  Kama.  Shunned  or  neglected  by  their  husbands,  women 
naturally  think  about  paramours.  A  son  born  of  such  a  woman, 
makes  the  excellent  family  roam  about. 

The  moment  such  a  son  is  born,  Pitrs,  Pitamahas  and  other 
ancestors  residing  in  heaven  fall  down.  Hence  the  son  is  called 
Kulata. 

As  a  result  of  his  own  Karma,  Moon-god  became  a  patient 
of  consumptive  disease.  He  had  to  abandon  the  world  of  leading 
Suras  and  come  down  to  the  world  of  mortals.  He  wandered 
over  many  TIrthas  and  holy  shrines  and  ultimately  leached 
Narmada  that  is  destructive  of  all  sins. 

He  observed  fasts  and  holy  Vratas  and  restraints.  He  per¬ 
formed  Dana  rites.  Thus  his  pious  activities  continued  for  twelve 
years.  Thereby  he  became  rid  of  sins. 


374 


Skanda  Purana 


After  bathing  Mahadeva,  the  destroyer  of  all  sins,  he  re¬ 
gained  his  full  refulgence  and  went  back  to  the  excellent  world. 

He  who  installs  the  Lord  and  worships  him  for  many  yeais, 
is  himself  honoured  in  Rudraloka  for  as  many  thousand  years 
as  the  number  of  years  he  has  worshipped. 

Hence  men  install  gods  as  per  proper  procedure  on  the 
earth.  Thereby  men  enjoy  for  a  period  which  is  inexhaustible 
and  unending. 

17-26.  A  man  who  bathes  in  Somatlrtha  and  adores  Lord 
Isvara,  shines  in  this  world  and  becomes  pleasing  in  looks  like 
Soma. 

He  who  goes  to  Candrahasa  TIrtha  during  solar  and  lunar 
eclipses  and  devoutly  takes  his  holy  bath  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

O  excellent  king,  holy  ablution  taken,  Dana  performed,  verily 
all  auspicious  or  inauspicious  acts  done  in  Candrahasa  Tirtha, 
become  everlasting  in  their  effect. 

Men  who  take  their  holy  bath  in  Candrahasa  Tirtha  and  see 
the  eclipse  are  really  blessed.  They  are  noble-souled.  Their 
birth  and  life  are  excellent. 

Verbal,  menial  and  physical  sins  committed  earlier  perish, 
O  great  king,  merely  because  a  holy  bath  is  performed  in  that 
Tirtha. 

Many  are  entirely  deluded  ones  who  do  not  know  it,  like  the 
Lord  in  the  form  of  greatest  bliss  (Atman)  abiding  in  the  body 
itself. 

Undoubtedly  one  attains  in  Candrahasa  that  entire  benefit 
which  people  get  after  going  to  Somatlrtha  in  the  western  sea 
(in  Saurastra).  By  taking  the  holy  bath  in  Candrahasa  during 
Sarikranti,  Vyatlpata,  Ayana  and  Visuva  period,  one  is  rid  of  all 
sins. 

Those  who  do  not  know  Candrahasa  situated  on  Reva,  are 
deluded  and  wicked  in  action.  Their  life  is  purposeless. 

A  Brahmana  who  takes  up  the  life  of  a  recluse  at  Candrahasa 
Tirtha  undoubtedly  attains  Somaloka  from  which  he  never 
returns. 


V.iii.122.1-13 


375 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTYTWO 
The  Greatness  of  Kohana  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-2.  Thereafter,  O  king,  one  should  go  to  the  meritorious 
Tirtha  well-known  as  Kohanasva.  It  is  destructive  of  all  sins  and 
even  of  death. 

Formerly  a  certain  Brahmana  who  had  mastered  the  Vedas 
and  Vedangas  lived  there  along  with  his  wife,  sons,  friends,  and 
kinsmen.  He  was  always  engaged  in  performing  his  duties. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

3-13.  Tell  me  entirely  the  duties  of  a  Brahmana,  the  origin 
of  Ksatriya,  Vaisya  and  Sudra. 

I  wish  to  know  the  excellent  procedure  regarding  Dharma, 
Artha,  Kama  and  Moksa  entirely.  It  is  my  opinion  that  no  one 
else  knows  it. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Brahma,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  is  glorified  as  the  primary  source 
of  origin  of  all  living  beings.  He  is  the  preceptor  of  the  uni¬ 
verse  consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile  beings. 

Brahmanas  were  born  from  the  face  (mouth).  Ksatriyas  were 
born  from  the  arms,  Vaisyas  from  the  region  of  thighs  and 
Sudras  from  the  feet.' 

The  Varnas  other  than  they  are  separate  and  they  perfoim 
their  respective  duties  separately.  They  are  born  in  the  usual 
order  or  in  the  opposite  order  ( vilomatah ).  - 

I  shall  expound  their  special  duties  as  enjoined  by  the  Sruti 
and  Smrti.  If  they  are  perfectly  performed,  all  of  them  attain 
the  greatest  goal. 

This  goal  is  attained  by  devout  Brahmanas,  O  king,  even 
without  meditation,  because  they  teach  one  or  more  Vedas 

^After  the  life  as  a  student,  a  Brahmana  should  marry  a  girl 
of  noble  family,  marked  by  all  the  usual  auspicious  character- 


1.  An  echo  of  Purusa  Sukia ,  RV  X.  90 


376 


Skanda  Purana 


istics  and  endowed  with  beauty,  after  being  duly  permitted  by 
the  preceptor. 

Then  he  should  gradually  worship  the  fire  at  the  time  of 
marriage  whether  it  is  Srauta  or  Smarta.  He  should  be  devoid 
of  hypocrisy  and  covetousness  and  earn  wealth  through  Pratigraha 
(gifts). 

He  should  duly  perform  the  five  Yajnas.  After  fulfilling  the 
duties  of  the  second  Asrama  (i.e.  householdership)  he  should 
go  to  the  forest. 

He  should  entrust  his  wife  to  his  sons  and  severe  all  connec¬ 
tions  and  associations.  He  thereby  attains  all  desired  worlds. 
He  is  not  reborn  here  again. 

14-23.  A  Ksatriya  well-established  in  the  kingdom  should 
protect  the  kingdom  always  fixing  his  mind  on  Dharma.  He 
shall  obtain  the  greatest  goal. 

There  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  the  Dharma  of  a  Vaisya  is 
the  ardent  pursuit  of  cultivation  and  breeding  of  cattle.  He 
too,  well-endowed  with  truthfulness,  purity  and  mental  quies¬ 
cence  goes  to  the  excellent  Svarga. 

A  separate  duty  has  not  been  assigned  by  Paramesthin  to  the 
Sudra.  He  need  not  have  any  Mantra,  consecration  or  pursuit 
of  lores.  He  need  not  have  any  conventional  study  of  the  sci¬ 
ence  of  words  (i.e.  Grammar)  and  special  worship  of  deities. 
He  has  to  be,  day  and  night,  in  the  same  state  as  at  birth. 

Such  is  the  Dharma  of  all  the  Varnas  as  created  by  the  Self- 
born  Lord  formerly.  They  are  richly  endowed  with  the  conse- 
cratory  rites  with  Mantras.  The  three  Varnas  are  called  Dvijali 
(twice-borns). 

If  anyone  lives  a  wanton  life  disregarding  their  opinions  and 
comments,  he  is  reborn  as  a  dog  on  death.  Pie  has  no  upward 
progress. 

Their  missions  and  errands  (should  not  be  ignored  by  him). 
Remembering  and  following  their  opinions  and  views,  he  be¬ 
comes  well-reputed,  one  abiding  by  his  specific  duty,  and  one 
deserving  Svarga. 

Now,  the  Brahmana  referred  to  above,  possessing  all  the 
good  qualities  lived  there,  O  descendant  of  Bharata.  He  heard 
words  like  “ Hanasva  (kill),  Hanasva." 

Thereat  he  looked  up  and  down  and  all  round.  Trembling 
with  fright,  he  faltered  at  every  step. 


V.iii.  122.24-38 


377 


He  was  face  to  face  with  a  man  riding  on  a  buffalo  and 
equipped  with  fetters,  weapons  and  terrible  nooses  in  hands. 

24-31.  He  had  the  lustre  of  a  heap  of  black  collyrium.  He 
was  clad  in  black  garments.  Endowed  with  all  characteristic 
marks,  he  had  red  eyes  and  long  arms. 

On  noticing  him  coming  along,  the  Brahmana  turned  his 
attention  inwards  and  repeated  words  fit  to  be  muttered  such 
as  the  great  Satarudriya  hymn. 

Thereupon  Lord  Yama,  the  great  controller  of  all,  said:  “O 
Brahmana,  I  am  Yama,  the  controller  of  all  creatures.  Withold, 
O  blessed  one,  the  Rudrajdpya  (Japa  of  Rudra)  which  is  impreg¬ 
nable,  so  that  I  can  painlessly  bind  you  with  Kalapasa.” 

On  hearing  those  ruthless  words  that  issued  forth  from  the 
mouth  of  Yama,  the  Brahmana  became  extremely  terrified  and 
fled. 

All  the  servants  pursued  his  path  along  with  Yama  and  said, 
“Stop,  stop”  to  the  Brahmana.  But  he  continued  to  run. 

By  this  hurried  flight,  he  became  exhausted  and  cried:  “Alas! 
I  have  been  assailed  by  evil-minded  ones.  Save  me,  save  me,  O 
Mahadeva  who  consider  those  who  seek  your  refuge  as  your 
favourites.” 

After  saying  this,  he  fell  down  on  the  ground  and  closely 
embraced  the  Linga,  O  descendant  of  Bharata.  Losing  his  con¬ 
sciousness,  the  eminent  Brahmana  resorted  to  the  Lord  of  Suras. 

32-38.  On  seeing  him  fallen  on  the  ground,  Mahesvara, 
the  Lord  of  Devas,  made  a  Humkdra  (‘Hum’sound)  and  said, 
“Who  dares  to  kill  you?  Do  not  be  afraid.” 

At  that  Humkara,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  all  the  servants 
fled  away  along  with  Yama  like  clouds  blown  away  by  wind. 

Ever  since  then,  that  TTrtha  became  well-known  as  Kohanasva. 
It  is  meritorious  and  destructive  of  all  sins.  It  is  the  most  ex¬ 
cellent  one  of  all  the  Tlrthas. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  plunge  there  in  that  TIrtha  and  wor¬ 
ships  Paramesvara,  attains  the  excellent  benefit  of  Agnistoma 
Yajna. 

He  who  sheds  his  life  there  in  that  TIrtha,  O  great  king,  does 
not  see  Lord  Yama.  So  said  Sankara. 

O  excellent  king,  the  devotee  may  immolate  himself  by  en¬ 
tering  fire  or  drowning  in  water.  Thereby  he  gains  a  residence 
in  Agniloka  for  a  period  of  three  hundred  Kalpas  or  he  may 


378 


Skanda  Parana 


reside  in  Varunaloka  for  as  much  time  as  he  pleases  and  return 
to  this  world  after  which  he  is  destined  to  become  Lord  of 
enormous  wealth. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTYTHREE 
The  Greatness  of  Karmadesvara  Tirlha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  KarmadT  (sic)  Tirtha  where  Vighnesa,  the  mighty  Lord  of 
Ganas,  stands. 

If  a  man  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  on  the  fourth 
lunar  day  and  observes  fast,  he  will  never  have  any  obstacle  in 
the  course  of  seven  births,  O  descendant  of  Bharata. 

Undoubtedly  whatever  is  offered  as  gift  at  that  Tirtha  shall 
have  everlasting  benefit. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTYFOUR 
The  Greatness  of  Narmadesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-2.  Thereafter,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent  Narmadesvara, 
O  king.  By  taking  the  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha,  a  man  is 
rid  of  all  sins. 

If  one  meets  death  by  entering  fire,  or  drowning  in  water 
or  due  to  ritualistic  starvation,  his  departure  (from  this  world) 
shall  be  one  from  which  one  has  never  to  return  (to  Samsara), 
as  Sankara  told  me. 


V.iii.125.1-18 


379 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTYFIVE 


The  Greatness  of  Ravi  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should, go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Ravittrtha  where  the  Thousand-rayed  Lord  performed  a 
penance  and  went  to  heaven. 


Yudhisthira  said: 

How  (is  it  that)  Lord  Bhaskara,  Ravi  (Sun-god),  the  sustainer 
of  the  universe,  who  is  bowed  to  by  all  the  Devas,  performed 
penance?  Is  the  Lord  of  Devas  a  sage?  He  is  worthy  of  being 
propitiated  by  all  living  beings.  He  is  adored  by  all  the  Devas. 
He  is  seen  directly  in  the  world.  He  is  the  cause  of  creation 
and  annihilation  (of  the  world).  How  did  he  attain  the  name 
Aditya?  How  is  he  called  Bhaskara?  O  sinless  one,  describe  all 
this  succinctly. 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 


O  great  king,  what  you  have  asked  is  a  great  and  relevant 
question.  After  making  obeisance  to  the  Self-born  Lord,  I  shall 
describe  everything. 

Everything  in  the  universe  was  once  enveloped  in  darkness. 
It  was  all  unknown  and  featureless.  It  was  incomprehensible, 
beyond  knowledge;  everything  was  as  it  were  in  deep  sleep  all 


Thereafter  a  divine  refulgence  (appeared)  like  a  highly  heated, 
excellent  ball  (of  iron).  Like  a  meteor  from  the  sky,  it  came 
down  with  face  directed  downwards  for  the  creation  (of  the 

W°wthin  that  refulgence,  a  Purusa  (Person)  was  born  well- 
adorned  with  everything.  He  was  without  legs  and  hands.  He 
is  Lord  Siva  by  whom  all  these  visible  objects  are  created  and 

P  9-18  After  the  appearance  of  that  Being  in  the  form  of 
refulgence  Prajapati  who  became  Kala  (time)  appeared  in  due 
course.  He  then  became  fire  for  (the  sake  of)  all  living  beings. 


380 


Skanda  Puranci 


mortals,  Asuras  and  Raksasas.  He  is  the  overlord  of  all  the 
Devas.  Hence  he  is  called  Adilya, 

Obeisance  to  him  should  be  paid  at  the  outset  and  to  the 
others  only  after  him.  So  it  is  done  by  all  the  deities  and  all 
the  great  sages. 

In  the  solar  disc  three  Sandhyas  (junctions  of  time)  and 
three  Devas  are  present.  So  when  the  Sun  is  bowed  to,  all  the 
Devas  are  also  (automatically)  bowed  to. 

O  king,  had  there  been  no  Sun-god,  neither  day,  nor  night, 
neither  the  southern  transit  lasting  for  six  months  nor  the 
northern  transit  would  appear. 

Without  Surya  (Sun-god)  there  is  neither  Snana  (holy  bath) 
nor  Dana,  neither  Japa  nor  Homa,  neither  self-study  of  the 
Vedas  nor  adoration  of  the  deities.  Hence  Ravi  is  the  most 
worthy  of  adoration. 

Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesvara  are  to  be  known  through  words 
of  the  Sruti  (Vedas)  chiefly.  But  Lord  Sun  is  directly  visible.  He 
is  the  sanctifier  of  all  the  worlds. 

He  is  the  source  of  origin;  the  cause  of  annihilation  and 
dissolution,  the  storehouse  and  the  immutable  seed.  The  Lord 
of  the  universe,  the  sole  cause  is  none  other  than  Bhaskara. 
After  thus  making  the  universe  consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile 
beings  issue  out  of  himself,  he  established  the  path  of  piety  for 
the  sake  of  the  welfare  of  the  worlds. 

He  resorted  to  the  banks  of  Narmada  and  installed  his  own 
physical  form,  the  thousand-rayed  storehouse  of  refulgence. 
He  then  went  up  to  the  immutable  sky. 

19-27.  If  a  devotee  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha 
and  adores  the  Thousand-rayed  Lord,  the  great  Lord,  in  accordance 
with  the  injunctions  regarding  the  Mantras  in  the  forms  of  the 
names  (of  deities)  it  is  as  good  as  though  penance  has  been 
performed  by  him,  Homa  has  been  carried  out,  nay  everything 
has  been  duly  performed.  By  doing  all  these  things  perfectly, 
the  greatest  position  is  attained  by  him. 

Those  who  take  their  holy  bath  in  the  waters  of  Narmada 
and  visit  Lord  Bhaskara  are  blessed.  They  are  noble-souled 
ones.  Their  life  is  well  lived. 

The  devotees  should  constantly  repeat  the  Mantra  thrice,  O 
great  king  and  circumambulate  the  Lord  with  single-pointed 
devotion.  Thereby  they  become  purified.  Their  sins  are  dispelled 


V.iii.l  25.28-36 


381 


by  that  Mantra.  Listen  with  concentration  of  mind  to  the  merit 
that  shall  accrue  to  them. 

There  is  no  doubt  about  it  that  the  entire  earth  consisting 
of  mountains,  parks  and  forests  along  with  oceans  and  caves, 
has  been  circumambulated  by  him. 

This  entire  group  of  the  three  worlds  consisting  of  mobile 
and  immobile  beings  has  Mantras  at  its  root.  Hence,  bereft  of 
Mantras,  no  undertaking  in  the  world  succeeds. 

Just  as  a  wooden  image  of  an  elephant  or  a  leathern  deer 
cannot  be  effective  in  action,  so  also  a  pious  rite  without 
Mantras  (is  futile). 

Just  as  an  oblation  offered  on  ashes  or  offering  of  a  gift 
without  use  of  water  is  futile,  so  also  (is)  Dana  bereft  of  Man¬ 


tras. 

28-36.  In  regard  to  idols  made  of  wood,  stone  or  a  lump 
of  clay,  particularly  in  the  case  of  earthen  ones,  people  per¬ 
form  the  adoration  along  with  relevant  Mantra.  They  do  not 
make  it  without  uttering  Mantra. 

By  performing  Namaskara  (obeisance)  once  with  due  utter¬ 
ance  of  Mantras,  one  derives  the  benefit  that  is  usually  ob¬ 
tained  by  ordinary  Namaskaras  (prostrations)  done  continu¬ 
ously  for  twelve  years  with  devotion. 

If  a  devotee  takes  his  holy  bath  in  the  waters  of  Narmada 
and  worships  Ravi  during  Sankranti,  Vyatlpata,  Ayana  and  Visuva, 
his  sins  committed  knowingly  or  unknowingly,  in  course  of 
twelve  years,  get  dissolved  immediately  like  husk  burned  by 

fir  A  devotee  of  controlled  sense-organs,  observing  fast,  should 
take  his  holy  bath  during  solar  and  lunar  eclipses.  By  seeing 
the  face  of  the  deity,  Aditya,  he  is  liberated  froin  all  sins. 

On  the  seventh  lunar  day  in  the  month  of  Magha,  O  excel¬ 
lent  king,  one  should  control  anger  and  stay  m  the  shrine  of 
Surya  observing  fast.  In  the  morning  he  should  take  his  holy 
bath  in  accordance  with  the  injunction,  and  offer  Arghya  to  the 
Sun  duly  reciting  the  Mantras.  He  shall  obtain  excellent  ment. 

After  offering  the  libations  to  the  Pitts,  Devas  and  human 
beings,  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord  of  Devas,  the  devotee  should 
perform  the  worship  by  means  of  sweet  scents,  flowers  mcense 
lights  and  auspicious  Naivedyas.  After  worsh.pp.ng,  he  should 
recite  the  Mantra. 


382 


Skanda  Parana 


37-44.  He  shall  repeat  the  twelve  names  (of  the  Sun-god) 
viz.  Visnu,  Sakra,  Yama,  Dhatr,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Vivasvan,  Savitr, 
Pusan,  Candarhsu  and  Bharga  (Ravi,  the  12th  name  also)  and 
circumambulate. 

Listen  attentively  to  know  the  benefit  that  he  attains,  O  son 
of  Kuntl.  He  will  never  be  poor,  sick,  dumb,  deaf  and  sluggish 
for  seven  births.  So  said  Sankara. 

He  who  wishes  for  excellent  merit  should  devoutly  propitiate 
Ravi  after  completely  studying  and  then  uttering  the  Mantra  in 
accordance  with  the  injunctions.  The  wise  devotee  then  attains 
the  merit. 

He  who  professes  to  be  a  devotee  without  uttering  the  Man¬ 
tra,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  deceives  himself  like  brutes,  worms 
and  insects. 

Whoever  abandons  the  excellent  physical  body  there  in  the 
Tlrtha,  shall  go  to  heaven  being  adored  by  the  Devas  and  great 
sages. 

There  he  lives  as  he  pleases  for  a  long  time.  Then  he  shall 
become  a  king  here  in  this  world  richly  endowed  with  sons  and 
grandsons,  elephants,  horses  and  chariots  etc.  He  is  born  in  a 
large  family  with  hundreds  of  men  and  maid  servants. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTYSIX 
The  Greatness  of  Ayoniprabhava  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  great 
Tlrtha  called  Ayonija.  A  man,  merely  by  a  holy  plunge  therein, 
ceases  to  face  the  danger  of  being  in  a  womb. 

A  man  should  take  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tlrtha  and 
worship  Lord  Isvara,  uttering  this  Mantra:  “O  great  Lord 
Paramesvara,  just  as  you  are  one  not  born  of  a  womb,  so  also 
release  me  from  the  inevitable  (possible)  calamity  of  being  in 
a  womb.  He  who  worships  with  scented  flowers,  incense  etc. 
shall  be  rid  of  all  sins. 

He  who  devoutly  covers  the  Linga  with  rice  mixed  with  curds 


V.iii.126.8-16 


383 


shall  reside  in  the  world  of  the  Lord  of  Devas,  in  proportion 
to  the  number  of  grains  of  (that)  boiled  rice  (covering  the 
Linga) . 

The  devotee  should  bathe  Mahadeva  with  scented  water  in 
the  Ayonija  TIrtha.  He  may  bathe  with  honey,  milk  or  curds 
also.  He  shall  attain  great  glory. 

On  the  eighth  day  in  the  bright  half  or  fourteenth  day  in 
the  dark  half  he  should  worship  Mahadeva  and  delight  him 
with  vocal  and  instrumental  music.  He  shall  reside  in  the  world 

of  Siva.  - 

Those  who  celebrate  festivals  reside  in  the  world  of  Siva  until 


the  annihilation  of  all  living  beings. 

8-16.  Uttering  this  Mantra  always  and  submitting  his  plaint, 
the  devotee  should  circumambulate  the  Lord  with  great  devo¬ 
tion:  “O  great  Lord  Paramesvara,  just  as  you  are  one  not  born 
from  a  womb,  so  also  release  me,  O  Sarva,  from  all  possible 

calamities  (befalling  one  lying)  in  a  womb.” 

Traditionally  men  have  stated  the  following  good  lesults  re 
ceived  from  the  Lord  of  Devas.  Listen  with  mental  concentra¬ 
tor  what  avail  are  the  many  Mantras  that  merely  make  his 
throat  more  and  more  parched?  If  the  Mantra  om  namah  szvaya 
is  uttered  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Lord,  it  is  as  good  as  he  has 
studied  everything,  heard  everything  and 

The  ^petition  of  the  by  uttering 

practised  and  stabilised.  1  he  oeneiu  ui«.  Rrahmana 

The  six-syllabled  Mantra  cannot  be  attained  by  a  Brahma. 

fTthneyd°evoteeglesr  hutath  there  in  the  TTrtha  and  won 
ahipVa  SitySn,  he  wiU  reap  the  bruit  of  feeding  ntore  than 

ten  thousand  Brahmanas.  one 

Meru;  the  water  on  a  par  with 


1.  For  the  sake  oflontinuity  in  narration  verse  10  is 
9  follows  verse  10. 


laken  after  8  and  verse 


384 


Skanda  Parana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTYSEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Agni  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-4.  Thereafter,  O  eminent  king,  a  person  should  go  to 
the  excellent  Agni  Tirtha.  By  taking  the  holy  bath  there  at  the 
beginning  of  a  fortnight,  one  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

Listen,  O  best  one  among  men,  to  the  benefit  proclaimed 
as  accruing  unto  a  man  who  gifts  away  a  virgin  well-adorned 
at  that  Tirtha. 

By  gifting  her  adorned  in  accordance  with  his  capacity,  the 
man  obtains  the  benefit  of  Agnistoma  and  Atiratra  multiplied 
by  hundred  times  a  hundred. 

He  attains  the  greatest  goal  in  the  world  of  Siva  for  as  many 
years  as  there  are  hairs  on  the  bodies  of  her  sons,  grandsons 
and  great-grandsons. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTYEIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Bhrkutesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thereafter,  O  eminent  king,  one  should  go  to  the 
excellent  Bhrkutesvara  Tirtha  where  the  highly  honoured  Bhrgu 

though  highly  irascible,  became  a  Siddha  (enlightened  spiritu¬ 
ally). 

O  sinless  one,  formerly  an  elaborate  penance  was  performed 
by  him  for  more  than  a  hundred  years  for  getting  a  son.  The 
most  excellent  one  among  those  blessed  with  sons  chose  (re¬ 
quested  for)  a  son  as  the  boon. 

O  highly  honoured  one,  the  boon  was  granted  by  the  Lord 
who  subdued  Andhaka.  He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in 
that  Tirtha  and  worships  Paramesvara  shall  obtain  eight  times 
the  benefit  of  Agnistoma  Yajna. 

Whoever  seeks  a  son  and  devoutly  bathes  Bhrkutesa  with 
ghee  mixed  with  honey,  does  get  the  desired  son. 


V.iii.129.1-15 


385 


Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  of  the  devotee  who  takes 
his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and  gifts  to  a  Brahmana,  a 
piece  of  gold,  a  cow,  or  a  plot  of  land. 

O  excellent  king,  there  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  it  is  as 
good  as  the  entire  earth  along  with  the  oceans  and  caves,  mountains, 
parks  and  forests  has  been  gifted  by  him. 

As  a  result  of  that  gift,  he  sports  about  happily  in  heaven  and 
then  comes  down  to  the  mortal  world  as  a  great  king  or  a 
highly  worshipped  Brahmana. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  TWENTYNINE 
The  Greatness  of  Brahma  Tirtha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  excel- 
lent  Brahma  Tirtha  which  is  greater  than  the  greatest  of  all  the 
other  Tirthas. 

There  at  that  Tirtha,  Brahma,  the  most  excellent  one  among 
Suras,  the  grandfather  of  all  the  worlds,  resorted  to  the  banks, 
of  Narmada.  Merely  by  seeing  him  the  Lord  of  Devas  washes 
off  the  sins  of  the  four  Varnas,  committed  earlier,  including  all 
mental  and  verbal  ones  and  those  arising  from  activities  of  the 


body. 

The  eminent  Brahmanas  who  take  their  holy  bath  and  per- 
form  the  expiatory  rites  enjoined  by  Srutis  and  Smrtis  have 
their  residence  in  heaven. 

Those  who  are  oppressed  by  lust  and  greed  and  abandon  the 
scriptural  texts  and  then  prescribe  expiatory-  rites  (as  they  please) 

fall  into  hell.  ,  , 

A  sinner  should  take  his  holy  bath  at  the  outset  and  bow 
down  to  Brahma.  Then  he  shall  confess  his  sin.  His  sin  perishes 

quickly  like  darkness  at  sunrise.  ,  , 

7-15.  He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and 
adores  Pitrs  and  deides,  derives  die  excellent  benefit  of  Agmstoma 

^Whatever  is  gifted  away  as  Dana  there  at  that  Tirtha  with 


386 


Skanda  Purana 


Brahma  in  view,  becomes  everlasting  in  its  benefits.  So  said 

If  Japa  is  carried  out  merely  of  the  Gayatrl  Mantia  there,  it 
shall  become  as  meritorious  as  one  of  the  Rk,  Yajus  and  Sama 
Vedas.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it. 

If  anyone  were  to  cast  off  his  body,  usually  very  difficult  to 
be  cast  off,  in  the  Tirtha  there,  his  return  from  the  world  of 
Brahma  is  undoubtedly  impossible. 

He  is  honoured  in  Devaloka  for  as  many  thousand  years  as 
there  aie  bones  of  embodied  beings  in  the  Brahma  Tirtha. 

Thereafter,  he  comes  down  into  the  world  (here)  and  is 
reborn  as  one  knowing  Brahman  in  a  noble  family.  He  shall  be 
the  most  excellent  one  among  all  the  Varnas  like  the  great 
deity  among  Devas. 

He  will  be  well-versed  in  all  the  lores  and  a  master  of  the 
Vedas  and  their  Angas.  He  will  be  undoubtedly  honoured  in 
the  world  by  kings. 

He  will  be  accompanied  by  sons  and  grandsons  and  will  be 
free  from  all  ailments.  By  the  power  of  Brahma  Tirtha,  he  will 
live  more  than  a  hundred  years. 

The  noble  souls  who  visit  this  meritorious  Tirtha,  the  most 
excellent  one  for  those  endowed  with  knowledge,  a  Tirtha  that 
destroys  all  sins,  attain  immortality. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTY 
The  Greatness  of  Devatirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-2.  On  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada,  there  is  the  ex¬ 
cellent  Devatirtha.  Paramesvara  was  propitiated  by  Devas  who 
came  there. 

He  who  is  free  from  lust  and  anger  and  takes  his  holy  bath 
there  in  the  Tirtha,  shall  undoubtedly  attain  the  benefit  of 
(the  gift  of)  a  thousand  cows. 


V.iii.131.1-15 


387 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTYONE 
The  Greatness  of  Ndgesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-7.  On  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada,  there  is  the  ex¬ 
cellent  Nagatlrtha  where  the  great  serpents  achieved  fulfilment, 
O  king,  when  a  cause  of  terror  occurred. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

O  excellent  Brahmana,  usually  Nagas  (serpents)  cause  great 
terror  unto  the  world  (people).  How  then  did  a  cause  of  great 
terror  unto  them  occur  whereby  they  engaged  themselves  in  a 
severe  penance. 

O  dear  one,  everything  pertaining  to  the  past,  present  and 
future  in  the  case  of  Suras,  Asuras  and  human  beings  is  entirely 
known  to  you.  Hence  my  curiosity  is  great. 

The  distress  that  I  undergo  is  due  to  Duryodhana.  When  it 
is  flooded  with  the  words  issuing  forth  from  your  lotus-like 
mouth,  it  ceases  to  oppress. 

The  more  I  hear  the  sin-destroying  story  narrated  through 
your  mouth,  O  sage  of  excellent  holy  vows,  the  more  I  recollect 
this,  and  the  desire  for  further  hearing  arises  all  the  more. 

Of  course,  a  Brahmana  should  not  be  given  further  strain 
but  no  one  else  knows  the  great  benefit  of  the  great  Vidyadana 
(gift  of  learning)  narrated  and  listened  to. 

After  understanding  this  duly,  may  the  story  with  reference 
to  the  question  put  by  me  be  narrated,  O  Brahmana,  by  adopt¬ 
ing  the  compassionate  gesture  towards  me. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

8-15.  O  king,  the  more  you  are  talking  (putting  questions), 
the  more  fluency  comes  to  my  speech.  Despite  the  slackness 
resulting  from  my  senility,  affection  for  you  never  perishes,  O 

dear  one. 

I  shall  recount  the  old  legend1  the  way  it  occurred  as  re¬ 
counted  earlier  by  elders  traditionally,  O  descendant  of  Bharata. 

1  This  is  a  rehash  of  the  legend  of  the  wager  between  Kadru  and  Vinaia 

•  about  the  colour  of  the  divine  horse  Uccaissravas.  The  horse  was  white 


388 


Skanda  Parana 


Kasyapa  had  two  wives,  the  most  excellent  ones  in  all  the 
worlds.  They  were  Vinata,  mother  of  Garuda,  and  Kadru,  mother 
of  serpents.  A  dispute  between  them  arose  at  the  sight  of  the 
horse  (Uccaihsravas)  in  the  morning,  O  great  king.  Vinata  perceived 
the  form  of  the  horse  brilliant  like  the  refulgence  of  the  sun. 

He  was  completely  white.  She  said  to  Kadru:  See  here,  O 
lady  of  excellent  countenance,  the  wholly  white  form  of  the 
horse  Uccaissravas  that  incessantly  runs  with  the  speed  of  wind.” 

On  seeing  him  proceeding  fast,  she  (Kadru)  was  deluded  by 
a  fit  of  internal  envy.  Considering  him  black,  she  prattled  thus 
to  her,  O  excellent  king: 

“O  Vinata,  O  cruel  one  spoiling  the  whole  family!  You  are 
a  Her.  I  say,  this  is  black.  If  you  say,  this  is  white,  you  will  fall 
into  the  great  abysm  of  Naraka.” 

Vinata  said: 

16-26.  A  true  statement  and  a  false  one  shall  be  our  stakes, 
yours  and  mine.  I  shall  be  a  maidservant  in  your  house  for  a 
period  of  one  thousand  years  in  case  my  statement  proves  false. 

Thus  they  pledged  each  other’s  plight  and  went  home  at 
night.  They  had  by  that  lime  abandoned  the  paroxysm  of  anger. 

They  went  to  their  kinsmen  and  mentioned  the  stake,  the 
incident  that  took  place  between  Kadru  and  Vinata  in  the  plea¬ 
sure  spot. 

On  hearing  it,  all  the  kinsmen  as  well  as  the  sons  of  Kadru 
thought  that  a  despicable  thing  was  committed  by  their  mother. 
It  was  not  conducive  to  their  welfare. 

They  said:  “Mother,  the  excellent  horse  is  not  black.  How 
can  he  become  black?  On  account  of  this  stipulation,  O  lady 
of  holy  rites,  you  will  have  to  become  a  slave.” 

Kadru  said: 

Do  something  immediately  lest  I  should  become  a  slave.  This 
is  my  suggestion  that  you  should  penetrate  the  hair  pores  of 

but  Kadru  staled  that  he  was  black.  To  maintain  her  stand  on  the  colour 
of  the  horse,  she  ordered  her  sons  to  assume  hair-like  forms  and  cover 
the  body  of  the  horse.  Those  who  refused  to  do  so  were  cursed  with  death 
in  fire  (Mbh.,  Adi.  20.8) 


V.iii.l  31 .27-36 


389 


that  horse.  If  this  is  done  for  a  very  short  while,  she  will  become 
my  slave.  Thereby,  O  serpents,  you  will  become  happy. 

The  serpents  said: 

O  fair  lady,  although  you  have  been  considered  (and  honoured) 
as  the  mother  of  serpents  on  the  earth,  still  she  (Vinata)  can¬ 
not  be  deceived  outright. 


Kadrit  said: 

If  there  are  serpents  on  the  earth  not  caring  to  carry  out  my 
behest,  all  of  them  will  straightway  fall  into  the  jaws  of  Havyavaha 
(fire). 

On  hearing  these  terrible  words  that  issued  from  the  mouth 
of  their  mother,  some  of  them  entered  the  hairs  (of  the  horse) . 
Others  stayed  on  mountains.  Some  of  them  entered  Gahga  and 

others  began  to  perform  penance. 

27-36.  Then  at  the  end  of  a  thousand  years,  Paramesvara 
was  pleased.  Mahadeva,  the  creator  of  the  universe,  spoke  in 

majestic  words:  . 

“O  serpents,  desist  from  the  austerities.  I  shall  grant  you  the 

great  benefit  thereof  which  you  wish  for.  You  need  not  worry 
over  it.” 


The  serpents  said: 

O  Mahesvara,  O  Lord  of  Devas,  we  are  afraid  of  the  curse 
of  Kadru.  We  shall  stay  near  you  until  the  annihilation  of  all 

living  beings. 


Devadeva  (Siva)  said: 

This  mighty  Vasuki,  the  excellent  one  among  serpents,  alone 
shall  stay  always  near  me.  He  will  be  the  protector  of  all  from  fear. 

At  my  bidding  the  other  serpents  need  not  fear  at  all  Leap¬ 
ing  into  the  waters  of  Narmada  those  serpents  can  be  well 
protected.  They  need  not  be  afraid  of  death.  Stay  where  you 
desire  to.  There  is  no  fear  of  the  curse  of  Kadru.  This  is  my 

supreme  seat  (vistarah  parah?). 

*  *  * 


390 


Skanda  Parana 


Thus,  after  granting  them  the  boon,  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of 
Devas,  went  to  Kailasa  mountain  passing  through  the  sky. 

When  the  Lord  vanished,  O  king,  the  serpents,  the  chief  of 
whom  was  Vasuki,  installed  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  and 
went  away. 

If  anyone  adores  Siva  in  that  Tirtha  on  the  Fifth  lunar  day, 
all  the  eight  families  of  Nagas  will  never  injure  him. 

One  who  dies  in  that  Tirtha,  O  king,  shall  become  Siva’s 
attendant  for  a  long  time  and  stay  there  as  long  as  he  wishes. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTYTWO 
The  Greatness  of  Adivaraha  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  Tirtha 
named  Varaha  which  dispels  all  sins.  It  is  situated  on  the  north¬ 
ern  bank  of  Narmada. 

It  is  there  that  Lord  Visnu,  the  sustainer  of  the  universe  and 
the  Lord  enabling  people  to  cross  the  ocean  of  worldly  exist¬ 
ence,  assumed  the  form  of  a  Boar  and  stationed  himself  for  the 
sake  of  the  welfare  of  the  worlds. 

A  devotee  should  take  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and 
worship  Dharanidhara  (i.e.  Lord  Visnu)  by  means  of  specially 
prepared  scented  garlands.  He  should  indulge  in  loudly  shout¬ 
ing  "Victories  unto  the  Lord”  and  similar  auspicious  activities. 

O  excellent  king,  he  should  observe  fast  on  the  twelfth  lunar 
day.  He  should  shun  the  very  touch  of  Vrsalas  of  sinful  activi¬ 
ties  as  well  as  Andhapisacins  (blind  ghostly  beings),  since  sin  will 
be  transmitted  by  them  if  they  talk,  touch  their  body  and  take 
food  along  with  them.  Even  when  they  breathe  out,  sin  is  trans¬ 
mitted. 

On  the  other  hand,  Brahmanas  should  be  duly  and  devoutly 
adored  in  accordance  with  one’s  capacity.  During  the  night, 
the  devotee  should  keep  awake  listening  to  pious  stories. 

Those  who  have  conquered  bad  temper  and  take  holy  bath 
in  the  pure  Tirtha,  should  visit  the  Lord,  the  preceptor  of  the 
universe.  Thereby  they  will  be  rid  of  all  sins. 


V.iiU  32.8— 133.7 


391 


8-13.  On  seeing  the  face  of  the  Lord  in  the  form  of  a 
Boar,  all  sins  perish  quickly  just  as  on  seeing  Suparna  (Garuda) 
serpents  perish  discharging  their  poison  and  terrifying  fiery 
nature. 

Just  as  on  seeing  the  Sun,  the  most  excellent  one  among 
Devas,  the  darkness  in  the  sky  perishes,  so  also  the  sins  very 
difficult  to  counteract  perish  on  seeing  the  face  of  Dharadhara 
(Lord  Visnu),  O  son  of  Kuntl. 

Of  what  avail  are  numerous  Mantras  to  a  person  who  has 
devotion  to  Lord  Janardana!  The  very  Mantra  namo  nardyanaya 
is  the  means  of  achieving  every  object.1 

Even  a  single  obeisance  offered  to  Krsna  is  on  a  par  with  the 
valedictory  bath  after  ten  Asvamedhas.  A  person  who  performs 
ten  horse-sacrifices  takes  birth  again,  but  one  who  makes  obei¬ 
sance  to  Krsna  is  not  reborn. 

Those  persons  who  have  conquered  the  sense-organs  and 
the  noble  souls  who  meditate  upon  the  Narayana  form  of  Hari 
and  cast  off  their  body  there  in  the  Tlrtha  attain  that  place 
devoid  of  impurities,  not  available  even  to  Suras.  That  is  the 
greatest  region  of  Visnu  free  from  Ksara  (perishable)  and  Aksara 
(imperishable). 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTYTHREE 
The  Glory  of  Kaubera  and  other  Tirthas 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  great 
group  of  four  Tirthas,  a  mere  visit  to  which  brings  about  the 
destruction  of  all  sins.  They  are  Kaubera  Varuna,  Yamya  and 
Vayavya.  It  was  here  that  the  highly  intelligent  and  powerful 
Guardians  of  Quarters  became  Siddhas. 


Yudhisthira  said: 

What  for,  O  sinless  one,  was  penance  performed  by  the  Guardians 


1.  This  shows  the  influence  of  or  leaning  to  Pancaratrism. 


392 


Skanda  Parana 


of  Quarters  formerly  on  the  bank  of  Narmada?  It  behoves  you 
to  narrate  this  to  me. 

Markandeya  said: 

Inasmuch  as  the  world  (worldly  existence)  is  weak,  feeble 
and  unstable  like  a  drop  of  water  hanging  from  a  blade  of 
grass,  all  people  crave  for  a  stable  base.  All  the  four  types  of 
living  beings  whether  mobile  or  immobile  are  Fickle,  free  of 
essence  like  the  core  of  a  plantain  tree  and  unreal  like  mirage. 
That  being  the  case,  Dharma  is  mother,  Dharma  is  father,  Dharma 
is  kinsman  as  well  as  friend.  Dharma  alone  is  the  support  of 
all  living  beings  in  all  the  three  worlds  consisting  of  mobile  and 
immobile  beings. 

After  realizing  this  all  the  Guardians  of  Quarters  waited  for 
an  opportunity  and  performed  an  unparalleled  penance  taking 
in  wind  alone  as  their  food. 

8-17.  When  half  of  Krtayuga  passed  off,  Mahadeva  was 
pleased.  O  great  king,  Paramesvara  granted  them  an  open  choice 
of  a  boon  saying,  “Whoever  wishes  for  anything,  whatever  he 
may  desire,  I  shall  grant  it.” 

Thus  in  accordance  with  the  Yuga,  the  mighty  Guardians  of 
Quarters  were  asked  to  choose.  On  hearing  these  words  of  Siva, 
the  Guardians  of  worlds  intending  to  do  what  is  good  for  the 
world  requested  the  Lord  for  an  excellent  boon. 

Kubera  said: 

O  Mahadeva,  if  you  are  pleased,  if  a  boon  has  to  be  granted 
to  me,  let  me  be  the  Lord  of  Yaksas  and  Dhanada,  the  bestower 
of  wealth. 

Then  Yama  engaged  in  controlling  (all)  said  to  the  Lord  of 
Devas:  “O  Lord,  let  me  be  the  chief  of  all  living  beings.” 

After  bowing  down  to  Mahesvara,  Varuna  said  thereafter: 
“Let  me  sport  about  in  the  Varuna  world  accompanied  by  the 
groups  of  aquatic  beings.” 

After  bowing  down  to  Mahesvara,  Vayu  asked  immediately, 
O  descendant  of  Bharata.  It  was  the  ability  to  spread  all  over 
the  three  worlds  that  he  requested  for. 


V.iii.l  33.1 8-38 


393 


After  granting  the  cherished  desire  to  all  the  Guardians  of 
the  worlds,  Sankara  vanished  along  with  Uma.  When  Lord 
Mahesvara  had  vanished,  they  remained  in  their  respective  places. 
Installation  of  the  Lord  was  carried  out  by  them  severally  after 
their  own  names.  Kubera  installed  Kuberesa,  Yama  Yamesvara, 
Varuna  Varunesa  and  Vata  Vatesvara,  O  king. 

18-27.  With  different  kinds  of  auspicious  Mantras  duly 
chanted,  they  offered  libations  after  worshipping  the  Lord  of 
all  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions. 

All  of  them  like  the  Lords  of  all,  invited  Brahmanas  who  had 
fully  subdued  the  sense-organs  and  mind,  who  had  subdued 
anger,  who  granted  freedom  from  fear  unto  all  living  beings, 
who  were  clever  in  the  Vedic  lore  and  were  masters  of  all 
scriptural  texts,  and  who  were  embellished  with  Rk,  Yajus,  Saman 


and  Atharva  Vedas. 

They  said,  “We  shall  give  four  types  of  Danas  unto  ye  all. 
Accept.”  After  saying  this  they  did  the  excellent  Bhumidana 
(gift  of  plots  of  land)  unto  all  those  Brahmanas. 

(The  Brahmanas  said,)  “Your  Dana  will  last  as  long  as  the 
Moon  and  the  Sun  shine  and  as  long  as  the  Earth  exists.  There 
shall  be  no  enemy.” 

Whether  it  is  a  king  or  someone  on  a  par  with  a  king,  it  one 
loses  what  is  given  by  the  Guardians  of  the  worlds,  he  is  de¬ 
luded.  What  is  in  store  for  him  may  be  listened. 

O  descendant  of  Bharata,  Dhanada  will  dry  up  the  assets  of 
that  sinner;  Varuna  will  make  his  body  dried  up.  Wind-god  will 
make  his  lineage  dried  up  (extinct).  His  life  becomes  defunct- 
Yama,  the  great  controller  of  all,  takes  away  his  life  quickly 
Hutabhuk  (Fire-god)  reduces  him  to  ashes  and  goes  away. 


descendant  of  Bharata. 

Hence,  O  Yudhisthira,  all  kings  should  have  devotion  to 

Brahmanas  if  they  wish  their  own  welfare. 

King  is  a  tree.  Brahmanas  are  like  the  root  thereof.  Atten 
dants  are  the  leaves  and  ministers  its  branches.  Hence  the  root 
should  be  protected  with  effort.  If  the  root  is  well  preserved 

the28-3e8e  dTpne0rsonemaking  gifts  of  land  dwells  in  heaven  for 
s  Jy TousandW  One  who  seires  it  or  slights  or  den, grates 
others  shall  stay  in  Naraka  for  as  many  years. 


394 


Skanda  Purana 


Land  given  by  one’s  own  people  or  others  should  be  well- 
protected.  Whoever  has  the  land  has  the  fruit  (benefit)  thereof. 

Those  kings  who  remember  the  command  of  the  deities  and 
preserve  the  earth  shall  always  reside  in  heaven.  O  Yudhisthira, 
land  given  by  one’s  own  people  or  others  should  be  well-pro¬ 
tected  by  a  king.  Protection  of  land  is  better  than  the  gifting 
thereof. 

If  kings  are  scrupulously  engaged  in  the  protection  of  the 
subjects,  their  longevity,  fame,  strength,  wealth  and  progeny 
shall  be  everlasting  certainly. 

After  saying  thus  to  the  excellent  Brahmanas  (?)  all  the  Guardians 
of  the  worlds  adored  them  duly  and  sent  them  off  after  bowing 
down  duly. 

After  the  leading  Brahmanas  had  gone  the  Guardians  of  the 
worlds  took  their  holy  bath  and  performed  Homa.  Being  hun¬ 
gry  they  wandered  here  and  there  for  alms.  Their  bodies  were 
reduced  to  mere  bones  and  skin,  with  their  hands  holding  the 
alms  bowl.  They  did  not  get  even  a  moiety  of  half  of  a  morsel. 
They  set  out  from  the  city  and  after  angrily  cursing  the  Brahmana(?) , 
O  Yudhisthira:  like  “You  shall  be  poor  always  and  also  fools”, 
they  went  home. 

Ever  since  then  all  the  Brahmanas  were  deprived  of  their 
wealth.  As  a  result  of  the  curse  those  in  the  northern  region 
became  miserable. 

Sankara  said  thus:  “The  wealth  of  father  is  not  always  en¬ 
joyed  by  sons,  nor  that  of  sons  and  gurdians  by  father  for  all 
the  period.”  Kala  alone  enjoys  (eats  up)  all. 

39-48.  A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  the  Kuberesa 
TIrtha  and  worships  Siva  with  scents,  incense  and  prostrations 
shall  derive  the  benefit  of  a  horse-sacrifice. 

One  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Yama  TIrtha  and  visits  Yamesvara 
shall  be  liberated  from  all  sins  incurred  in  the  course  of  seven 
births. 

Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  of  a  person  who  takes  his 
holy  bath  on  a  full-moon  and  a  new-moon  day  and  performs 
Pitrtarpana  (offering  libations  to  Pitrs).  Pitrs  and  Pitamahas 
become  well-pleased.  Prapitamahas  (great-grandfathers)  remain 
sporting  about  in  heaven  for  twelve  years. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Varunesa  TIrtha  and  wor¬ 
ships  Mahesvara  obtains  the  excellent  benefit  of  a  Vajapeya 


V.iii. 134.1-2 


395 


Yajna.  On  death  after  a  long  time  he  goes  to  the  world  where 
Jalesvara  (Varuna)  is  present  by  means  of  a  (special)  vehicle. 
He  will  be  sung  about  by  groups  of  celestial  damsels. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Vatesvara  TIrtha  and  wor¬ 
ships  Mahesvara  becomes  blessed  and  contented  by  seeing  the 
Guardians  of  the  worlds. 

Of  what  avail  to  him  are  many  Yajnas  with  plenty  of  Daksina 
or  Dana,  if  he  takes  his  holy  bath  in  all  the  four  TIrthas  and 
obtains  the  benefit  of  the  birth. 

They  are  blessed,  they  are  noble  souls,  their  birth  and  life 
is  well-lived  who  stay  in  Kaurill  (PKauberi)  always  after  inviting 
the  Guardians  of  the  worlds. 

This  narrative  is  destructive  of  sins.  It  is  meritorious,  condu¬ 
cive  to  wealth  and  capable  of  augmenting  the  span  of  life.  The 
sins  of  those  who  read  and  listen  to  it  shall  be  dispelled  en¬ 
tirely. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTYFOUR 
The  Greatness  of  Rdmesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-2.  On  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada,  there  is  the  ex¬ 
cellent  Ramesvara  Tirtha  that  is  meritorious,  destructive  of  sms 
and  capable  of  dispelling  all  miseries.  .  , 

Those  who  take  their  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and 
worship  the  great  Lord  Mahadeva,  the  great  soul,  are  liberated 

from  all  sins. 


396 


Skanda  Parana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTYFIVE 
The  Greatness  of  Siddhesvara  Tirlha 
Sn  Markandeya  said : 

1-5.  Beyond  that  itself  is  another  excellent  TIrtha  named 
Siddhesvara.  It  is  endowed  with  all  good  qualities  and  is  honoured 
in  all  the  worlds. 

One  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  wor¬ 
ships  Uma  and  Rudra,  shall  attain  the  excellent  benefit  of  a 
Vajapeya  Yajna. 

On  death  he  shall  attain  heaven  due  to  that  great  merit. 

There  he  will  be  surrounded  by  groups  of  celestial  damsels  of 
auspicious  features  proclaiming  his  victory. 

He  shall  sport  about  there  as  he  pleases  for  a  thousand 
years.  Then  he  shall  be  reborn  in  a  great  family  rich  with  j* 

wealth  and  foodgrains. 

O  best  among  men,  he  will  be  master  of  the  Vedas  and 
Vedangas  and  honoured  by  all.  He  will  be  free  from  ailments 
and  grief  and  live  a  hundred  years. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTYSIX 

- 

The  Greatness  of  Ahalya  Tirtha} 

Sn  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  O  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent 
Ahalyesvara  Tirtha  where  the  blessed  ascetic  lady  Ahalya  re¬ 
ceived  redemption  and  fulfilment  formerly. 

There  was  a  Brahmana  named  Gautama  who  was  like  an¬ 
other  Brahma.  He  was  endowed  with  truthfulness  and  piety. 

He  was  engrossed  in  the  Vanaprastha  stage  of  life. 

_  *  | 

1.  Here  the  Ahalya  episode  is  the  same  as  in  Vdlmlki  Rdmdyana  (VR),  Sargas 
48-49.  But  Ahalya’s  penance  and  installation  of  a  Linga  on  Narmada  is 
a  new  feature. 


V.iii.l  36.8-24 


397 


His  blessed  wife  named  Ahalya  was  very  famous  in  all  the 
three  worlds  as  a  woman  endowed  with  beauty  and  prime  of 


youth. 

Satakratu,  the  king  of  Devas,  was  infatuated  by  the  excep¬ 
tional  beauty  of  Ahalya.  The  Slayer  of  Bala,  therefore,  tempted 
her. 

“O  beautiful  lady  of  uncensured  features,  resort  to  me,  the 
king  of  Devas.  Sport  about  with  me.  You  shall  be  one  honoured 
in  all  the  three  worlds.  What  will  you  do  with  this  Brahmana 
who  has  become  lean  and  emaciated  due  to  his  over-zealous- 
ness  for  purity  and  conventional  rites  and  austerities  and  Vedic 
studies!  O  lady  of  beautiful  eyes,  you  must  be  rather  undergo¬ 
ing  sufferings  now.” 

On  being  told  thus,  the  beautiful  lady,  very  fickle  by  nature 
as  all  women  are,  became  confused  and  defiled  by  the  god  of 
Love.  Mentally  she  became  overwhelmed  by  Sakra. 

8-16.  Sensing  her  emotional  upheaval  the  Lord  who  slew 
Paka  was  so  overcome  by  wicked  intentions  that  he  deceived 
Gautama. 

Getting  an  opportunity,  he  assumed  the  excellent  guise  o 
the  sage  and  carnally  delighted  Ahalya  who  believed  (that  he 


was  Gautama)  in  the  inner  apartment. 

Within  a  moment  thereafter,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  the 
excellent  sage  hurriedly  entered  the  apartment. 

On  seeing  Gautama  come  Purandara  became  terrified  and 
he  went  out.  Seeing  him  he  thought  (knew)  that  it  was  Sakra. 
So  Gautama  became  highly  enraged  and  he  cursed  Devendra: 
“Since  you  could  not  control  your  senses,  be  one  with  a  thou¬ 
sand  vaginal  apertures.”  On  being  cursed  thus,  Devendra  was 
instantly  covered  with  a  thousand  vaginal  apertuies.  H 
came  bereft  of  all  glory.  He  left  the  kingdom  and  the  Suras  too. 
He  performed  elaborate  penance  on  the  eart  . 

AhaW  too  was  cursed  by  Gautama:  "Since  you  have  been 

Thereby  you  shall  be  rid  of  your  s  elaosed  she  was 

17.24.  As  the  stipulated  P'Xmoanv  of  vlimitr,  She 
seen  by  the  intelligent  Rama  in  th  P  y 


398 


Skanda  Purana 


absolved  herself  of  her  rocky  form  and  adored  Rama  duly. 
Thereby  she  became  free  of  sins  and  malignant  features.  She 
came  to  the  Tirtha  on  the  banks  of  Narmada  and  duly  took 
her  holy  bath.1 

For  a  month  she  performed  the  Candrayana  rites  and  there¬ 
after  the  Krcchra  rites  for  another  month.  Mahadeva  became 
pleased  and  granted  her  excellent  boons.  Umapati  vanished 
and  sported  about  for  a  long  time. 

When  the  Lord  went  away,  Ahalya  installed  the  preceptor 
of  the  universe  by  the  name  Ahalyesvara  and  went  back  to  her 
abode. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and  adores 
Paramesvara,  shall  obtain  heaven  after  death.  He  will  sport 
about  in  the  place  where  Lord  Mahesvara  is  present  in  that  Loka. 

The  performer  of  great  penance,  at  the  end  of  a  thousand 
years,  will  be  reborn  in  human  form  endowed  with  wealth  and 
foodgrain  in  plenty  and  be  accompanied  by  sons  and  grand¬ 
sons.  He  will  be  born  in  a  pure  family  and  be  the  receptacle 
of  Vedic  lore.  Intelligent  and  handsome;  he  will  be  very  for¬ 
tunate.  He  will  live  for  more  than  a  hundred  years  afflicted 
with  no  ailments  as  a  result  of  his  resorting  to  Ahalya  Tirtha. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTYSEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Karkatesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  O  Dharmaputra,  thereafter  one  should  go  to  the  ex¬ 
cellent  Karkatesvara  Tirtha  on  the  northern  bank  of  Narmada. 
It  is  destructive  of  all  sins. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  accordance  with  the 
injunctions  and  adores  Siva,  shall  never  return  from  Rudraloka. 
Undoubtedly  his  departure  will  be  one  without  a  return. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  describe  in  detail  the  greatness  of  the 
Tirtha  as  heard  by  me  in  the  Purana.  Hence  I  shall  recount 
it  briefly. 


I.  This  portion  is  not  in  VR.  It  is  added  for  the  glorification  of  Narmada 
by  the  Purana  writer. 


V.iii.138.1-10 


399 


Whatever  is  done  by  one  at  that  Tirtha,  whether  auspicious 
or  inauspicious,  O  great  king,  out  of  delight  or  arrogance,  shall 
entirely  become  everlasting. 

After  performing  penance  there  at  that  Tirtha  Valakhilyas 
and  Maricis  rejoice  in  the  different  worlds  even  today  as  they 
please,  O  scion  of  the  family  of  Kurus. 

Men  staying  there  do  not  know  it  as  they  are  excluded  from 
its  knowledge  in  the  same  manner  as  one  is  not  aware  of  the 
immutable  Atman,  the  imperishable  refulgence  stationed  in 
the  body. 

There  at  the  Tirtha,  Goddess  NarayanI  began  her  penance 
formerly  and  even  today  she  continues  the  severe  austerities 
which  she  has  been  doing  for  the  last  one  hundred  million 
years. 

A  devotee  should  take  his  holy  bath  in  the  Tirtha  and  pro¬ 
pitiate  the  Pitrs  and  deities.  His  Pitamahas  become  satisfied  for 
twelve  years  thereby. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTYEIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Sakra  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  O  son  of  Pandu,  a  person  should  go  to  the 
excellent  Sakratlrtha  where  Satakratu  (Indra),  the  illustrious 
king  of  Devas,  became  a  Siddha. 

On  knowing  that  the  Lord  of  Suras  was  cursed  by  Gautama, 
the  deities  beginning  with  Brahma  and  all  the  sages  who  regard 
penance  as  their  wealth  pleaded  to  Gautama  through  splendid 
words:  “O  Lord  of  sages,  Sakra  is  bereft  of  his  kingdom  and 
glory.  O  Brahmana,  none  will  have  any  interest  in  the  domain 
without  Indra,  whether  he  be  a  Deva  or  a  human  being.  O 
venerable  one,  this  is  already  known  to  you.  Hen“'  °  e“el: 
lent  Brahmana,  take  pity  on  him  on  «h«mmn»menble.wnl 
apertures  have  been  foisted.  Defiled  by  his  own  sin,  Sakra  is 

“oaring  the  words  of  the  Devas,  Gautama,  the 
greatest  of  those  conversant  with  the  Vedas,  consented  and 


400 


Skanda  Purana 


began  to  grant  a  boon  unto  Sakra:  “O  Satakratu,  the  thousand 
vaginal  apertures  that  were  earlier  produced  (on  your  body) 
shall  now  become  a  thousand  eyes  with  my  favour.” 

On  being  told  thus  the  Thousand-eyed  One  bowed  down  to 
the  excellent  sage  and  the  virtuous  Brahmanas.  Thereafter,  he 
came  to  Narmada. 

He.  took  his  holy  bath  in  the  pure  waters  and  installed  god 
Trlpurantaka.  After  that  he  went  back  to  heaven,  being  adored 
by  groups  of  celestial  damsels. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  TIrtha  and 
adores  Paramesvara,  becomes  absolved  of  the  sin  of  violating 
the  chastity  of  other  men’s  wives.. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  THIRTYNINE 
The  Greatness  of  Somatntha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Somatlrtha  where  Soma  performed  penance  and  attained 
a  permanent  place  in  the  stellar  path. 

Listen,  to  the  meritorious  benefit  of  a  person  who  takes  his 
holy  bath  there  in  that  TIrtha  after  duly  and  ceremoniously 
sipping  the  holy  water,  and  having  performed  Japa  meditates 
on  Ravi. 

Merely  by  reciting  the  Gayatrl  Mantra  here,  one  gets  that 
benefit  which  is  cited  as  the  benefit  of  one  who  recites  the 
Mantras  of  Rk,  Yajus  and  Sama  Vedas,  O  descendant  of  Bharata. 

If  a  devotee  remains  pure  and  feeds  a  few  Brahmanas  there 
at  that  TIrtha,  it  becomes  as  meritorious  as  a  crore  Brahmanas 
fed  properly  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions. 

If  a  person  makes  gifts  of  sandals  and  shoes,  garments,  um¬ 
brella,  blankets  and  horses  to  an  eminent  Brahmana,  it  is  on 
a  par  with  such  things  gifted  to  a  crore  such  Brahmanas. 

6-13.  The  feeding  of  thousands  and  thousands  of  Brahmanas 
utterly  ignorant  of  the  Rk  verses  does  not  merit  even  a  six- 


V.iii.140.1-6 


401 


teenth  part  of  the  feeding  of  one  Brahmana  fully  conversant 
with  the  Mantras. 

A  person  need  feed  only  one  master  of  the  Vedas  knowing 
many  Rks  (by  heart),  or  if  he  belongs  to  another  Sakha  (branch 
of  Vedic  study),  he  should  be  an  Adhvaryu  (i.e.  Yajurvedin)  or 
Chandoga  (i.e.  Samavedin)  or  Samaptiga  (i.e.  one  who  has 
concluded  Vedic  Studies). 

In  Somatlrtha  if  one  person  well-versed  in  the  Vedas  (is  fed), 
one  gets  the  merit  said  to  result  from  performing  a  thousand 
Agnihotras  by  learned  men. 

If  a  man  feeds  a  hundred,  he  gets  the  merit  of  feeding  a 
thousand.  (There)  learned  men  know  that  the  merit  of  (feed¬ 
ing)  one  well-versed  in  Yoga  (is  on  a  par  with  it). 

Wherever  a  sage  resides  after  restraining  the  sense-organs, 
the  holy  place  should  be  deemed  as  Kuruksetra,  Naimisa  or 
Puskara. 

Hence  one  should  assiduously  feed  a  Yogin  at  the  time  of 
solar  and  lunar  eclipses,  during  Sankranti  or  Vyatlpata  in  par¬ 
ticular. 

One  who  enters  into  Samnyasa  stage  at  that  Tirtha,  O  Yudhisthira, 
becomes  glorious  and  goes  to  heaven  by  means  of  an  aerial 
chariot.  He  becomes  an  attendant  of  Soma.  He  rejoices  along 
with  him. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTY 
The  Greatness  of  Nandahrada  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  devotee  should  go  to  the 
excellent  Nandahrada  where  the  glorious  Goddess  NandadevI, 
bestower  of  boons,  became  a  Siddha. 

Formerly  there  was  a  notorious  Danava  Mahisasura  with  a 
huge  body  in  Krta  Yuga.  He  caused  terror  unto  the  Devas.  He 
was  killed  by  the  Trident-wielding  Goddess.  His  body  was  pierced 
with  the  spear. 

It  was  this  powerful  Asura  who,  in  Krta  Yuga,  defeated  eleven 
Rudras,  (twelve)  Adityas,  along  with  the  group  of  (fortynine) 


402 


Skanda  Parana 


Maruts,  (eight)  Vasus  along  with  Moon-god  and  Sun-god.  He 
defeated  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesvara. 

When  the  terror  of  the  Devas  was  thus  killed  in  a  Fieice 
battle,  Goddess  Nanda  of  wide  eyes,  after  the  terrible  slaugh¬ 
ter,  .took  her  bath  in  the  Hrada  (pool).  Hence  it  is  remem- 

bered  as  Nandahrada.  j  rr 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  offers 

gifts  to  Brahmanas  with  Goddess  Nanda  in  view,  shall  attain  the 

merit  of  performing  an  Asvamedha. 

7-1 1  Bhairava,  Kedara,  Mahalaya  Rudra  and  the  fourth  one 
Nandahrada  (are  the  excellent  shrines).  A  fifth  one  is  very  rare 


l°  Many  who  are  overwhelmed  by  Kama  and  Raga  do  not  know 
that  Hrada  in  Narmada  which  is  meritorious  and  destructive  of 

If  a  person  takes  his  holy  bath  there,  in  that  Tirtha,  and 
worships  Goddess  Nanda,  of  what  avail  is  the  departure  unto 

Himalaya- to  him?  •  . 

Those  who  are  ignorant  of  reality,  wander  here  and  theie 
as  they  are  enveloped  in  Tamas.  One  experiences  only  tire¬ 
someness  in  associating  with  them. 

O  son  of  Kunti,  by  taking  the  holy  bath  in  Nandahrada,  O 
king,  one  attains  that  merit  which  is  mentioned  as  the  merit 
of  taking  holy  bath  and  offering  Dana  everywhere  on  the  earth 
encircled  by  the  oceans. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTYONE 
The  Greatness  of  Tapesvara  Tirtha 
Sn  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  O  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent 
Tapesvara  Tirtha  where  a  doe  frightened  by  a  hunter  became 
a  Siddha. 

After  casting  off  her  limbs  (body)  into  the  water,  she  rose 
up  unto  the  outer  space.  The  hunter  was  dismayed  at  the  sight 
of  the  doe.  He  set  aside  his  bow  and  arrows  and  started  per- 


V.iii.  141. 6-11 


403 


forming  excellent  austerities.  Penance  was  performed  by  the 
hunter  for  a  period  of  a  thousand  divine  years. 

When  the  time  elapsed  thus,  Mahesvara  became  pleased.  He 
said,  “O  great  hunter,  speak  up  what  appeals  to  your  mind. 
What  boon  shall  be  granted?” 

Vyddha  said: 

O  Lord  of  Devas,  if  you  are  pleased,  if  a  boon  is  to  be 
granted  to  me,  let  my  stay  beside  you  be  granted  to  me,  O 
Mahadeva. 

Isvara  said : 

6-11.  Let  it  be  so,  O  hunter.  You  are  granted  the  boon 
desired  by  you. 

After  saying  this,  Mahadeva,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  vanished. 
When  the  Lord  disappeared  the  Vyadha  installed  Mahesvara, 
worshipped  him  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  and  went 
to  heaven. 

Ever  since  then  that  Tlrtha  became  well-known  in  all  the 
three  worlds.  It  is  heard  that  Tapesvara  Tlrtha  originated  from 
the  repentance  of  the  Vyadha. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tlrtha  and  worships 
Sankara  attains  Sivaloka.  So  said  Mahesvara  to  me. 

Men  who  bathe  in  the  Tapesvara  Tlrtha  in  the  waters  of 
Narmada,  are  liberated  from  the  three  types  of  distress.  No 
hesitation  need  be  felt  in  this  respect. 

For  the  sake  of  the  suppression  of  sins,  a  devotee  should 
take  the  holy  plunge  on  the  eighth  and  fourteenth  lunai  days 
and  particularly  on  the  third  lunar  day. 


404 


Skanda  Purana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTYTWO 


The  Greatness  of  Ruhminl  Tirlha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the 
excellent  Rukmini  Tirtha.  By  taking  the  holy  bath  only  therein, 
one  shall  become  handsome  and  fortunate. 

If  a  devotee  takes  his  holy  bath  on  the  eighth,  fourteenth 
or  the  third  lunar  day  in  particular,  he  will  never  be  born  here 

35  He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  and  makes  the  gift  of  gold,  will 
never  incur  sorrow  due  to  the  power  of  that  Tlitha. 


Yudhisthira  said: 

O  great  sage,  how  did  this  Tirtha  come  to  possess  such  a 
great  efficacy?  Kindly  tell  me  how  this  Tirtha  became  capable 
of  according  beauty  and  good  fortune. 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

O  descendant  of  Bharata,  I  shall  recount  the  old  legend  in 
the  manner  it  occurred  and  also  as  traditionally  narrated  by 
elders  from  early  days'.  That  I  shall  recount  to  you.  Listen  with 
concentration  of  mind. 

Bhlsmaka  was  a  ruler  of  the  city  named  Kundina.  He  was 
richly  endowed  with  horses,  elephants  and  chariots.  He  was 
wealthy  and  very  powerful.  Shining  in  the  midst  of  a  thousand 
women,  he  administered  the  splendid  kingdom. 

8-15.  MahadevI  (‘great  queen’)  was  his  wife  dear  to  him 
more  than  his  own  very  vital  breaths.  He  begot  of  her  a  son 

named  Rukmaka.  .... 

The  second  child  born  was  a  daughter  named  Rukmini.  At 
that  time  an  unembodied  etherial  voice  told  him,  “O  Bhlsmaka, 
this  girl  should  be  given  to  a  Four-armed  One  (born)  on  this 

earth.”  .  , 

On  hearing  these  words,  he  and  his  beloved  became  de¬ 
lighted.  Along  with  learned  Brahmanas,  he  entered  the  lying- 


1.  Kundiriapura  near 


Amaravati  in  Vidarbha  (Maharashtra). 


V.iii.142.16-27 


405 


in-chamber  and  made  them  recite  the  Svastika  prayers  and  the 
girl  was  duly  named  Rukmini. 

O  descendant  of  Bharata,  she  was  proclaimed  Rukminl  by 
the  Brahmanas  then  because  she  had  a  freckle  golden  in  colour 


congenitally. 

As  time  passed  on  she  became  a  girl  of  eight  years.  The  king 
recollected  the  words  of  the  unembodied  being  and  became 
worried.  ‘To  whom  shall  I  give  this  daughter?  Who  will  be  the 


four-armed  one?’ 

In  the  meantime  Damaghosa,  the  chieftain  of  Cedi  came 
there  from  the  excellent  mountain  Raivata1. 

16-27.  He  entered  the  royal  palace  where  King  Bhismaka 
was  present.  On  seeing  him  arrived  in  the  abode,  the  king  duly 
adored  him. 

He  was  taken  to  the  Royal  Court  and  given  a  proper  seat. 
‘This  day  has  dawned  meritoriously.  I  was  eager  to  see  you.  O 
great  king,  my  daughter  has  come  to  the  age  of  eight  years. 
The  ethereal  voice  of  an  unembodied  being  has  told  that  she 


should  be  given  to  a  Four-armed  One”. 

On  hearing  the  words  of  Bhismaka,  Damaghosa  said  thus. 
“My  son  is  well  known  in  all  the  three  worlds  as  Four-armed 
One  ( Caturbhuja) .  O  Bhismaka,  let  this  girl  be  given  to  Sisupala.” 

On  hearing  the  words  of  Damaghosa,  O  king,  Rukmini  was 
betrothed  to  Sisupala  by  Bhismaka. 

The  auspicious  ceremonial  beginning  was  made  by  Bhismaka, 
O  Yudhisthira.  All  the  kinsmen  and  members  of  the  family  who 
were  staying  in  far-off  countries  in  every  direction,  were  invited 
and  they  duly  arrived. 

Then  Bala  and  Kesava,  the  distinguished  members  oi  the 
Yadava  clan,  were  also  invited.  They  came  to  the  city  of  Kun^ma 
of  Bhismaka.  The  most  excellent  scions  of  the  family  of  Yadu 
were  duly  received  and  honoured  by  Bhismaka. 

At  the  time  of  dusk,  Rukmini,  the  bride  of  seductive  charms, 
went  out  of  the  city  accompanied  by  her  female  companions 
for  the  worship  of  Ambika. 

There  she  saw  Hari,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  m  the  gu.se  of  a 
cowherd.  On  seeing  him,  she  was  excited  by  the  god  of  Love 
and  became  completely  fascinated. 


1 


Cedi  is  Bundeikhanda  and  Raivata  or  Girnar  is  in  Gujarat.  The  author  has 
faint  ideas  about  Indian  Geography. 


406 


Skanda  Puranci 


On  seeing  her,  Kesava  said  to  Sankarsana,  O  dear  brother, 
in  my  view  the  excellent  jewel  of  a  girl  should  be  taken  away.” 

28-40.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Kesava,  Sankarsana  said: 
“Go  ahead,  O  Krsna,  O  mighty  one.  Let  the  jewel  of  a  girl  be 
seized  quickly.  I  shall  follow  you  closely  behind  causing  much 
havoc  unto  all  these  demons. 

On  getting  the  consent  of  Sankarsana,  Kesava,  the  slayer  of 
Kesin,  seized  the  girl,  immediately  put  her  on  the  chariot  and 
went  off. 

Setting  off  in  quick  speed  like  wind,  O  king,  he  went  ahead. 
There  arose  a  great  hue  and  cry  in  the  city  of  Bhlsmaka. 

The  enraged  demons  came  out  like  billows  (of  flowtide)  in 
the  great  ocean.  All  of  them  were  perfectly  armed  and  they 
roared  as  they  ran  after  the  chariot  along  the  highway. 

They  overtook  Baladeva  who  was  following  the  chariot  along 
the  highway.  A  battle  that  threatened  annihilation  of  all  the 
worlds  ensued  between  them  and  Bala,  as  in  the  case  of  an 
earlier  well-known  battle  for  Tara  (Brhaspati  s  wife) . 

Wielding  the  club  in  his  hand,  Bala,  the  mighty  one,  had  no 
match  in  all  the  three  worlds.  He  forcefully  dragged  them  by 
means  of  his  ploughshare  and  struck  them  down  with  blows  of 
the  club. 

The  powerful  Balabhadra  could  not  be  struck  by  the  Danavas. 
He  smashed  all  the  demons  and  stood  there  unshakeable  like 
a  mountain. 

On  seeing  Bala  much  infuriated  and  unassailable  even  by 
gods,  the  highly  refulgent  son  of  Bhlsmaka,  the  well-renowned 
warrior  named  Rukmin,  took  an  AksauhinI  (large  divisions  of 
chariots,  horses  etc.)  of  men  of  great  heroism,  attacked  and 
tried  to  repulse  Balabhadra. 

Accompanied  by  Rukmin!  Lord  Kesava  hurried  along  the 
path  in  the  chariot  dodging  the  arena  of  the  battle. 

Crossing  Vindhya,  the  immutable  preceptor  of  the  three  worlds 
came  to  the  banks  of  Narmada  where  he  had  earlier  achieved 
perfection  and  invincibility  by  the  power  of  this  Tirtha. 

41-48.  It  is  for  this  reason,  O  dear  one,  that  it  is  called 
Yodhanlpura.  Rukma  (Rukmin)  the  leading  Danava  too  came 
to  that  excellent  spot. 

He  furiously  spoke  (challengingly) :  “Stop!  Stop!  Do  not  go 
away.  I  shall  despatch  you  unto  the  abode  of  Yama  by  means 
of  sharp  arrows.” 


V.iii.142.49-57 


407 


Both  of  those  heroes  roared  like  this  against  each  other. 
Their  fight  became  terrible  like  that  between  Taraka  and  Skanda 
(who  was  born  of  Agni) .  The  demon  discharged  volleys  of  arrows 
against  Kesava.  Ignoring  them,  Kesava,  the  slayer  of  Kesin,  too 
discharged  arrows  against  him. 

The  infuriated  Rukma  took  up  an  excellent  bow  and  pierced 
his  chest  with  a  sharp  arrow.  Thereupon  Visnu  himself  became 
furious,  seized  his  discus  Sudarsana  and  was  about  to  hurl  it 
at  Rukma  when  he  was  restrained  by  Rukminl. 

“The  fellow  does  not  know  you  as  the  four-armed  Janardana, 
the  Lord  of  Devas.  Reveal  your  own  real  form  taking  pity  on  me.” 

On  being  requested  thus  by  Rukminl,  the  Lord  revealed  his 
form,  O  descendant  of  Bharata.  On  seeing  that  form  the  Devas 
stationed  in  the  sky  began  to  eulogize.  At  that  time,  O  descen¬ 
dant  of  Bharata,  the  Lord  granted  to  Rukma  the  divine  vision. 


Rukma  said: 

49-57.  O  Lord  Kesava,  unlucky  and  sinful  that  I  am,  I  had 
hit  your  chest  with  arrows.  It  behoves  you  to  forgive  me. 

Formerly  Janaki  was  given  over  to  you  by  Janaka  himself. 
Now,  O  Lord  of  Devas,  Rukminl  is  offered  unto  you  by  me. 
Marry  her  duly  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions. 


On  hearing  the  words  of  Rukma,  the  Preceptor  of  the  uni¬ 
verse  became  pleased.  The  Lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas  spoke 
thus  to  Rukmin,  the  son  of  Bhlsmaka:  “Go  back  to  your  own 
city.  Do  not  be  afraid.  Rule  the  kingdom  free  from  thorns 

(hindrances  from  enemies)."  , 

On  hearing  the  words  of  Kesava,  Rukma,  the  leading  Danava  , 
bowed  down  to  the  Lord  of  the  universe  and  went  back  to  the 

abode  of  his  father.  „ 

When  Rukma  went  back  Kr,na  invited  excellent 

They  were  the  seven  mental  sons  of  Brahma,  ' 

Atri,  Ahgiras,  Pulaslya,  Pulaha,  Kratu  and  Vas.«ha .the  highly 
honoured  one.  These  seven  have  been  mentioned  decisively  in 

th  0Ph“Jldy  intelligent  one,  these  sons  of  Brahma  are  truthful, 

noi  a  Danava  but  a  bonafide  Ksatriya. 


1.  Rukma  (Rukmi  in  of  ^  are  D5navas  or  Raksasas. 

But  to  this  Purana  all  opponents  or  - 


408 


Skanda  Purana 


men  of  fortitude,  great  ones  endowed  with  progeny.  They  were 
embellished  by  the  great  ones.  They  have  come  down  to  the 
banks  of  Narmada  to  stay.  They  have  conquered  the  sense- 
organs.  They  are  engaged  in  penance  and  self-study  of  the 
Vedas.  They  are  devoted  to  Japa  and  Homa. 

58-67.  They  were  invited,  O  great  king,  by  the  noble-souled 
Kesava.  After  duly  performing  the  Sraddha  in  accordance  with 
the  injunctions  of  Brahma,  Hari  honoured  those  seven  great 
Brahmana-sages. 

Janardana  granted  them  twelve  villages  there.  “The  gift  offered 
by  me  shall  be  yours  as  long  as  the  moon  and  the  sun  shine 
and  the  earth  remains.  There  shall  never  be  any  enemy.  I  shall 
bestow  welfare  on  those  kings  of  no  sins,  who  will  keep  up  what 
has  been  offered  by  me.  I  will  grant  them  the  greatest  goal. 

Those  who  preserve  what  has  been  given  by  me  rejoice  in 
heaven  as  long  as  the  five  great  elements  move  about  in  the 
worlds. 

A  fool  who  deprives  you  of  what  has  been  given  on  the  earth, 
will  have  to  live  invariably  in  Naraka  until  the  annihilation  of 
all  living  beings. 

The  earth  has  to  be  protected  whether  bequeathed  by  one’s 
own  men  or  others.  The  benefit  belongs  to  the  person  to  whom 
the  earth  belongs  for  the  nonce. 

He  who  takes  away  the  earth  bequeathed  by  one’s  own  men 
or  others,  becomes  a  worm  in  faeces  and  sinks  along  with  his 
Pitrs  (ancestors). 

If  the  land  is  illegally  confiscated  or  illegally  caused  to  be 
confiscated,  the  primary  confiscator  and  the  other  who  caused 
it  to  be  confiscated,  are  born  as  worms  in  faeces. 

He  who  gifts  a  plot  of  land  stays  in  heaven  for  sixty  thousand 
years.  The  confiscator  (Usurper)  and  he  who  abets  it,  shall  stay 
in  Naraka  for  as  many  years. 

68-79.  Which  gentle  (good)  man  will  take  back  the  gifts 
made  over  earlier  by  leading  men,  causing  religious  merit,  wealth 
and  renown?  They  are  on  a  par  with  the  remnants  of  the  offerings 
made  unto  a  deity.” 

In  this  manner  the  Slayer  of  Madhu  honoured  them  duly 
and  perfectly  and  then  grasped  the  hand  of  RukminI  in  mar¬ 
riage. 

After  finishing  his  task  splendidly  i.e.  after  conquering  the 
leading  Danavas,  Musalin  (i.e.  Balarama)  came  back  to  his  abode. 


V.iii.142.80-89 


409 


Both  of  them,  Krsna  and  Sankarsana,  set  off  to  Dvaraka. 

On  seeing  Kesava,  the  destroyer  of  sufferings,  going  away, 
the  truthful  Brahmanas  of  esteemed  holy  vows  also  started. 

On  seeing  those  Brahmanas  closely  following  the  chariot 
along  its  path,  Kesava  stopped  for  a  short  while  and  spoke 
these  words: 

“O  excellent  Brahmanas,  speak  out  everything,  what  makes 
you  come  along?  Your  duty  towards  me  yet  remains.  Do  carry 
out  your  own  tasks.” 

On  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord,  the  sages  spoke  thus: 
“You  have  been  venerated  by  us  with  truthful  mental  fervour 
for  thousands  and  crores  of  Kalpas.  You  are  very  difficult  to  be 
attained  by  men  but  attained  (now)  by  us;  why  do  you  abandon 

us  (summarily)?”  ,  _  .  , 

On  hearing  the  words  of  the  Brahmanas,  the  Lor  spo 
thus:  “This  is  the  truth,  the  sole  truth.  Again  and  again J  repeat 
this  that  I  shall  come  on  three  occasions  (everyday)  to  Mathura, 

Dvaraka  and  Yodhanlpura.”  v^v^nTni.ra 

On  hearing  this,  the  Brahmanas  returned  to  Yodhampura. 

After  manifesting  himself  in  Mathura,  the  Lord  incarnate, 

manifested  himself  in  three  ways.  .  ,  . 

Thus  everything  past,  present  and  future  connected  with  he 
origin  of  the  TIrtha  has  been  recounted  to  you.  On  hea  g 
this,  one  is  sure  to  be  rid  of  all  sins  undoubtedly.  ha, 

80  89  He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirt 
and  worships^Bala  and  Kesava  ha,  actually  venerated  the  sustamer 

0t^r!h^^^umambu,»l?  U£H 
A  man  wno  ou  hesitation  be  enter- 

be  liberated  from  all  sins,  ino  wony 

tained  in  this  respect.  growing  there  in  that 

Those  men  who  see  even  the  rees  g,  J  ^  lhe  sin 

TIrtha  are  rid  of  sins  though  they  may  De  as 

of  foeticide.  ,  after  eettine  up  in  the  morn- 

Those  who  see  ^"^"rd  ‘  Del*,  the  wielder  of  the 
ing  shall  become  equal  t the nd  ofbeing  bowed 

discus.  They  are  worthy  of  being  adoi  ea,  j 
to.  Their  life  is  an  excellent  life. 

_ _  .  . .  .  cfnrv  of  the  abduction  of  RukminT 

1.  Though  Skanda  follows  "  TTnha  on  Narmada  is  a  Skanda  con- 

by  Kr5na,  the  creauon  of  Ruknuiu 

tribution. 


410 


Slianda  Purana 


O  king,  the  Dana,  the  holy  bath  and  the  adoration  of  the 
Lord  there  in  that  Tirtha  shall  entirely  be  everlasting.  So  said 
Sankara. 

O  excellent  king,  listen  to  the  merit  cited  as  accruing  to 
those  who  die  there  entering  fire.  It  shall  be  recounted  com¬ 
pletely. 

They  shall  go  to  the  palace  of  Agni-god  by  means  of  an  aerial 
chariot  shining  with  tinkling  bells  and  solar  splendour.  He  shall 
rejoice  there  for  as  much  time  as-  he  pleases. 

Those  who  die  getting  drowned  in  water  within  the  precincts 
of  Yodhanlpura  shall  stay  in  Varuna-Loka  until  the  annihilation 
of  all  living  beings. 

If  people  die  in  that  Tirtha  by  ritualistic  fast  and  starvation, 
O  king,  their  departure  shall  be  one  without  return.  There  is 
no  hesitation  or  worry  in  this  respect. 

90-102.  Listen  to  the  benefit  of  this  also,  namely  the  excel¬ 
lent  gift  of  a  Kapila  (tawny-coloured)  cow  there  at  that  Tirtha 
in  accordance  with  the  injunctions. 

They  shall  be  honoured  with  the  fulfilment  of  all  their  de¬ 
sires.  They  will  rejoice  in  heaven  for  as  many  years  as  there  are 
hairs  on  that  cow  and  her  calf. 

He  is  honoured  (in  heaven)  for  as  many  years  as  there  are 
hairs  on  the  cow.  After  slipping  down  from  heaven  on  the 
Triloki  (one  of  the  three  worlds)  he  shall  be  born  in  the  family 
of  those  with  plenty  of  cows. 

He  who  gifts  silver  or  gold  there  in  that  Tirtha  is  transported 
to  Visnuloka  in  a  golden  aerial  chariot  and  he  is  honoured 
there. 

He  who  gifts  a  pair  of  sandals  or  garments  there  at  that 
Tirtha  obtains  the  desired  Svarga  by  the  power  of  the  gift. 

There  at  that  Tirtha,  one  obtains  by  means  of  Gayatri,  that 
benefit  which  is  usually  obtained  by  the  study  of  the  passages 
of  Rk,  Yajus  and  Samaveda. 

Undoubtedly  one  obtains  by  merely  bathing  in  that  Tirtha 
all  the  benefits  of  the  following:  the  merit  accruing  from  Prayaga, 
Gaya,  Tripuskara,  Kuruksetra  when  the  sun  is  swallowed  by 
Rahu,  O  great  king,  and  the  merit  accruing  from  Somesvara  at 
the  time  of  a  lunar  eclipse. 


V.iii-143.1-8 


411 


If  a  man  takes  his  holy  bath  on  the  twelfth  lunar  day  and 
bows  down  to  Janardana,  the  Pitrs  are  redeemed  by  him.  The 
fruit  of  his  birth  has  been  obtained  by  him. 

If  someone  feeds  a  single  Brahmana  there  at  the  time  of 
Sankranti  (Transit  of  the  Sun),  Vyatlpata  and  particularly  on 
the  twelfth  lunar  day,  it  shall  then  become  one  on  a  par  with 
the  feeding  of  a  crore  of  Brahmanas. 

All  the  Tlrthas  and  the  holy  oceans  on  the  earth  are  present 
there  on  DvadasI  day,  O  son  of  Pandu. 

Ordinary  Dana,  Yajna,  Bali  (oblation)  and  other  rites  may 
get  lost  but,  O  great  king,  what  is  performed  there  in  that 
Tirtha  never  gets  lost. 

Everything  connected  with  the  greatness  of  the  Tirtha,  past 
and  future,  has  been  recounted  to  you  in  detail,  O  descendant 
of  Bharata. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTYTHREE 


The  Greatness  of  Yojanesvara  Tirtha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  shouldg°to  **  e3“*1 
lent  Yojanesvara  Tirtha  where,  m  a  formei  Kalpa, 

Nara  and  Narayana  became  Siddhas.  Tirtha  that 

It  was  after  performing  a  penance  there  «  that  TMt» ^ 

both  of  them,  Nara  and  Narayana,  of  no*e  souls,  ^ 

lory  in  the  battle  between  c.vas  a"  ,s  Rgma  and  Laksmana 

Again,  when  Trel? Thereby  the  invincible  demon 
took  their  bath  in  that  Tiitha.  ihereoy 

Ravana  could  be  killed.  (jie)  Lords  Balarama  and 

Again  after  the  adve  f  K«  J xhey  performed 
Kesava  were  born  in  the  y  Naraka,  Kalanemi, 

formidable  deedS; 

Kamsa,  Canura,  Musuka,  Sisupaia  anu  j 


1  ,1  Tlrnre  Hplongs  10  Dvapara  Age. 

1,  Kali  Age  "began  after 

2.  BhTma  killed  Jarasandha  (Mbh.  SMa  24.7). 


412  SkandaPurana 

That  Lord  will  kill  in  the  battle  Karna,  Duryodhana  and 
others  with  Bhisma  and  Drona  as  their  leaders. 

They  will  engage  themselves  in  fighting  in  Kuruksetra,  the 
sacred  battlefield,  making  Bhlma  and  Arjuna,  the  disciples  of 
each,  as  instruments. 

They  will  go  to  that  Tirtha  again  and  perform  a  severe  pen¬ 
ance.  After  devoutly  honouring  Brahmanas,  they  will  return 
to  Dvaraka  once  again. 

9-17.  If  a  person  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and 
worships  Balarama  and  Kesava,  it  is  as  though  the  Supreme 
Lord,  the  sustainer  of  the  universe,  endowed  with  the  three 
Gunas  (Sattva,  Rajas  and  Tamas)  is  honoured  by  him. 

A  man  who  observes  fast,  keeps  awake  at  night  and  sings  his 
splendid  story,  becomes  absolved  of  all  sins. 

As  many  trees  men  see  there  in  that  Tirtha  so  many  sins  such 
as  those  of  Brahmana-slaughter  etc.  become  dissolved  (at  once). 

Those  who  get  up  in  the  morning  and  see  Balarama  and 
Kesava,  become  by  that  very  act  of  seeing,  similar  to  the  Discus¬ 
bearing  Lord  of  Devas. 

Those  who  bow  down  to  Hari,  Lord  Narayana,  worthy  of 
being  adored  by  the  whole  universe  become  themselves  worthy 
of  adoration  and  obeisance.  Their  life  is  well-lived. 

Whatever  is  performed  in  that  Tirtha  by  way  of  Dana,  Snana 
and  adoration  of  the  deity,  the  fruit  thereof  becomes  everlast¬ 
ing. 

It  is  (traditionally  stated)  that  gold  is  the  first  progeny  of 
Agni.  The  earth  (plot  of  land)  belongs  to  Visnu  and  cows  are 
the  children  of  Sun-god.  If  a  person  makes  a  gift  of  a  cow,  a 
piece  of  gold  or  plot  of  land,  it  is  as  though  all  the  three  worlds 
have  been  gifted  by  him. 

Thus  the  entire  excellence  and  greatness  of  the  Tirtha,  its 
great  efficacy  past,  present  and  future  has  been  recounted  to 
you. 

By  listening  to  this  and  by  narrating  this  to  righteous  per¬ 
sons,  one  is  rid  of  all  sins.  No  hesitation  or  worry  in  this  regard 
(is  needed). 


V.ni-144-1 — 145.3 


413 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTYFOUR 
The  Greatness  of  Dvadasi  Tirlha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Dvadasi  Tlrtha.  All  the  Dana  as  well  as  Japa,  Homa,  Bali 
and  other  rites  performed  (elsewhere)  perish.  But  what  is  per¬ 
formed  in  Cakratlrtha  (?)  never  perishes. 

Whatever  is  there  in  regard  to  the  excellent  greatness  of  the 
Tlrtha,  past,  present  as  well  as  future  has  been  entirely  re¬ 
counted  by  me  separately,  O  descendant  of  Bharata. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTYFIVE 
The  Greatness  of  Siva  Tirlha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Thereafter,  O  Lord  of  the  Earth  a  person  should  go 
to  the  excellent  Siva  Tlrtha;  by  seeing  the  Lord  there 
liberated  from  all  sins  sense-organs  and 

Mahadeva  sHaU 

attain  the  merit  of  pei  forming g  -  Tlrtha  and 

- — — 

back.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it. 


414 


Skanda  Parana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTYSIX 
The  Greatness  of  Asmahaka  Tirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  a  devotee  should  go  to  the  excellent  Pitrtlrtha 
named  Asmahaka  where  by  (offering)  a  single  ball  of  rice  an¬ 
cestors  are  liberated  from  the  state  of  ghost. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

O  sinless  one,  recount  to  me  the  greatness  of  Asmahaka  as 
well  as  the  merit  that  accrues  to  one  through  performing  Snana, 
Dana,  offering  libation  and  balls  of  rice. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

In  a  former  Kalpa,  O  excellent  king,  in  the  assembly  of  sages 
and  Devas,  this  same  question  was  put  by  me  which  you  ask  me 
now,  O  dear  one. 

(If  there  be)  on  one  side  the  seven  seas  (Sagaras)  along  with 
Prayaga  and  Puskara,  they  do  not  attain  equality  with  this.  No 
doubt  need  be  felt  in  this  respect. 

A  man  obtains  that  merit  which  one  gets  (by  Snana)  at  the 
time  of  a  lunar  eclipse  in  the  well-known  Somanatha  Tirtha 
that  was  established  by  Soma. 

At  the  end  of  a  month  (i.e.  on  Amavasya  day)  Pitrs  look  up 
to  their  human  progeny  to  ascertain  whether  someone  will 
offer  them  Pinda  here  in  this  Tirtha.  So  also  do  Prapitamaha 
(great-grandfather)  and  Adityas.  This  is  (mentioned  in)  the 
eternal  Sruti.  So  say  Devas  and  sages  and  ascetics. 

8-14.  Listen,  O  king,  to  the  merit  that  accrues  to  one  by 
offering  libation  and  Pindas  but  once.  O  eminent  king,  they 
enjoy  the  splendid  Yoga  for  twelve  years. 

In  every  Yuga,  O  great  king,  Pitamahas  wait  eagerly  for  the 
arrival  of  a  scion  of  their  family  in  the  Asmahaka  Tirtha  wish¬ 
ing,  “Will  our  Amavasya  occur  in-Amahaka  (Asmahaka)?” 

Those  who  perform  the  rites  of  Snana,  Dana  and  Tilatarpana 
(libation  with  gingelly  seeds’  and  water)  unto  the  Pitrs  become 
free  from  all  sins.  They  attain  all  their  desired  objects. 


V.iii.  146. 15-32 


415 


In  the  midst  of  water,  O  king,  there  is  Agnitlrtha  as  well.  By 
visiting  that  Tlrtha  a  heap  of  sins  gets  dissolved.  Through  a 
holy  bath  alone,  O  leading  king,  one  dispels  the  sin  of  the 
slaughter  of  a  Brahmana. 

A  person  should  always  wear  white  clothes  with  self-restraint, 
and  subduing  of  the  sense-organs.  He  should  stay  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  Tlrtha  for  a  month  taking  food  only  once  a  day.  Thereby 
he  obtains  in  full,  the  merit  arising  from  the  gift  of  a  hundred 


virgins  adorned  with  gold.  He  is  honoured  in  Pitrloka. 

15-20.  He  shall  be  a  lordly  enjoyer  of  all  pleasures  on  the 
earth  encircled  by  oceans.  He  shall  be  endowed  with  wealth 
and  foodgrains  and  become  righteous  and  munificent. 

One  who  remains  pure  and  observes  fast  shall  obtain  the 
world  of  Brahma.  One  who  casts  off  his  life  after  coming  to 
Asmahaka  is  honoured  in  Rudraloka  for  crores  of  thousand 
years.  Thereafter,  slipping  down  from  heaven  when  the  meri¬ 
torious  Karmas  dwindle,  he  shall  be  born  in  a  family  rich  in 
gold,  jewels  and  pearls  and  will  be  endowed  with  handsome 

features.  . 

After  performing  the  ceremonious  bathing  in  accordance 

with  the  injunctions,  he  shall  attain  the  merit  of  performing 
a  horse-sacrifice.  He  shall  be  wealthy,  handsome,  alert,  clever, 
munificent  and  righteous. 

By  taking  the  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tlrtha,  a  devotee  at¬ 
tains  that  merit  which  is  acquired  by  the  study  of  the  four 
Vedas  and  by  speaking  only  the  truth.  This  Tlrtha  that  is  greater 
than  all  the  other  Tirthas,  was  created  by  Sambhu  formerly. 

21-32  Visnu  himself,  the  Lord  of  the  heart,  performs  the 
Tapa  of  Mahesvara.'  So  also  do  Gandharvas,  celestial  damsels, 
Maruts,  Marutas,  Visvedevas,  Pit™,  Moon,  Sun,  Manet,  Atn, 
Angiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Pracetas,  Vasistha,  Bhrgu,  Narada, 
Cyavana,  Galava,  the  great  sage  Vamadeva,  Valakhilyas,  Gandharas, 
Trnabindu,  Jajali,  Uddalaka,  Rsyasrnga,  Vasistha,  Sanandana, 
Sukra,  Bharadvaja,  Vatsya,  Vatsyayana,  Agasti,  Mitra,  Varupa, 
Visvamitra,  Munlsvara,  Gautama,  Pulastya  Paulastya,  pu  aa, 
Kratu1,  Sanatana,  Kapila,  Vahni,  Pancasikha  and  many  other 
sages  of  esteemed  holy  rites.  All  the  Devas,  sages,  ascetics,  human 


T.  W  22-26  c^Tain  repetition  of  names,  probably  inadvertently  done  by  the 
redactor  of  SkP. 


415  Skanda  Purana 

beings,  YogTndras,  Pitrs,  along  with  Pitamahas  etc.  stay  in  Asmahaka. 
There  is  no  doubt  about  it. 

Everything  offered  to  them  whether  good  or  bad  is  perma¬ 
nent.  Whatever  is  done  in  Yodhanlpura  is  everlasting. 

One  forsakes  his  mother,  father,  all  kinsmen,  friendly  folks, 
wealth,  foodgrains,  dear  sons  and  even  very  body,  O  excellent 
and  goes  in  the  form  of  air  accompanied  solely  by  Subha 
(merit)  and  Asubha  (demerit).  He  is  invisible  to  all  living  beings 
like  the  greater  supreme  Atman.  By  means  of  his  own  Karmas, 
O  king,  he  attains  good  and  evil  states. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

33-45.  What  is  the  reason  for  this?  Neither  Subha  nor  Asubha 
befalls  kinsmen.  A  creature  at  birth  is  alone.  It  is  alone  when 
it  gets  dissolved  (dies).  He  solely  enjoys  the  meritorious  ben¬ 
efits  and  alone  he  experiences  the  evil  effects  (of  his  actions). 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

This  great  question  put  by  you  is  remembered  by  me.  What 
is  uttered  by  the  very  mouth  of  Pitamaha,  I  shall  recount  to 
you.  It  was  known  from  Pitamaha  formerly  in  the  Assembly  of 
Sages. 

(Really)  no  one  is  mother,  father,  kinsman  or  friend  unto 
anyone  at  any  time.  As  the  embodied  being  becomes  aerial  in 
form,  his  form  is  not  known  to  anyone. 

If  such  were  not  the  case  in  the  world,  O  dear  king,  every¬ 
thing  would  have  gone  beyond  proper  limits.  The  mobile  and 
immobile  beings  would  have  perished. 

This  was  realized  even  very  early  by  the  creators  of  the  worlds, 
O  king;  Norms  have  been  established  lest  Dharma  (piety,  righ¬ 
teousness)  should  perish  in  the  world. 

If  Dharma  perishes  the  unrighteousness  of  men  will  prevail. 
As  a  result  thereof  people  will  go  astray  from  their  path  and 
it  inevitably  leads  to  downfall  into  hell. 

All  people  are  uncontrolled  by  nature.  All  are  intent  on  (i.e. 
love)  transgressing  the  norms  of  decency.  Hence  the  bounds 
of  decorum  were  established  by  the  great  sages  in  the  light  of 
the  scriptural  texts. 

The  various  righteous  acts  are:  Snana ,  Dana,  Japa,  Homa ,  self- 
study  of  the  Vedas,  worship  of  the  deities,  offerings  of  libation 


V.iii.146.46-56 


417 


and  balls  of  rice  (to  Pitrs)  and  hospitality  unto  guests.  The 
Pitrs,  Pitamahas  (grandfathers)  and  Prapitamahas  (great-grand¬ 
fathers)  are  to  be  remembered  as  well  as  the  three  deities 
Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesvara. 

All  of  them  were  adored  by  men  of  esteemed  worth.  So  also 
the  three  (generations  beginning  with)  maternal  grandfather. 
Hence  by  means  of  all  endeavour  a  devotee  should  follow  the 
acts  of  righteousness  urged  by  the  Sruti  and  Smrti  texts.  By 
practising  piety  for  ever,  one  is  not  defiled  by  the  particles  of 
sin.  One  should  not  even  think  of  transgressing  the  pious  rites 
laid  down  in  the  Sruti  and  Smrti  (Texts). 

46-56.  If  one  desires  for  one’s  own  welfare  in  this  world 
as  well  as  in  the  other,  one  should  scrupulously  practise  pious 
rites.  Father  and  son  are  always  identical,  the  original  and  its 
replica,  whether  (living)  together  or  separately.  This  is  the 
implication  of  the  Sruti  and  Smrti  passages. 

One  should  lift  oneself  up  by  one’s  own  effort.  One  should 
not  allow  oneself  to  sink  in  dejection  and  suffering,  O  son  of 
Kunti,  by  not  offering  libations  and  balls  of  rice.  There  is  no 
doubt  about  it.  After  realizing  this  one  should  be  a  person 
regularly  offering  libations  and  balls  of  rice.  Thereby  longevity, 
piety,  fame,  refulgence  and  progeny  flourish. 

I  shall  mention  unto  you  all  the  Pitrksetras  (holy  spots  spe¬ 
cific  for  the  Manes)  all  over  the  earth  encircled  by  the  oceans, 
where  things  offered  yield  great  benefits.  They  are  Gaya,  Puskara, 
Jyestha  (?)  Prayaga,  Naimisa,  Sannihati,  Kuruksetra  and  Prabhasa, 
O  scion  of  the  family  of  Kuru. 

Undoubtedly,  by  means  of  the  offering  of  libations  and  balls 
of  rice  in  Asmahaka  on  Narmada  one  obtains  the  benefit  pro¬ 
claimed  by  learned  men  in  the  case  of  all  those  holy  spots  of 
the  Manes. 

There  all  these  are  present:  Brahma,  the  Slayer  of  Mura  (i.e. 
Visnu),  Rudra  along  with  Uma,  Devas  beginning  with  Indra,  all 
the  Pitrs,  sages,  oceans,  rivers,  mountains,  clouds  and  the  Manes 
too.  Hence  it  is  the  Supreme  Tirtha  of  all  the  Tirthas. 

Brahmasila  (stone-slab  of  Brahma)  is  also  there,  O  king,  and 
it  resembles  the  forehead  of  an  elephant.  It  is  not  visible  in 
Kali  age  It  is  the  most  important  part,  the  Gayasiras.  On  the 
new-moon  day  in  the  month  of  Vaisakha,  the  holy  rock  resem¬ 
bling  the  forehead  of  an  elephant,  pervades  the  Ththa  to  an 
extent  of  a  Gavyuti  (six  Kilometers) .  That  is  cited  as  the  Tirtha. 


418 


Skanda  Purana 


57-66.  If  a  person  goes  there  on  that  day  and  performs 
Sraddha,  the  Pitrs  will  become  perfectly  satisfied  for  a  hundred 
years. 

One  may  take  his  holy  bath  there  on  any  other  new-moon 
day  as  well.  With  sense-organs  under  control,  one  should  per¬ 
form  Sraddha  duly  reciting  the  prescribed  Mantras. 

Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  he  derives,  O  king.  He 
obtains  that  benefit  which  is  ordinarily  obtained  by  performing 
Agnistoma,  Asvamedha  and  Vajapeya.  So  Sankara  has  told  me. 

The  fathers,  grandfathers  on  the  paternal  and  maternal  sides 
detained  in  all  hells  beginning  with  Raurava,  if  offered  a  ball 
of  rice  or  libations  of  water  at  least  once,  sport  about  in  the 
Pitrloka  until  all  the  living  beings  are  annihilated.  There  is  no 
doubt  about  this. 

Those  who  regularly  performed  their  pious  rites  or  those 
who  performed  the  opposite  thereof  and  those  who  have  be¬ 
come  ghosts  and  spirits  due  to  sins — all  these  are  liberated 
undoubtedly  through  a  single  Pinda  (ball  of  rice). 

A  divine  rock  resembling  an  elephant  stands  in  the  Asmahaka 
Tirtha.  It  was  created  by  Brahma  formerly  and  it  is  destructive 
of  all  sins.  Upon  this  rock,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  a  wise 
person  should  offer  balls  of  rice  placed  on  Darbha  grass  with 
the  tips  pointing  to  the  south.  They  shall  offer  these  with  the 
Pitrs  in  view. 

The  cooking  of  the  food  intended  for  the  Sraddha  shall  be 
done  on  the  ground  below  duly  (not  on  the  rock).  With  the 
Pitrs  in  view,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  various  kinds  of  monetary 
and  other  gifts  should  be  made  to  Brahmanas  invited  for  the 
Sraddha,  such  as  a  pair  of  clothes,  umbrellas,  shoes,  waterpot  etc. 

67-78.  Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  of  the  person  who 
offers  these  to  an  excellent  Brahmana.  The  Pitrs  undoubtedly 
become  contented  for  a  period  of  twelve  years. 

O  great  king,  Pitrs  and  Pitamahas  assuming  aerial  forms  (at 
Asmahaka)  eagerly  wait  for  a  member  of  their  family  to  arrive 
there.  “The  son  shall  arrive  here  at  the  Tirtha,  take  his  holy 
bath  and  offer  the  libation.  He  may  perform  Sraddha  or  offer 
balls  of  rice.  Thereby  we  shall  attain  sadgati  (good  position) 
(i.e.  Moksa).” 

The  drops  that  fall  from  the  garments  after  taking  the  holy 
plunge  shall  delight  the  Pitrs  staying  in  Naraka.  There  is  no 
doubt  about  it. 


V.iii.146.79-89 


419 


If  any  member  of  the  family  was  not  properly  cremated  in 
funeral  fire  after  death,  the  drops  of  water  falling  from  the 
hairs  (of  the  performer  of  Sraddha)  and  other  things  wet  therewith 
will  propitiate  them. 

A  person  should  perform  the  Sraddha  in  accordance  with 
the  injunctions  in  the  Tlrtha  there  and  perform  the  Japa  of 
Pilr-Samhitd.  They  immediately  redeem  the  ancestors. 

When  Amavasya  coincides  with  a  Monday,  the  man  need 
offer  only  a  single  ball  of  rice.  The  Pitrs  attain  everlasting 
worlds.  There  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  everything  becomes 
everlasting  if  performed  or  offered  there. 

Persons  performing  the  Japa  of  Pitrsamhitd  redeem  immedi¬ 
ately  the  Pitrs  from  Naraka. 

Vrsotsarga 

Even  Vacaspati  is  not  competent  to  recount  the  meritorious 
benefit  of  a  person  who  ritualistically  discharges  a  Nila  Bull1 
perfect  in  every  limb,  after  duly  bathing  it  in  the  Tlrtha  on  an 
Amavasya  day  with  the  Pitrs  in  view,  O  descendant  of  Bharata. 
Because  you  have  been  listening  attentively,  O  descendant  of 
Bharata,  I  shall  recount  the  merit  that  accrues  by  ceremoni¬ 
ously  discharging  a  bull  in  Asmahaka.  He  shall  redeem  twenty- 
one  generations  of  the  members  of  his  family  who  have  been 
baked  in  Narakas  beginning  with  Raurava. 

A  bull  that  has  a  pink-coloured  face,  grey  tail  and  tawny- 
coloured  hoofs  and  horns,  is  called  Nila  Bull. 

79-89.  A  bull  that  is  tawny-coloured  in  all  the  limbs  and 
white  in  tail  and  hoofs  is  called  Piiiga  Bull.  It  increases  the 
delight  of  Pitrs. 

A  bull  resembling  a  pigeon  in  colour,  that  has  a  Tilaka  (freckle 
mark)  on  the  forehead  is  called  Babhru.  It  should  be  perfect 
and  splendid.  A  bull  that  has  the  same  colour  all  over  the  body 
but  has  a  tawny-coloured  tail  and  hoofs  is  called  Khura-pinga. 
It  gives  a  good  position  to  Pitrs. 

Some  say  that  a  bull  that  is  blue  in  colour  throughout  the 
body  is  a  Nila  Bull.  His  eyes  are  bright  red  in  colour. 

Nila  Bull  is  of  five  types:  A  Nila  Bull  bred  in  the  house  of 
a  Vaisya  is  the  best  of  the  lot. 


1.  The  term  is  explained  in  verse  78  below. 


420 


Skanda  Purdna 


A  calf  bred  in  the  house  should  never  be  yoked  to  a  plough. 
The  rite  of  Vrsotsarga  should  be  performed  only  through  it  in 
order  to  become  free  from  indebtedness  to  Pitrs. 

If  a  twice-born  yokes  to  a  plough,  a  calf  bred  m  his  house, 
the  Pitrs  slip  down  even  if  they  have  attained  the  world  of  Brahma. 

After  drinking  (water)  the  bull  should  shake  its  head.  By 
drinking  the  bull  delights  Pitrs.  By  shaking  its  head  it  redeems 
the  Pitrs  from  Naraka.  When  it  shakes  the  tail  and  the  drops 
of  water  reach  the  shoulder  the  Pitrs  of  the  family  of  the  person 

fallen  into  Naraka  are  redeemed. 

In  rainy  season,  it  may  bellow  and  scratch  the  ground  with 
the  horns.  It  pleases  the  sages  through  the  mud  kicked  up  by 


the  hoofs.  ,  .  , 

By  drinking,  the  bull  delights  Pitrs.  Through  eating  (grass 

etc.)  and  scratching  (the  ground)  it  delights  Suras  and  by  roar¬ 
ing  and  bellowing,  sages  and  human  beings.  O  son  of  Dharma, 

the  bull  is  Dharma  personified. 

90-97.  One  possessed  by  spirits  or  vampires  or  affected  by 
quartan  fever  should  go  to  Asmahaka  TIrtha,  the  destroyer  of 

the  anguish  of  all.  . 

After  taking  the  holy  bath  in  the  pure  waters,  a  piece  ot 
Darbha  grass  should  be  tied  on  the  head,  armpit,  navel  or 

round  the  neck.  . 

He  should  then  approach  the  deity  Kesava  and  circumambulate 

him.  After  uttering  the  Gayatri  or  any  Vaisnava  Mantra,  he 
should  eulogize  Narayana,  the  Lord  of  persons  worthy  of  being 
sought  in  refuge,  the  Lord  saluted  and  venerated  by  all  the  Devas. 

(Prayer)  “Obeisance  to  you,  O  Lord  born  of  a  part  of  Yajiia. 
Obeisance  to  you,  O  omnipresent  one.  Obeisance,  Obeisance 
to  you,  O  Lord  of  Devas,  O  eternal  Lord  with  the  lotus  as  the 
womb.  O  Damodara,  be  victorious.  O  infinite  one,  protect  me 

who  have  sought  refuge  in  you. 

You  are  the  maker.  You  are  the  annihilator  in  this  world 
consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile  beings.  You  protect  living 
beings.  You  support  the  universe.  Be  pleased,  O  Lord  of  the 
chiefs  of  Devas.  Waken  the  sleeping  (paralysed)  limb.  I  am 
always  engaged  in  meditadve  absorption  in  you.  I  consider  devotion 
to  you  as  the  greatest.  O  Lord  Acyuta,  you  have  been  eulogized 
thus.  Be  pleased  with  me.  Protect,  protect  me  who  have  sought 
refuge  in  you.  Save  me  from  sins.” 


V.iii.  146.98-117 


421 


98-107.  After  eulogizing  Hari,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  and  the 
destroyer  of  Danavas,  the  devotee  should  take  the  holy  bath 
once  again  uttering  the  Mantra  mentioned  before. 

He  should  then  feed  Brahmanas.  After  taking  the  holy  plunge 
in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  laid  down  in  the  Vedas  and 
after  duly  offering  the  balls  of  rice,  the  person  should  recite 
Svastika  prayer. 

This  rite  is  repeated  thrice.  After  making  them  repeat  the 
blessings,  the  Brahmanas  should  be  sent  off. 

What  is  uttered  there  should  be  mentioned  to  the  Brahmanas. 
After  taking  the  holy  bath  in  the  TIrtha  the  devout  man  or 
woman  should  give  monetary  gifts  after  Sraddha  is  performed 
duly. 

When  the  devout  person  duly  bathes  the  deity  with  milk, 
honey,  curds,  or  cold  water,  the  Pitrs  drink  water  in  Puskarapatras 
(ethereal  vessels). 

A  devotee  who  worships  the  Lord  of  Devas  with  flowers  and 
offers  Naivedya  at  the  time  of  Ayana  (transit  of  the  Sun),  Visuva 
(equinox) ,  Yugadi  (beginning  of  the  Yugas)  and  Suryasaiikrama 
(passage  of  the  Sun  to  various  Zodiacs)  derives  the  full  benefit 
of  an  Asvamedha  sacrifice. 

A  man  who  performs  rites  connected  with  solar  eclipse  there 
in  the  TIrtha,  O  king,  goes  to  Visnuloka  by  means  of  vehicles 
resembling  solar  splendour  and  is.  honoured  there. 

A  dutiful  son  who  performs  the  Sraddha  unto  the  Pitrs  there 
at  the  TIrtha  has  attained  the  benefit  of  his  very  birth  (as  a 

son).  - 

108-117.  On  hearing  this,  all  the  Devas  with  Sakra  as 

their  leader,  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesvara  installed  the  Lord 
who  subdues  all  ailments  and  destroys  all  sins. 

If  a  person  remains  pure  and  offers  balls  of  rice  on  Amavasya 
days  throughout  the  year  in  the  Asmahaka  TIrtha,  O  king,  he 
obtains  here  itself  that  benefit  (merit)  which  performers  of 
Sraddha  attain  in  Tripuskara,  Gaya,  Prabhasa  and  Naimisa. 

A  person,  facing  the  south,  should  offer  water  mixed  with 
gingelly  seeds  and  Darbha  grass  on  holy  days  such  as  Manvadi, 
Yugadi,  Vyatipata  and  Dinaksaya  (evening).  He  who  offers  thus 
to  the  fathers  and  mothers  shall  obtain  the  benefit  of  an  Asvamedha. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  plunge  in  Asmahaka  and  adores 
Hari,  Brahma  and  Sankara  with  devotion  and  keeps  awake  at 


422  Skanda  Purana 

night,  shall  be  liberated  from  all  sins  and  get  the  hospitality 
of  Sakra  in  heaven. 

If  a  man  takes  his  holy  plunge  there  in  the  Tirtha  and  visits 
Janardana  and  adores  with  special  procedures  and  bows  down 
again  and  again,  he  is  considered  a  good  son.  The  salvation  of 
the  Pitrs  has  been  effected  by  him. 

There  is  only  one  Murti  (image)  for  the  three  deities  Brahma, 
Visnu  and  Mahesvara.  They  are  associated  with  good  results 
and  causes.  They  are  subtle  and  yield  great  benefits. 

Thus,  O  king,  the  greatness  of  Asmahaka  has  been  recounted 
to  you.  It  is  destructive  of  great  sins.  What  else  do  you  ask? 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTYSEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Siddhesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Siddhesvara  Tirtha.  It  is  an  extremely  fine  spot  situated  on 
the  southern  bank  of  Narmada. 

One  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  adores 
the  Bull-emblemed  Lord,  shall  be  rid  of  all  sins  and  attain  the 
status  of  those  who  perform  a  horse-sacrifice. 

If  a  person  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and 
assiduously  performs  Sraddha  in  order  to  propitiate  the  Pitrs, 
it  is  as  if  he  has  done  everything  for  that  purpose. 

No  inclination  for  further  stay  in  womb  will  be  evinced,  O 
excellent  king,  by  creatures  that  die  there  in  that  Tirtha. 

A  stay  in  the  womb  brings  one  to  misery  and  never  to  hap¬ 
piness.  There  is  no  possibility  of  rebirth  in  the  case  of  one  who 
bathes  in  the  waters  of  that  Tirtha. 


V.iii.148.1-19 


423 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTYEIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Mangalesvara  Tirlha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  auspi¬ 
cious  Angaraka  (Mangalesvara)  Tlrtha  on  the  northern  bank 
of  Narmada.  It  is  destructive  of  all  sins. 

On  the  fourth  lunar  day  coinciding  with  a  Tuesday  the  devo¬ 
tee  should  perform  the  Sankalpa-rite  (ritualistic  announcement 
of  the  decision)  resolutely  and  take  his  bath  after  sunset.  He 
then  proceeds  to  perform  the  Sandhya  rites  of  dusk. 

He  should  adore  Lohita  (Mars)  devoutly  with  sweet  scents, 
garlands  and  ornaments.  The  idol  should  be  installed  on  the 
ground  and  smeared  with  red  sandalpaste. 

Uttering  “Obeisance  to  Angaraka”  he  should  adore  on  the 
pericarp  of  the  lotus  figure  (drawn).  Then  on  the  petals  be¬ 
ginning  with  the  one  in  the  east,  he  should  perform  the  wor¬ 
ship  uttering  respectively.  “Obeisance  to  Kuja”,  “Obeisance  to 
Bhumi-Putra”,  “Obeisance  to  Raktanga”,  “Obeisance  to  Suvasas", 
“Obeisance  to  Harakopodbhava”  (‘born  of  the  anger  of  Hara  ), 
“Obeisance  to  Svedaja”  (‘bom  of  sweat’),  “Obeisance  to  Atibahu”, 
(‘of  extremely  powerful  arms’)  and  “Obeisance  to  Sarvakamaprada 
(‘bestower  of  all  desires’). 

After  duly  worshipping  thus,  he  (the  devotee)  should  offer 
the  Arghya  in  accordance  with  the  injunction.  Then  he  utters 
the  Mantra:  “Obeisance  to  you,  O  son  of  Earth,  O  highly  pow¬ 
erful  one,  O  deity  born  of  the  sweat  of  the  Pinaka-bearing 
Lord,  O  Lohitanga  (red-bodied  one).  O  Angaraka,  I  make, 
obeisance  to  you.” 

He  then  makes  the  gift  of  a  water-pot  filled  with  paddy  rice 
to  a  Brahmana  along  with  gold  and  clothes  and  placed  on 
sweetmeat.  At  that  time  he  repeats  the  Mantra,  “May  Kuja  be 

pleased  with  me.”  '  ... 

9-19.  He  should  then  offer  Arghya  with  water  mixed  with 
red  sandalpaste.  On  an  auspicious  circular  Mandala  (mystic 
design  drawn  on  the  ground)  a  copper  vessel  is  placed,  filled 
with  gingelly  seeds  mixed  with  rice  and  strewn  with  red  flowers. 
He  then  places  the  vessel  on  his  head  and  kneels  on  the  ground. 
The  clever  devotee  then  offers  the  Arghya  sanctified  through 


424 


Skanda  Purana 


Mantras  Thereafter  the  devotee  who  wishes  for  his  welfare 
takes  in  silently  his  food,  soft,  smooth  and  sweet.  He  should 

avoid  saline,  bitter  and  sour  foodstuff.  _ 

The  devotee  celebrates  this  festival  on  three  Caturthl-Angaraka 
combinations  and  when  the  fourth  occasion  arrives  he  should 
make  an  idol  of  Angaraka  in  gold  within  his  capacity.  It  should 
be  beautiful.  It  is  to  be  placed  on  an  altar  made  of  jaggery. 

The  devotee  should  worship  the  deity  placed  on  jaggery  with 
sweet-smelling  flowers.  The  idol  is  to  be  placed  in  the  north¬ 
east  along  with  jaggery  and  water.  A  vessel  made  of  white  copper 
(}Kdsarena)  shall  be  placed  in  the  south-east  and  a  pot  filled 
with  red  rice  in  the  south-west.  The  wise  man  should  place  a 
fourth  Karaka  (pot)  filled  with  sweetmeat  in  the  north-west. 
This  Karaka  should  be  tied  with  a  thread  round  its  neck  and 
it  shall  be  adorned  with  scented  garlands. 

A  conch  should  also  be  blown  and  musical  instruments  played. 
There  shall  be  auspicious  shouts  of  victory  etc.  A  Brahmana 
well-versed  in  the  Vedic  texts  should  be  made  to  sit  on  a  high 
seat  or  in  the  middle  of  the  platform.  He  should  wear  red 
clothes,  red  garlands  and  unguents.  He  should  be  quiescent, 
handsome  and  lucky-featured.  He  should  be  one  engaged  in 
what  is  conducive  to  the  welfare  of  all  living  beings.  He  should 
be  a  master  of  all  scriptural  texts.  After  duly  adoring  him,  O 
son  of  Pandu,  he  should  be  asked  to  recite  Vedic  passages. 

20-26.  A  red  cow  along  with  a  red  bull  should  be  gifted 
to  him  while  uttering  the  Mantra,  “May  the  deity,  the  son  of 
Earth,  who  is  venerated  by  all  Devas,  be  pleased.” 

The  devotee  then  circumambulates  the  Brahmana  along  with 
his  wife  and  sons,  father,  mother  and  friends  too.  After  asking 
for  his  forgiveness  he  should  be  sent  off. 

I  shall  tell  you  fully  the  meritorious  benefit  that  accrues  to 
one  when  this  rite  is  performed,  especially  at  that  TIrtha. 

Due  to  the  power  of  this  TIrtha,  O  great  king,  he  shall  be 
a  handsome  man  with  lucky  features  for  seven  births.  No  hesi¬ 
tation  or  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  respect. 

If  the  man  dies  in  the  TIrtha  willingly  or  otherwise,  he  shall 
go  to  the  City  of  Angaraka  and  will  be  adored  by  Devas  and 
Gandharvas. 

After  duly  and  befittingly  enjoying  the  divine  pleasures  of 
excellent  nature,  he  is  reborn  here  in  the  human  world  as  a 
pious  king. 


V.iii.149.1-15 


425 


He  will  be  handsome  and  lucky.  He  will  be  free  from  all 
ailments.  He  will  live  for  more  than  a  hundred  years  and  all 
the  world  will  pay  respects  to  him. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FORTYNINE 
The  Greatness  of  Lihga  Varaha  Tirlha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Next  to  it  is  the  holy  spot  well-known  as  Lingesvara  where 
by  visiting  the  Lord  of  Devas,  sins  perish. 

O  Yudhisthira,  after  working  terrible  havoc  among  Danavas, 
the  Lord  assumed  the  form  of  a  boar  and  stationed  himself  on 

^O^who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  TIrtha  and  ven¬ 
erates  the  Lord,  O  excellent  king,  is  rid  of  great  sins  committed 

^oTthe  twelfth  day  of  the  dark  half  as  well  as  the  bright  one, 
one  should  observe  fast  and  then  worship  the  Lord  of  the 
universe  with  fragrant  garlands,  O  son  of  Pandu. 

O  blessed  one,  he  should  honour  Brahmanas  through  Dana, 
special  devotion  and  gift  of  foodstuff.  Listen  to  the  meritorious 

beBeyFfeedienrg  Brahmanas  there,  the  devotee  gets  the  same  ben¬ 
efit  as  a  person  attains  through  the  performance  of  a  Sattra 
extending  to  twelve  yc<irs. 

7-15.  After  due  offering  of  libations  to  the  Pitre  and  Devas 
nnd  taking  a  holy  dip,  the  person  should  concentrate  his  mind 
therein  and  repeat  the  twelve  names  of  the  Lord  while  sitting 
before  him.  This  should  be  done  every  month  on  the  twelfth 
dav  O  scion  of  the  family  of  Kuru. 

A  wise  devotee  should  always  worship  Kesava in  the  ^argas" 
He  worships  Lord  Narayapa  in  the  month  of  Pau5a  and 
MSdhava  in  the  month  of  Magha.  He  should  adore  Govtnda  m 
the  month  of  Phalguna  and  Visnu  in  Caitra.  In  the  month  o 
Va'sS.  he  worships  Madhuhantr  (Madhusudana  the  slayer 
of  Madhu)  and  Lord  Trivikrama  in  the  month  of  jyestha.  In 


426 


Skanda  Purana 


the  month  of  Asadha,  he  should  worship  Vamana  and  remem¬ 
ber  Sridhara  in  the  month  of  Sravana.  He  should  worship  Hjslkesa 
in  the  month  of  Bhadrapada  and  Padmanabha  in  that  of  Asvina. 
One  who  glorifies  Damodara  in  the  month  of  Karttika  never 
gets  feeble  and  tired.  (The  above  are  the  first  twelve  names  of 
Visnu.) 

By  glorifying  the  names  in  different  months  a  sin  committed 
earlier  perishes,  whether  it  be  verbal,  mental  or  due  to  physical 
activities.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it. 

He  should  be  alert  always,  whether  winking  or  opening  the 
eyes.  He  shall  take  food  looking  over  it  quickly.  Then  he  should 
utter  the  name  without  (any  other)  Mantra. 

This  is  the  natural  reaction  of  a  creature  caught  in  a  great 
disaster,  that  he  utters  the  name  of  Lord  Visnu,  the  ruling  deity 
of  different  months,  which  is  appropriate  to  that  particular 
month. 

Those  nights,  those  days,  those  months  and  those  years  of 
men  are  fruitful  wherein  Lord  Hari  is  remembered. 

16-22.  If  from  the  lotus-like  heart  of  the  devotee,  though 
he  is  in  the  midst  of  great  disaster,  Lord  Janardana  does  not 
move  away,  he  is  undoubtedly  a  Yogin. 

Those  who  are  devoid  of  devotion  to  Lord  Ananta  are  un¬ 
wise.  They  are  on  a  par  with  brutes.  Those  unfortunate  people 
are  really  worthy  of  being  pitied.  They  have  come  to  the  earth 
only  to  add  to  the  burden  of  the  earth. 

Those  who  are  equipped  with  devotion  to  Lord  Ananta,  are 
persons  who  have  fulfilled  tasks  on  the  earth;  they  sanctify  the 
universe  when  their  limbs  come  into  contact  with  it.  They  are 
clever,  they  are  the  veritable  ornaments  unto  the  universe. 

If  Lord  Janardana  is  present  in  one’s  mind,  words  and  body, 
he  alone  is  meritorious.  He  has  secured  the  fruit  of  the  tree 
of  his  life. 

This  excellent  TIrtha  is  meritorious,  for  it  has  Janardana  as 
the  Linga.  After  deceiving  the  enemies  in  the  battle  in  the 
guise  of  Boar,  the  eternal  Lord  (is  installed  here). 

A  pure  man  should  offer  here  water  mixed  with  gingelly 
seeds  to  the  Pitrs  on  the  following  occasions:  during  the  eclipses 
of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  on  the  Astaka  days  and  during  the 
two  Ayanas. 

May  Lord  Hari  in  the  form  of  Boar  make  you  quiescent  (by 


V.iii.150.1-17 


427 


blessing  you) .  With  his  curved  fangs  he  made  a  series  of  holes 
in  Meru.  He  is  like  a  raft  unto  those  who  sink  down  in  the 
ocean  of  misery.  His  hoofs  were  partially  immersed  in  the  vast 
expanse  of  mud  that  came  out  from  the  bowels  of  Rasatala 
(nether  worlds).  When  he  produced  a  hissing  snort,  it  nudged 
the  wind  in  the  atmosphere  which  split  the  trumpeting  sound 
of  the  Elephants  of  Quarters.  The  reputation  of  his  stiffened 
physical  form  has  been  dealt  with  in  the  Srutis.  May  that  Lord 
Hari  give  you  peace  and  quiescence. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTY 
The  Greatness  of  Kusumesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Kusumesvara.  It  is  destructive  of  Upapatakas  (minor  sms). 

The  deity  named  Kusumesvara  was  installed  by  Kama.  The 
eternal  Lord  of  Devas  is  well  known  all  over  the  world. 

Kama  is  mind-born  one.  He  is  a  universal  being  having  flow¬ 
ers  for  his  weapons  and  bow.  On  being  worshipped  the  Fish- 
emblemed  Lord  bestows  all  desires. 

After  his  body  was  burnt,  Ananga  (Body-less)  regained  Angitva 
(the  stale  of  being  an  embodied  one)  on  the  banks  of  Narmada. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

Do  tell  me  the  (story  of)  destruction  of  Ananga  when  he  was 
one  possessing  all  the  limbs.  It  has  neither  been  heard  nor 
seen  by  me  as  having  ever  taken  place.  O  excellent  Brahmana, 
do  recount  everything  in  the  manner  it  happened.  O  eminent 
Brahmana,  I  along  with  Bhlma,  Arjuna  and  the  twins  (Nakula 
and  Sahadeva)  wish  to  hear  it. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Ax  the  outset,  in  Rrtayuga,  O  dear  one,  Mahesvaia, 
the  Lord  of  Devas,  performed  an  elaborate  penance  when  he 
was  staying  at  Ganga  Sagara. 


428 


Skanda  Purdna 


The  worlds  along  with  Suras  and  Asuras  became  scotched  by 
that  penance.  All  of  them  sought  refuge  in  the  Lord  of  Devas, 

the  Consort  of  Saci.  _ 

“O  Gopati  (Lord  of  heaven),  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of  Devas, 

who  pervades  all  living  beings  scorches  the  three  worlds.  Do 
stop  him.” 

Ori  hearing  the  words  of  those  Devas,  the  Slayer  of  Bala  and 
Vrtra  thought  mentally  and  commanded  (his  subordinates)  to 
bring  about  an  obstacle  in  his  penance.  They  were:  the  Apsaras, 
Menaka,  Rarhbha,  Ghrtaci  and  Tilottama  and  also  Vasanta  (Spring 
Season),  Cuckoo,  Kama  and  the  excellent  Southern  Wind. 

On  being  told  thus  by  the  king  of  Devas,  O  descendant  of 
Bharata,  the  Devas  accompanied  by  the  Apsaras  went  near  Hara. 

The  time  was  Vasanta  (Spring)  with  abundance  of  flowers. 
Peacocks,  Cataka  birds  and  cuckoos  became  excessively  excited. 
The  Devas  danced  and  the  Apsaras  sang  making  all  love-stricken 
and  agitated.  The  (Southern)  Wind  blew  on  making  even  Yama 
and  Nairrta  confounded.  Thereat  everyone  went  into  a  swoon. 
Excellent  birds  engaged  in  mutual  contacts,  along  with  Kinnaras 
and  the  great  serpents  were  agitated  by  the  fragrance  of  the 
Spring  Season. 

Even  as  he  glanced  round,  the  whole  forest  was  in  a  great 
upheaval.  The  people  were  seen  experiencing  the  state  of  (in¬ 
toxication  following)  a  poisonous  sting  (of  an  insect  or  1  ep- 
tile). 

Even  the  Lord  of  Devas  passed  through  the  three  states  oi 
Devas  viz.  Sattvika,  Rajasa  and  Tamasa.  O  king,  listen  to  it. 

18-27.  (Out  of  the  three  eyes  of  Sankara)  one  eye  became 
closed  like  a  bud  due  to  Yogic  mental  absorption.  As  for  the 
second  eye,  it  had  a  lethargic  repose  (due  to  the  intensity  of 
the  sentiment  of  love)  on  the  loins,  hips  and  breasts  of  Parvatl 
and  another  eye  of  Saihbhu  became  kindled  with  the  fire  of 
anger  at  Madana  who  far  away  from  him,  had  (held)  his  bow 
to  shoot  off  (an  arrow).  May  the  triad  of  Sambhu’s  eyes  depict¬ 
ing  different  sentiments  at  the  time  of  his  meditation,  protect 
you  all. 

Thus  was  Rama  seen  by  the  Lord.  He  was  reduced  to  ash 
along  with  his  bow  and  arrows.  It  amounted  to  the  destruction 
of  all  embodied  beings. 


V.iii.150.28-39 


429 


On  seeing  Kama  annihilated  there,  the  Devas  and  the  groups 
of  celestial  damsels  became  frightened.  All  of  them  fled  away 
in  the  ten  different  directions. 

All  the  worlds  including  Suras,  Asuras  and  human  beings, 
bereft  of  Kama,  sought  refuge  in  Brahma.  The  Devas  with  Indi  a 
as  their  leader  sought  refuge  in  Brahma. 

On  seeing  the  universe  dejected  and  despondent,  they  spoke 
to  Paramesthin:  “O  Lord,  you  know  that  the  world  remains 
(alive  and  active)  when  copulation  becomes  possible.  Bu  ,  ^ 

Lord,  now  without  Kama,  all  the  subjects  have  become  dried  up. 

On  hearing  the  words  of  those  Devas,  Prapitamaha  accom¬ 
panied  them  and  went  to  the  place  where  Lord  Mahesvara  was 

^"propitiated  the  Lord  of  all  living  beings  the  Lord  of  the 
universe,  by  means  of  the  eulogy  of  his  Tapdava  dance  a 
passages  of  prayer  taken  from  the  Vedas  and  Vedanga  . 

P  Then  the  delighted  great  Lord  Paramesvara  became  pleased 
„J,Te  Se™.  He  spoke  these  sweet  words  to  the  Devas  wtth 

Bra4Tat“  ‘tote  done?  What  is  the  distress?  What  is  the  cause 
Of  this  arrival  of  the  Devas  and  sages?  May  this  be  told  me 

without  delay.” 

The  Devas  said: 

28-39  O  Sambhu,  the  destruction  of  the  universe  will  oc¬ 
cur  ns  a  result  of  the  destruction  of  Kama  in  mobile  and  1m 
mobhe  beings.  It  behoves  you  to  create  all  the  three  worlds 

once  again. 

On  hearing  these  words,  Paramesvara  pondered  over  them 
??i  iTof  the  physical  form  of  Kama,  rare  on  the  earth. 
""Thereupon  Anahga  came  there  quickly  as  an  embodied  one 
even  as  aU  the  living  beings  were  watching.  O  excellent  tng. 

":Ptn‘the  Sul^ulrnd  thereat  Serpents  honoured 
and  greeted  the  L°^. ““^you"  OLordotthe  chiefs 
Brher,rMrUm,7meCb.e«ed^ a"tejed.-  O  destroyer  of  «n- 
s'nl  ott’ lhe  C“e"ent  ^  ^ th"  "'ay 
they  had  come  there. 


430 


Skanda  Purana 


When  all  the  Devas  dispersed,  O  descendant  of  Bharata, 
Kamadeva  resorted  to  the  banks  of  Narmada  and  performed  an 
elaborate  penance  lasting  for  a  hundred  divine  years.  He  be¬ 
came  lean  and  emaciated  through  penance  and  Japa.  Then  he 
was  pestered  by  great  horrible  beings  causing  obstacles  from  all 
around. 

In  order  to  annihilate  all  the  obstacles  he  remembered 
Kundalesvara.  Showering  arrows  everywhere  he  accorded  him 
protection. 

Mahadeva  became  pleased  with  his  steadfast  devotion.  The 
Destroyer  of  Kama  was  inclined  to  bestow  boons.  He  accorded 
Kama  the  freedom  of  choice  of  a  boon  he  wanted. 

On  coming  to  know  that  Mahadeva  was  pleased  the  Fish- 
emblemed  One  bowed  down  to  the  Three-eyed  Lord  of  Devas 
and  spoke  with  palms  joined  in  reverence:  "O  Lord  of  Devas, 
if  you  are  pleased,  if  a  boon  has  to  be  granted  to  me,  O  Lord 
of  the  universe,  be  present  here  in  this  TTrtha  always.” 

Saying  "So  be  it”,  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  went  away 
piercing  through  the  sky.  He  was  then  eulogized  by  the  groups 
of  celestial  damsels. 

40-51.  When  the  Lord  had  vanished,  Kamadeva,  O  great 
king,  installed  the  preceptor  of  the  universe  named  Kusumesvara. 

On  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  of  Caitra  or  on  the  day 
of  Madana,  a  person  should  take  his  holy  bath  there  in  the 
TTrtha  and  observe  fast. 

Early  in  the  morning  itself,  he  should  bathe  and  adore  Divakara. 
Then  he  should  offer  libations  to  the  Pitrs  and  Devas  with 
water  mixed  with  gingelly  seeds. 

After  taking  the  holy  bath  in  accordance  with  the  injunc¬ 
tions  and  after  adoring  him,  one  should  offer  balls  of  rice. 
Listen  to  the  benefit  thereof. 

Undoubtedly,  by  offering  the  balls  of  rice  the  devotee  de¬ 
rives  that  benefit  which  one  gets  by  performing  a  Sattra  for  a 
period  of  twelve  years. 

If,  with  the  Pitrs  in  view,  the  devotee  offers  a  ball  of  rice  at 
the  root  of  Ankula(?)  his  grandfathers  become  contented  for 
twelve  years. 

O  Yudhisthira,  even  worms,  insects  and  locusts  that  die  there 
in  that  TTrtha  attain  heaven.  All  the  more  so  in  the  case  of  men 
who  die  there! 


V.iii.151.1-7 


431 


He  who  conquers  his  anger  and  the  sense-organs  and  de¬ 
voutly  takes  to  Sannyasa  (renunciation)  shall  go  to  Siva’s  Palace. 

There  he  sports  about  with  the  divine  Apsaras  and  musicians 
of  Devas  and  Gandharvas  serving  him  for  a  hundred  crores  of 
Kalpas,  O  king. 

When  that  period  is  complete,  he  will  be  born  as  a  man 
here.  He  becomes  a  great  king  adored  by  great  emperors. 

He  will  be  handsome,  lucky  in  features,  eloquent,  valorous, 
intelligent  and  pure  (sinless).  He  will  live  for  more  than  a 
hundred  years.  He  will  be  free  from  all  ailments. 

This  Tirtha  well-known  as  Kusumesvara  is  meritorious  and 
destructive  of  sins.  It  is  superior  to  hundreds  of  other  Tlrthas. 
It  is  venerated  by  all  the  Devas. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTYONE 
The  Greatness  of  Svetavaraha  Tirtha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  On  the  northern  bank  of  Narmada  there  is  an  exces¬ 
sively  splendid  Tirtha.  The  greatness  of Jayavaraha  (or  Svetavaraha) 
is  destructive  of  all  sins. 

The  Earth  bowed  to  by  all  the  Devas  was  lifted  up  by  that 
Lord  with  the  intention  to  bless  all  the  worlds.  He  stationed 
himself  on  the  banks  of  Narmada  with  the  same  idea. 

One  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  that  Tirtha  and  visits 
Madhusudana,  is  liberated  from  all  sins  by  repeating  the  names 
of  the  ten  births  (i.e.  ten  incarnations  of  the  Lord).  Those  ten 
are:  the  Fish,  the  Tortoise,  the  Boar,  the  Man-lion,  the  Dwarf, 
Parasurama,  Ramacandra,  Krsna,  Buddha  and  Kalki. 


Yudhisthira  said: 

O  dear  one,  what  was  done  by  Matsya  (the  Divine  Fish)?  O 
excellent  sage,  what  was  done  by  Kurma,  the  Divine  Tortoise? 
What  was  the  act  of  Varaha,  the  Divine  Boar?  What  was  done 
by  Narasimha  (the  Man-lion)?  By  Vamana  die  Dwarf},  by 
pLasurama,  by  Raghava?  What  was  done :  by _Ae  L  .d 
form  of  Buddha?  What  was  done  by  Kalki.  Tell  me. 


432 


Skanda  Purana 


On  being  asked  thus  by  the  intelligent  son  of  Dharma,  the 
leading  Brahmana  spoke  these  sweet  words  to  him: 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

8-17.  In  order  to  please  Brahma  in  a  former  Kalpa,  the 
Lord  became  a  Fish,  recovered  the  Vedas  that  were  immersed 
in  the  great  sea  and  handed  them  over  to  Brahma. 

At  the  time  of  the  production  of  Amrta,  O  king,  the  Precep¬ 
tor  of  the  universe  became  a  Tortoise  and  supported  Mandaia 
as  well  as  the  Earth. 

Janardana,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  assumed  the  form  of  a  Boar 
and  lifted  up  Goddess  Earth  who  was  submerged  in  Patala. 

He  assumed  a  body  partially  human  and  partially  leonine 
and  tore  up  the  chest  of  Hiranyakasipu  with  the  goad-like  claws. 

In  the  form  of  Vamana  with  matted  hair  the  Lord  was  eu¬ 
logized  by  excellent  Brahmanas.  Taking  up  that  divine  form, 
he  covered  the  earth  (etc.)  by  means  of  his  steps  and  latei 
made  Bali  a  resident  of  Patala.  After  establishing  all  the  Suras, 
Visnu  went  back  to  his  own  city. 

He  became  son  of  Jamadagni,  Parasurama,  the  most  excel¬ 
lent  one  among  warriors  wielding  weapons,  and  killed  Ksatriya 
kings  beginning  with  Haihaya.  After  giving  the  earth  along  with 
mountains,  forests  and  mines,  to  Kasyapa,  the  Lord  of  Devas 
is  performing  penance  even  today  on  Mahendra  Mountain,  O 
descendant  of  Bharata. 

Then  the  Lord  became  Rama,  son  of  Dasaratha,  and  killed 
Ravana,  the  thorn  unto  Devas,  in  battle  along  with  his  hosts. 
He  gave  the  kingdom  to  Vibhlsana.  He  ruled  the  kingdom  with 
justice.  By  means  of  Yajnas,  he  propitiated  Devas.  Then  the 
lotus-eyed  Rama  went  back  to  heaven. 

18-28.  The  Lord  of  the  earth,  Vasudeva,  took  his  birth  in 
the  abode  of  Vasudeva,  with  Sankarsana  as  his  help-mate  (brother) 
for  the  purpose  of  slaying  the  wicked  kings  like  Kariisa,  Kesin, 
Jarasandha  and  Canura,  O  Yudhisthira.  With  your  (moral)  sup¬ 
port  he  killed  them.  With  him  as  your  excellent  ally,  O  king, 
you  will  kill  the  enemies  and  enjoy  the  earth  consolidated  by 
your  brothers. 

Similarly,  Acyuta  will  take  up  the  next  birth  as  Buddha.  The 
Slayer  of  Madhu,  the  Lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  who  is  fond 


V.iii.152.1-3 


433 


of  the  spring  season,  will  be  very  quiescent.  With  Lord  Paramesthin 
in  the  form  of  Buddha  the  entire  universe  consisting  of  mobile 
and  immobile  beings  will  become  enchanted.  Ever  since  then, 
O  descendant  of  Bharata,  sons  do  not  pay  heed  to  the  words 
of  fathers,  relatives  do  not  pay  heed  to  the  words  of  elders,  nor 
students  to  the  words  of  preceptors.  Everything  will  become 
topsy  turvy.  Dharma  is  defeated  by  Adharma,  truthfulness  by 
falsehood,  kings  by  thieves,  and  men  by  women. 

With  the  advent  of  Kali,  O  Yudhisthira,  Agnihotras  get  de¬ 
funct,  adoration  of  preceptor  comes  into  disuse  and  all  the 
pious  precepts  of  Manu  get  lost.  Girls  of  ten  and  twelve  become 
pregnant,  only  girls  are  born  and  Brahmana  becomes  Haripingala 
(tawny  like  monkeys).  Thereupon,  the  Lord  will  take  up  his 
tenth  incarnation  as  Kalki. 

Thus,  O  king,  I  have  told  you  the  reason  for  the  ten  incar¬ 
nations  of  Lord  Paramesthin.  It  is  destructive  of  all  sins. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTYTWO 
The  Greatness  of  Bhdrgalesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Thereafter,  O  protector  of  the  earth,  one  should  go 
to  the  excellent  Bhargalesvara  Sankara,  who  is  the  very  life- 
breath  of  the  world.  It  (this  Tirtha)  destroys  sins  by  merely 
remembering  it.  One  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that 
Tirtha  and  adores  Paramesvara  attains  the  merit  of  performing 
a  horse-sacrifice.  Undoubtedly  his  departure  to  Rudraloka  is 

one  without  a  return  therefrom. 

If  someone  gives  up  his  life  in  the  Tirtha,  he  gets  the  goal 
of  Rudraloka  from  which  there  is  no  return. 


434 


Skanda  Purana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTYTHREE 
The  Greatness  of  Adityesvara  Tirtha 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-1 1 .  Next  to  it,  there  is  another  excellent  Ravi  Tirtha.  Merely 
bv  seeing  it,  men  are  liberated  from  all  sins. 

7  The  fruit  of  a  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Ravi  Tirtha 
and  visits  Bhaskara  has  been  laid  down  by  the  Lord  himself. 

^hTthe  course  of  sixteen  lives  hereafter,  of  that  devotee, 
there  shall  never  be  anyone  blind,  dumb,  deaf,  ugly  or  laving 
deformed  nails  in  his  family.  White  patches,  herpes,  scabs,  cu¬ 
taneous  eruptions  etc.,  perish  within  six  months  in  the  case  of 

a  devotee  of  the  Lord.  _ 

The  story  of  that  Lord  heard  by  me  in  the  Purana  cannot 

be  briefly  recounted,  O  excellent  king. 

If  with  Ravi  in  view,  a  gift  is  made  to  a  deserving  Brahmana 
in  accordance  with  the  injunctions,  there  is  no  end  to  its  merit 

at  all.  .  _  . 

Excellent  indeed  is  the  fruit  of  Dana  made  at  Ravitirtha  at 

the  time  of  Ayana  (transit  of  the  Sun) ,  Visuva  (equinox)  an 

of  solar  and  lunar  eclipses. 

Like  that  of  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  there  is  no  end  unto 
the  merit  of  Dana,  Havya  and  Kavya  offered  at  the  time  of 
Sankranti  (when  the  Sun  passes  from  one  Zodiac  to  another), 
O  descendant  of  Bharata. 

Savitr  (the  Sun-god)  recompenses  at  the  proper  time,  the 
persons  who  make  gift  or  perform  Homa  (there). 

The  Sun-god  grants  boons  for  the  next  seven  births  again 
and  again.  The  gift  made  during  the  waning  of  the  Moon  has 
a  hundred  times  return  and  that  when  there  is  Dinaksaya,  a 
thousand  times  return.  If  it  is  during  Sankranti,  the  return  is 
a  hundred  thousand  times  and  if  at  Vyatlpata,  it  is  infinite. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

12-24.  How  did  Ravi  Tirtha  come  to  be  remembered  as 
more  meritorious  than  other  meritorious  ones?  Kindly  recount 
to  me  in  detail.  My  ears  are  covetously  eager. 


V.iii.153.25-34 


435 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Listen  attentively  to  the  excellent  Adityesvara  on  the  north¬ 
ern  bank  of  Narmada.  It  is  destructive  of  all  ailments. 

Formerly  in  the  beginning  of  Krtayuga,  there  was  a  Brahmana 
named  Jabali  born  of  the  family  of  Vasistha.  He  was  a  master 
of  the  topics  dealt  with  in  the  Vedas  and  scriptural  texts. 

His  chaste  and  well-behaved  wife  was  a  woman  of  excellent 
mind.  During  the  days  after  the  menstrual  cycle,  she  approached 
her  husband  and  said  thus:  “This  is  the  period  of  my  menstrual 
cycle.  I  have  approached  you,  my  husband.  I  am  actuated  by 
love  and  I  wish  for  a  son.  Hence  enjoy  me  with  love.” 

On  being  told  thus,  the  Brahmana  said:  “O  my  beloved, 
today  I  am  observing  a  holy  vow.  Do  go  away  now,  O  beautiful 
lady.  I  shall  grant  you  the  boon  in  the  next  menstrual  cycle.” 

The  next  month,  when  the  menstrual  cycle  recurred,  she 
approached  him  again.  On  the  plea  that  he  was  observing  a 
holy  vow,  she  was  dissuaded  by  him. 

Thus  many  times,  she  was  again  and  again  kept  away.  She 
became  disappointed  with  her  husband  and  the  beautiful  lady 
was  overwhelmed  by  an  excess  of  grief.  She  undertook  fast  unto 
death  and  gave  up  her  life. 

Owing  to  this  sin  of  foeticide,  the  Brahmana  was  suddenly 
assailed  by  leprosy  when  his  nose  and  feet  became  infested  with 
sores.  All  his  penance  was  lost.  Realizing  that  he  had  con¬ 
tracted  the  fell  disease  of  leprosy,  the  excellent  Brahmana  became 
grief-stricken.  He  came  to  the  banks  of  Narmada  and  asked  the 
other  Brahmanas  about  Bhaskara  Tlrtha,  thinking  in  his  mind, 
‘One  should  seek  health  and  freedom  from  ailments  from  the 
Sun.’  He  asked  the  other  Brahmanas:  “O  Brahmanas,  where  is 
that  Bhaskara  Tlrtha?  May  it  be  pointed  out  to  me.  I  shall  go 
to  that  Tlrtha  with  mental  purity  and  perform  penance.” 

The  Brahmanas  said: 

25-34.  On  the  northern  bank  of  Reva,  there  is  a  Bhaskara 
Tlrtha  known  by  the  name  Adityesvara  Tlrtha.  It  is  destructive 
of  all  ailments.  Do  go  there  unhesitatingly,  if  you  can. 

On  being  told  thus  by  the  Brahmanas,  the  Brahmana  (Jabali) 
prepared  himself  to  go.  But  afflicted  with  the  foul  and  fatal 
disease,  he  was  unable  to  move. 


436 


Skanda  Purana 


Thereupon  he  thought:  ‘Indeed  the  power  of  Brahman  as  is 
famous  all  over  the  three  worlds.  The  Linga  (penis)  of  the 
Trident-bearing  Lord  of  Devas  was  made  to  fall  down  by  Brahmanas. 
The  ocean  was  dried  up  by  Brahmanas.  Vindhya  was  lestrained. 
I  too!  stationed  here  itself,  shall  bring  Bhaskara  here  by  means 
QfZ  power  of  penance.  I  shall  bring  the  deity  named  Adityesvara. 

After  determining  thus,  he  engaged  himself  in  a  seveie  pen¬ 
ance  without  taking  food  and  with  the  sole  intake  of  air  for 
food  In  summer  he  stationed  himself  within  five  flies.  Dunng 
winter  he  stood  in  water.  During  rainy  season  he  remained 

without  any  covering  for  the  body.  .  , 

When  more  than  a  hundred  years  passed,  Ravi  became  pleased 

and  said  thus: 


Siirya  said: 

Welfare  unto  you.  Choose  your  boon,  whatever  be  in  your 
mind  as  you  desire.  Even  if  it  is  one  not  to  be  granted,  I  shall 
give  it  to  you.  Do  not  delay.  O  Brahmana,  since  you  are  en¬ 
gaged  in  a  penance  (for  such  a  long  time),  what  is  it  that 
cannot  be  achieved,  for  you  now? 


Jabali  said : 

35-43  If  you  are  pleased,  O  Lord  of  Devas,  if  a  boon  has 
to  be  granted  to  me,  (I  would  like  to  tell  you  that)  I  had  taken 
a  vow  of  visiting  Adityesvara,  O  Lord  of  Devas.  But  being  a  - 
flicted  with  disease,  I  have  not  been  able  to  fulfil  it.  Hence  you 
station  yourself  here  at  Sukla  Tlrlha  assuming  the  form  ol 
Adityesvara. 


On  being  told  thus,  the  multiformed  Divakara  appeared  in¬ 
stantly  on  the  northern  bank  of  Narmada. 

Ever  since  then,  they  consider  and  speak  of  that  Tirtha  as 
one  destructive  of  all  sins  and  all  miseries. 

If  a  devotee  takes  his  holy  bath  everyday,  particularly  on 
every  Sunday,  makes  seven  circumambulations,  continuing  this 
for  a  full  year,  and  visits  Bhaskara,  listen  to  the  benefit  that  is 
to  be  obtained  by  him. 

Prasupla  (latent  leprosy),  patches,  herpec,  white  leprosy  ana 
scabs  perish  immediately,  O  king,  like  a  heap  of  cotton  in 


V.iii.154.1-9 


437 


blazing  fire.  Within  three  years,  his  house  will  be  filled  with 
wife,  sons  and  wealth. 

If  a  devotee  performs  Sraddha  there  with  the  Pitrs  in  view 
on  the  day  of  the  transit  of  the  Sun,  his  Pitrs  become  con¬ 
tented.  Indeed  Bhaskara  is  the  Lord  of  Pitrs. 

Thus  the  excellent  Adityesvara  TIrtha  has  been  entirely  re¬ 
counted  to  you.  It  is  divine  and  destructive  of  all  sins  and 
ailments. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTYFOUR 


The  Greatness  of  Kalakalesvara  Tirtha 


Sri  Marhandeya  said: 


1-9.  On  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada  is  the  famous 
Kalakalesvara  Tirtha  well-known  in  all  the  worlds.  It  was  cre¬ 
ated  by  the  Lord  himself. 

After  killing  Andhaka  in  the  battle,  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of 
Devas,  created  it  in  the  company  of  the  Devas,  Gandharvas, 
Kinnaras  and  great  Serpents.  They  sang  and  played  on  the 
musical  instruments  like  trumpet,  drums  like  Mrdanga,  Panava 
etc.,  lutes  and  flutes.  They  sang  a  number  of  eulogies.  They 
sang  Saman  verses,  Yajus  and  other  Vedic  passages.  Others  recited 
Rks.  Other  dignified  persons  eulogized  Mahesvara  with  many 


prayers.  , 

There  was  heard  the  Kalakala  (indistinct  but  sweet  to  the 

ears)  sound  of  Pramathas  and  bards.  Since  the  Lihga  was  in¬ 
stalled  in  the  midst  of  Kalakala  sound,  it  came  to  be  known 

after  it  , 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  visits 

the  deity,  Kalakalesvara,  obtains  a  greater  merit  than  that  o 

Vajapeya  here  on  the  earth  itself.  ■  h 

By  that  merit,  he  will  become  a  sanctified  soul  “d  °ndeath 
he  will  go  to  heaven  seated  on  an  excellent  vehicle.  He  will  be 
sung  about  by  groups  of  celestial  damsels.  After  enjoying  great 
pleasures  he  will  be  reborn  as  a  noble  soul  in  a  pur.  family 
liter  lapse  of  much  time.  He  will  be  a  Brahmana  of  excellent 


438 


Skanda  Parana 


luck  and  handsome  in  features.  He  will  be  a  master  of  the 
Vedas  and  Vedangas.  Devoid  of  ailments  and  grief,  he  will  live 
for  a  hundred  years. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTYFIVE 
Attainment  of  Siddhi  by  Canakya 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Henceforth  I  shall  extol  Sukla  Tlrtha,  the  most  excellent 
one  of  all  Tirthas.  It  is  on  the  northern  bank  of  Narmada,  O 
Yudhisthira. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  meritoriousness  and  auspicious¬ 
ness  in  appearance,  all  the  other  Tirthas  on  the  eai  th  do  not 
merit  even  a  sixteenth  part  of  that  Tlrtha. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

I  along  with  my  brothers  and  all  the  excellent  Brahmanas 
wish  to  hear  the  real  greatness  of  that  Tlrtha. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

O  king,  listen  to  the  origin  of  Suklatlrtha.  Merely  by  visiting 
it,  a  sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter  gets  dissolved. 

Narmada  is  the  most  excellent  one  among  all  the  rivers  and 
is  destructive  of  all  sins.  A  sin  committed  in  childhood  perishes 
merely  at  its  sight. 

Except  Suklatlrtha,  O  king,  no  Tirthas  are  bestowers  of  sal¬ 
vation  anywhere. 

The  greatness  of  Suklatlrtha  was  listened  to  by  me  formerely 
in  the  company  of  Devas  and  sages.  O  descendant  of  Bharata, 
it  was  narrated  by  Sitikantha  (the  blue-throated  god  Siva) ,  the 
Lord  of  Devas,  on  Kailasa,  the  most  excellent  one  among  mountains. 
That  I  shall  now  recount  to  you. 

8-21.  Formerly,  in  the  beginning  of  Krtayuga,  Visnu  per¬ 
formed  an  elaborate  penance  for  a  thousand  years  in  order  to 
propitiate  the  Consort  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain.  He 


V.iii.155.8-21 


439 


remained  without  taking  any  food  except  the  intake  of  air.  He 
had  stationed  himself  in  Suklatirtha. 

Thereafter,  Mahesvara,  the  god  of  Devas,  became  directly 
visible.  He  manifested  himself  all  of  a  sudden  in  that  Tlrtha, 
O  king. 

The  area  extending  to  two  Krosas  (i.e.  2  x  3=6  Kms)  was 
made  capable  of  yielding  worldly  pleasures  as  well  as  salvation. 
A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  the  Tlrtha  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

Gahga  is  meritorious  in  Kanakhala;  Sarasvatl  in  Kuruksetra. 
Whether  it  be  a  village  or  a  forest,  Narmada  is  meritorious 
everywhere. 

Intake  of  food  is  the  most  important  of  all  medicines;  of  all 
beverages,  water  is  the  most  important.  Sleep  is  the  most  im¬ 
portant  of  all  happy  and  pleasing  things,  a  young  woman  among 
the  yielders  of  pleasures,  and  head  is  the  most  important  of  all 


the  limbs. 

Just  as  the  forehead  of  one  who  has  taken  the  holy  bath  is 
the  most  meritorious,  O  excellent  king,  O  Yudhisthira,  so  also 
is  Suklatirtha  the  most  meritorious  on  Narmada. 

Just  as  Ganga  is  the  most  meritorious  among  all  rivers,  just 
as  Janardana  is  the  . greatest  of  all  deities,  so  also  Suklatirtha 
is  declared  as  the  most  meritorious  on  Narmada. 

Just  as  Surabhi  (celestial  cow)  is  the  most  important  one 
among  all  quadrupeds,  just  as  Brahmana  is  the  most  important 
of  all  Varnas,  so  also,  O  king,  Sukla  Tlrtha  is  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  of  ali  TIrthas. 

Tust  as  the  Sun  is  the  most  important  one  among  the  Planets, 
just  as  the  Moon  is  the  most  important  one  among  the  stars, 
just  as  head  is  the  most  important  of  all  the  limbs,  just  as 
truthfulness  is  the  most  important  of  all  righteous  acts,  so  also, 
O  son  of  Kunti,  is  Suklatirtha  the  most  excellent  one  of  all 

TIrthas 

just  as  the  eternal  Supreme  Soul  is  difficult  to  be  compre¬ 
hended  and  cannot  be  pointed  out  because  ts  very  subtle,  so 

also,  O  king, flJl'^great' delusion  and  suffers  from  slow- 
„U°Tnet  d«s  n",  unLsund  clearly  Suklatfrtha  established 

'"'o’sonof  Dhtm^of  what  avail  is  too  much  of  talk  repeated 
O  son  of  Dh  ?  Suklatirtha  is  highly  meritorious 

attd 'cant  be 'approached  only  through  the  destruction  of  sins. 


440 


Skanda  Purana 


If  a  devotee  offers  here  a  handful  of  the  waters  of  Reva,  it 
is  as  though  the  Pitrs  have  been  propitiated  for  thousands  and 
crores  of  Kalpas. 

22-29.  The  only  one  that  destroys  the  distress  of  Pitrs  on 
the  earth  is  a  son. 

There  was  a  king  named  Canakya1.  Only  he  knew  Sukla  Tirtha. 
Yudhisthira  said: 

O  excellent  Brahmana,  who  was  this  person  named  Canakya? 
Who  was  the  only  person  who  knew  Suklatlrtha  which  no  one 
else  knew?  By  what  means  was  it  (the  Tlitha)  known  by  him 
on  the  surface  of  the  earth?  I  wish  to  hear  about  it.  I  am  very 
eager. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

He  was  a  king  born  of  the  family  of  Iksvaku.  He  was  the 
great-  grandson  of  Suddhodana.  The  saintly  king  named  Canakya 
enjoyed  the  entire  earth.  He  was  not  deceived  by  any  man  but 
all  of  a  sudden  the  excellent  king  was  deceived  by  two  roguish 
crows. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

How  was  that  king  deceived  by  the  two  crows?  Formerly  the 
intelligent  noble  soul  had  vowed,  “I  shall  not  continue  to  live 
if  any  being  be  deceived  by  another.  I  will  certainly  cast  off 
my  life.  There  need  not  be  any  doubt  about  it.”  O  leading 
Brahmana,  explain  this  to  me.  My  eagerness  is  intense. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Realizing  that  he  had  been  deceived,  the  king  caught  hold 
of  the  crows  and  sent  them  to  the  abode  of  Yama  inflicting 
severe  punishment. 

The  croxos  said: 

30-39.  We  are  the  sons  of  Sunda  and  Upasunda.  We  have 
attained  the  state  of  crows  for  some  reason.  O  blessed  one,  do 

1 .  As  w  25ff  show,  this  Canakya  is  a  king.  He  is  different  from  Canakya  of 
Mudrdrdksasa. 


V.iii.155.40-49 


441 


not  kill  us.  We  have  come  to  a  decision  in  this  respect.  O 
bestower  of  honour,  whether  we  are  hurled  away  through  anger 
or  not,  we  shall  attain  the  greatest  goal.  Hence  command  us, 
O  leading  king.  After  carrying  out  something  that  pleases  you 
much  we  shall  be  freed  from  the  curse  in  accordance  with  the 
utterance  of  Brahma. 

On  hearing  the  words  of  the  crows  Canakya,  the  excellent 
king,  said:  “After  knowing  that  I  have  been  deceived  by  anyone 
anywhere,  I  will  not  continue  to  live.  Hence  (try)  to  find  out 
the  Tlrtha,  O  birds,  at  the  abode  of  Yama.  I  shall  send  you 
there  duly.  After  hearing  about  it,  you  will  tell  me.” 

Then  he  adorned  the  crows  with  garlands  and  sandalpaste. 
He  sent  them  asking  them  to  go  to  Yama’s  abode  quickly  and 
told  them: 

The  king  said: 

After  going  to  the  city  of  Dharma,  you  may  move  about  here 
and  there.  If  the  pious-souled  Yama,  the  great  controller,  were 
to  ask  you,  “From  where  are  you  coming?  Tell  me  by  whom  you 
have  been  adorned”,  my  words  should  be  repeated  to  him  with¬ 
out  any  fear  or  hesitation:  “There  was  a  righteous  king  named 
Canakya  born  of  the  family  of  Iksvaku.  On  the  twelfth  day  after 
his  death  we  were  propitiated  with  food  and  the  like. 

On  hearing  those  words  of  the  king,  they  went  to  the  abode 
of  Yama  With  the  full  embellishment  of  garlands  and  sandalpaste, 
they  began  to  sport  about  in  the  courtyard  of  Yama.  The  bold 
crows  were  seen  by  Dharmaraja.  He  asked  them: 

Yama  said: 

40-49  From  which  place  have  you  come?  By  whom  were 
you  two  adorned?  O  crows,  what  has  happened  may  be  men- 
tioned  unhesitatingly. 


The  crows  replied: 

There  was  a  righteous  king  named  Canakya  born  of  the 
family  of  Iksvaku.  On  his  death,  on  the  twelfth  day,  we  were 
propitiated  through  food  etc. 


*  *  * 


442 


Skanda  Purana 


On  hearing  their  words,  Yama,  the  son  of  Vivasvan,  looked 
at  Citragupta,  Kali  and  Kala  and  said  to  them  thus:  It  has  been 
enjoined  by  Brahma  that  living  beings,  such  as  the  oviparous, 
sweat-born  etc.,  among  mobile  and  immobile  beings  should 
come  to  my  presence.  Where  has  that  man  of  evil  action  named 
Canakya  gone?  Let  this  be  searched  and  found  out  from  the 
Puranas  and  Itihasas  as  to  what  the  fate  (of  such  ones)  is. 
Thereupon  those  Dharmapalas  (officers  of  god  Dharma)  urged 
by  Dharmaraja  looked  into  the  opinion  of  the  Puranas  regard¬ 
ing  the  coming  and  going  effected  by  Karmas. 

Thereafter  Dharma,  the  most  excellent  one  among  those 
who  uphold  righteousness,  said  in  a  voice  as  majestic  as  the 
thunder  of  a  rumbling  cloud,  even  as  the  Dharmapalas  were 
listening:  “The  oviparous,  sweat-born  and  other  living  beings 
that  die  in  the  pure  waters  of  Narmada  in  Suklatirtha  do  not 
come  to  my  presence.  That  Tirtha  is  highly  righteous  in  the 
world.  It  was  created  by  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesvara  with 
great  devotion  and  a  desire  for  the  welfare  of  the  worlds.  Men 
defiled  by  major  and  minor  sins  who  die  in  the  waters  of  Narmada 
in  Suklatirtha  become  pure.  They  are  not  at  all  under  my 
jurisdiction.” 

50-59.  On  hearing  these  words  uttered  by  Yama,  the  two 
crows  quickly  surveyed  the  great  city  of  Yama,  O  son  of  KuntI, 
and  returned. 

They  bowed  down  to  the  king  who  asked  them  about  what 
happened  and  what  was  heard  by  them.  The  two  crows  who 
were  Danavas  turned  into  crows,  said:  “From  this  place  we  two 
went  to  the  excellent  city  of  Yama  on  the  southern  side  of  the 
earth,  after  crossing  many  Yojanas. 

That  city  had  divine  features  with  golden  ramparts  and  or¬ 
namental  gateways.  It  could  bestow  everything  desired.  There 
were  many  groups  of  houses.  The  city  was  embellished  with 
jewels  and  gold,  crossing  roads,  quadrangles  and  royal  high¬ 
ways.  The  whole  region  was  covered  with  gardens  and  parks 
with  clusters  of  lotuses  adorning  the  ponds.  Swans  and  ducks 
cackled  loudly  while  the  cooings  of  cuckoos  added  to  the  confused 
noise.  The  forests  were  infested  with  lions,  tigers,  elephants 
and  monkeys  and  bears  resorted  to  them. 

It  was  teeming  with  men  and  women.  It  was  beautified  by 
continuous  festivals.  It  was  resonant  with  the  sound  of  blowing 


V.iii.l55.60-79a 


443 


of  conchs,  of  lutes  and  flutes.  Yama-marga  also  is  made  like  the 
region  called  Svarga.  Having  reached  the  place  we  were  found 
out  by  the  messengers  of  Yama.  At  the  behest  of  Yama,  we  were 
sent  to  the  place  where  the  Lord  of  the  universe  was  present. 
The  Lord  was  seated  on  a  throne  and  we  were  afraid  for  our 
very  life  when  we  saw  him.  He  had  huge  thighs,  calves,  shoul¬ 
ders,  belly,  chest,  arms,  face,  eyes,  nay  the  whole  body  was  very 
huge. 

60-62a.  Another  Kala  was  also  present  there  seated  on  a 
great  buffalo  and  adorned  with  a  great  crown.  Kali  and  the 
highly  intelligent  Citragupta  were  seen  arriving  with  fires  blaz¬ 


ing  in  between. 

They  were  experts  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Vedic  pas¬ 
sages.  They  were  discussing  the  merits  and  sins  of  the  crea¬ 
tures.  They  stayed  there  day  and  night  forever. 

62b-70a.  At  the  end  of  the  customary  obeisance,  Yama 
with  a  well  controlled  form,  asked  us  the  reason  for  our  visit. 
Do  listen  to  what  we  told  him,  'In  Ujjayini  there  was  a  valorous 
king  named  Canakya.  On  the  twelfth  day  after  his  death  we  had 
our  food  and  then  came  to  this  abode  of  Yama.’ 

On  hearing  our  words  Yama  shook  his  head  and  smilingly 
spoke  these  truthful  words  in  the  midst  of  the  assembled  court¬ 
iers,  ‘There  is  a  reason  why  this  sinful  person  Canakya  has  not 
come  to  my  world  that  terrifies  all  sinners.  All  the  creatures 
that  die  in  Suklatlrtha  on  Narmada  attain  the  greatest  position. 
There  is  no  need  to  doubt  anything  in  this  matter.  Whether 
a  creature  is  forced  or  does  it  voluntarily,  if  it  dies  in  the  area 
around  the  holy  spot,  it  shall  undoubtedly  become  an  atten- 

dant  of  Rudra. 

On  hearing  these  words  of  Dharma,  we  set  out  and  came  out 
of  the  city  We  saw  the  terrible  tortures  of  various  kinds  of 
people  in  Naraka.  O  excellent  king,  there  are  thirty  crores  of 
these  horrible  hells.  Seeing  these  on  the  great  highway  we 

became  terrified  and  extremely  distressed. 

7nh  7qa  The  Narakas  there  are:  Raurava  and  Maharaurava. 

Then  there  are  the  other  hells:  Pesana,  Sosana  Kalasutra, 

rpMrXl.s,  *"d  the 

(twin  mountains). 


444 


Skanda  Purana 


River  VaitaranI,  the  destroyer  of  all  sins  was  seen.  Meritori¬ 
ous  persons  drink  the  cool  nectar-like  water  thereof.  The  same 
water  gets  transformed  into  blood  in  the  case  of  sinners. 

Asipatravana  is  another  hell.  Another  great  rock  was  seen 
having  the  form  of  a  mass  of  fire.  Another  large  Salmali  was 
seen  There  are  hundreds  and  thousands  of  similar  hells. 

All  types  of  acutely  horrible  hells  were  seen  where  men  suf¬ 
fered  much.  They  had  committed  sins  verbally,  mentally  and 

P  Different  types  of  sins  due  to  arrogance  and  deceptive  words 
(were  seen).  Fathers,  mothers,  elders,  brothers  all  were  in 
helpless  states  with  imperfect  sense-organs.  Those  who  had  not 
redeemed  them  wandered  there  in  Raurava.  These  base  people 
spend  twelve  years  in  Raurava.  Coming  back  to  the  mortal  world, 

they  become  wretched  and  blind. 

79b-89a.  Men  of  sinful  deeds  who  misappropriate  the 
property  of  temples  or  of  Brahmanas  fall  into  Maharaurava  in 
the  abode  of  Yama  and  stay  there  certainly. 

Like  insects  in  chrysalis  stage  in  cocoon,  they  are  subjected 
to  piercing  with  thorns. 

Killers  of  animals,  birds  etc.,  and  meat-eaters  go  to  the  hell 
named  Pesana.  Those  who  keep  living  beings  in  bondage  fall 
into  Sosana  hell.  After  enduring  the  tortures  as  laid  down  in 
the  scriptural  texts,  they  come  back  to  the  human  world  as 


lame,  blind  and  deaf  men. 

Those  who  utter  falsehood  jeopardising  cows  and  Brahmanas 
fall  into  the  Kalasutraka  hell.  The  torture  therein  as  per  the 
authors  of  the  scriptural  texts  is  indeed  terrible.  After  experi¬ 
encing  those  sufferings  those  who  come  back  to  the  human 


world  are  born  as  men  of  low  caste. 

Those  who  forsake  the  progeny  of  their  own  family  and  keep 
living  beings  in  bondage  fall  into  the  Asthibhanjana  hell  un¬ 
doubtedly.  After  spending  a  hundred  years  there  they  are  born 
as  human  beings.  Those  sinners  undergo  misery  as  dwarfs  and 
hunchbacked  ones. 

Those  deluded  fools  who  profess  to  be  learned  but  forsake 
their  own  wives  go  to  the  terrible  Tamisra  hell.  There  is  no 
doubt  in  this  respect.  At  the  end  of  a  hundred  years  there  they 
come  back  to  the  human  world.  Those  men  are  congenitally 
unlucky  with  skins  morbidly  affected. 


V.iii.l  55.89b-l  10a 


445 


89b-99a.  The  base  men  who  speak  deceptive  words  and 
who  use  fraudulent  measures  and  weights  are  cooked  in  the 
Andhatamisra  hell.  After  staying  there  a  hundred  thousand 
years  they  come  back  to  the  mortal  world  and  wander  in  the 
abodes  of  enemies  as  blind  and  ill-formed  wretches. 

Those  who  nourish  themselves  alone  by  eating  without  giv- 
ine  food  to  Pitrs,  Devas  and  Brahmanas  fall  into  the  Krmibhaksya 
hell.  Even  at  the  time  of  birth  they  will  have  wounds  eaten  by 

W°One  who  lives  upon  the  fortune  of  others  emits  a  foul  odour. 
Those  who  swerve  from  their  duties,  the  sinners  bereft  of  the 
discipline  of  Varna  and  Asrama  endure  sufferings  in  the  Puya- 
s^pdrna  hell  (filled  with  putrid  things)  for  ten  thousand  yea^ 
When  the  period  is  complete  they  take  human  birth  but  afflicted 
S  ailments  they  become  repulsive  to  all  other  living  beings. 

A  man  of  greed  and  delusion,  a  wicked  man  who  administers 
pioTand  an  arsonist  alike  sink  into  the  Visasampurpa  helL 
After  a  period  of  a  hundred  years  he  comes  up  from  it.  He 

place  where  the  xugmay  '  woman  in  her  menses 

I91>1  ^hiood^in'the  Terrible  Vaitarani  river  with  blood  in  the 

of  sins  are  subject  to  torture  the 

“Thos^whoXays  inmcf  pain  on  others,  men  who  cohabit 
with  low-class  "omen_ “'“umacy  with  the  wives  of  precep- 
to^e  combed  to  embrace  (heated)  ftH.  (rocks,  for  a 
period  of  seventy  bir*hs-  h  ives  Qf  others  are  made  to 

embrace  (h"maSes  of  iron  fuii  of  man,  spikes 

in  the  hell  Salmali.  womenfolk  or  misappropri- 

ate?“et°eu  o  “a  B^toana  shah  become  a  erne,  Raksasa  in 
a  waterless  forest  region. 


446 


Skanda  Purana 


A  sinful  soul  who  takes  away  the  properties  of  deities  in 
temple  or  Brahmanas  out  of  avariciousness  has  to  sustain  him¬ 
self  with  the  leavings  of  the  food  of  vultures. 

These  are  the  sins  for  which  punishments  are  meted  out  at 
the  bidding  of  Yama.  Merely  the  sight  of  these  and  the  listen¬ 
ing  to  their  descriptions  generate  fear. 

There  are  others  who  enjoy  in  the  abode  of  Yama  the  ben¬ 
efits  of  the  gifts  they  had  made.  They  were  seen  even  as  the 
messengers  of  Yama  who  were  narrating  to  them  at  the  bidding 
of  Yama. 

They  were  surrounded  by  (and  carried  by)  chariots,  elephants 
and  horses.  O  blessed  one,  those  who  had  performed  series  of 
penances  and  derived  their  benefits  were  seen  there. 

That  world  accords  the  desires  of  the  men  who  gift  cows, 
gold,  plots  of  land,  jewels,  quilts,  food,  houses  etc.  Men  who 
offer  food  here  along  with  beverages  sport  about  in  the  abode 
of  Yama  fully  satisfied  and  contented. 

110b-115a.  O  excellent  king,  whatever  is  given  as  gift  here 
in  Suklatlrtha,  even  if  it  be  as  little  as  the  tip  of  a  hair,  has 
everlasting  benefit.  Thus  everything  seen  and  heard  has  been 
recounted  to  you.  Carry  out  whatever  you  desire  if  you  are 
capable  and  if  possible  release  (us).” 

On  hearing  their  words  Canakya  was  delighted  in  his  mind. 
He  congratulated  the  two  birds  again  and  again  and  sent  them 
off. 

When  both  of  the  crows  departed,  O  descendant  of  Bharata, 
he  gave  everything  he  possessed  to  Brahmanas,  discarded  lust 
and  anger  and  went  to  Amara  mountain  (Amarakantaka) . 

There  he  fastened  firmly  a  raft  with  black  strings.  Meditating 
on  Lord  Janardana  he  floated  on  quickly.  One  shall  wish  for 
health  from  the  Sun  and  wealth  from  the  sacred  fire.  One 
attains  knowledge  from  Isana  and  salvation  from  Kesava.  The 
string  that  was  dark  blue  in  colour  became  red  and  shone  like 
pure  crystal.  On  seeing  the  rope  shining  so  the  highly  intelli¬ 
gent  (king)  immersed  himself  in  the  pure  water  and  attained 
the  Vaisnava  region. 

115b-116a.  One  should  desire  (pray  for)  health  (absence 
of  ailments)  from  the  Sun,  wealth  from  Fire-god.  From  Isana 
one  obtains  (spiritual  knowledge).  One  attains  Moksa  (final 
beatitude)  from  Kesava. 


V.iii.l55.116b — V.iii.156.8 


447 


116b-119.  The  black-coloured  ropes  (of  the  raft)  became 
blue,  red  (and  finally)  resembling  pure  crystal  (which  was  the 
effect  of  the  waters  of  Suklatlrtha)  and  the  highly  intelligent 
king  immersed  his  body  in  the  auspicious  Suklatlrtha.  The  noble- 
souled  prince  attained  the  region  of  Narayana,  the  eternal  one 
called  Acyuta  (Unswerving  or  Eternal),  which  the  knowers  of 
the  Vedas  sing  about. 

Thus  the  Siddhi  (attainment  of  perfection)  of  king  Canakya 
has  been  described  to  you.  I  shall  describe  another  thing  also. 
Listen  with  concentration. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTYSIX 
The  Greatness  of  Suklatlrtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  There  is  no  other  Tlrtha,  O  king,  in  all  the  worlds, 
which  is  on  a  par  with  Suklatlrtha  which  is  on  the  earth.  No 
other  Tlrtha  is  sung  about  in  comparison  with  it. 

The  great  Suklatlrtha  is  stationed  on  Narmada  in  the  north¬ 
eastern  region.  It  is  resorted  to  by  groups  of  sages. 

On  the  fourteenth  lunar  day  in  the  dark  half  of  the  mont 
of  Vaisakha,  Sankara  himself  comes  here  from  Kailasa  along 

with  Uma.  „  .  ,  , 

He  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Suklatlrtha  with  great  mental  con¬ 
centration  at  midday  and  sees  himself  through  his  self.  He  is 
accompanied  by  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Indra. 

Especially  on  the  full-moon  day  in  Kartt.ka  and  Vaisakha,  O 
best  of  men,  (Indra)  after  taking  bath  sees  Brahma,  Visnu  and 

“  AfttrVlaking  bath,  Indra,  the  king  of  Devas,  along  with  Suras 
stays  (and  waits)  on  the  way  of  the  wind  (i.e.  the  fl"n*n“®: n  ) 

^  Sankara  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  dark  half. 

a"  On  that  day,  Gandharvas,  Apsaras,  Yaksas,  Siddhas,  Vidyadharas 
an^Uragas  (Serpent.)  see  the  Lord  of  De»as  and  shed  off  then 

sins. 


448 


Skanda  Purana 


Extending  to  half  of  a  Yojana  and  half  thereof  wide,  Suklatlrtha 
is  highly  meritorious  and  destructive  of  great  sins. 

9-21a.  Excellent  men  stand  in  a  place  from  where  they 
can  see  the  tops  of  the  trees  thereof.  Such  people  stationed 
there  are  rid  of  great  sins  accumulated  earlier. 

A  man  defiled  by  major  and  minor  sins,  is  liberated  by  the 
holy  bath  therein.  Even  the  sin  of  infanticide  which  is  very 
difficult  to  be  removed,  perishes  when  acquired. 

Especially  on  the  full-moon  day  in  Vaisakha  Sankara  comes 
here  from  Kailasa.  Since  the  Lord  of  Devas  stays  there  along 
with  Uma,  the  Tirtha  is  highly  meritorious  and  destructive  of 
all  sins.  It  was  earlier  said  to  me  by  Brahma  and  it  has  been 
mentioned  to  you,  O  king. 

Just  as  a  cloth  washed  by  a  washerman  becomes  free  from 
impurities,  so  also  the  body  of  a  man  becomes  pure  through 
the  holy  bath  therein. 

A  man  who  has  committed  sins  earlier  in  his  life  can  dispel 
them  by  staying  at  Suklatlrtha  for  a  day  and  night. 

O  great  king,  if  on  a  full-moon  day  a  handful  of  the  waters 
of  Reva  is  offered  to  Pitrs,  they  will  enjoy  welfare  for  thousands 
of  crores  of  Kalpas. 

Neither  one’s  mother  nor  father  nor  kinsmen  will  redeem 
one’s  fall  into  the  ocean  of  hell,  O  king,  but  the  merit  acquired 
from  Suklatlrtha  will  do  that. 

One  does  not  attain  through  penance  or  continuous  celi¬ 
bacy  that  good  state  which  a  creature  that  dies  by  casting  off 
its  body  in  Suklatlrtha  attains. 

One  should  observe  fast,  remain  pure  and  bathe  the  deity 
with  ghee  on  the  fourteenth  day  in  the  dark  half  of  the  month 
of  Karttika.  At  dawn  he  should  take  his  holy  bath  in  Reva. 
Keeping  Lord  Sankara  in  view  one  should  offer  Ghrtakambala 
along  with  gold  according  as  his  resources  permit. 

Concluding  the  offering  to  the  Lord  with  Ghrta  (ghee)  is 
called  Ghrtakambala.  That  man  becomes  highly  refulgent  on 
death  and  shall  go  to  the  world  of  Siva  accompanied  by  twenty- 
one  generations  of  his  family  and  remain  there  till  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  all  living  beings  (i.e.  Pralaya). 

21b-33a.  A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Suklatlrtha 
and  worships  Uma  and  Rudra  with  sweet  scents,  incense,  flow¬ 
ers  etc.,  shall  obtain  the  merit  of  a  horse-sacrifice. 


V.iii.l56.33b-44 


449 


O  king,  he  who  observes  fast  for  a  month  there  at  that  Tlrtha 
is  liberated  from  great  sins  incurred  in  the  course  of  seven 
births.  The  following  sins  undoubtedly  perish  by  observing 
Candrayana  at  Suklatlrtha:  Taking  in  milk  of  a  camel;  taking 
milk  of  sheep  and  taking  food  in  Navasraddha;  co-habitation 
with  a  Vrsall;  eating  prohibited  foodstuff,  buying  a  sheep  or 
buffalo  under  false  pretext,  performing  Yajria  on  behalf  of 
undeserving  fellows;  usury;  administering  poison  to  a  number 
of  persons;  and  reviling  deities  and  Brahmanas:  these  and  oth¬ 
ers  of  this  sort. 

If  a  person  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Suklatirtha  and  offers 
libation  to  Pitrs  and  deities  they  become  highly  propitiated  and 
contented  for  twelve  years. 

Persons  who  offer  sandals  and  shoes,  umbrella,  quilt,  seat, 
gold,  money,  foodgrain,  Sraddha,  fully  yoked  plough,  meal, 
drinking  water  etc.,  in  that  Tlrtha,  will  undoubtedly  go  to  Sivaloka 
on  death  delighted  and  well  nourished. 

Men  who  devoutly  keep  Siva  in  view,  O  descendant  of  Bharata, 
and  offer  an  alms-bowl  and  cooked  food,  go  to  heaven. 

Even  something  as  little  as  the  tip  of  a  hair,  gifted  to  the 
residents  of  the  Tlrtha,  those  who  perform  Yajnas  and  observe 
vows,  becomes  everlasting  in  its  merit. 

He  who  has  rid  himself  of  too  much  attachment  and  hatred, 
meditates  in  his  heart  on  Janardana  and  enters  fire  with  con¬ 
centration  shall  go  to  the  City  of  Varuna  with  all  his  desires 
fulfilled.  There  is  no  ailment  and  old  age  where  the  Lord  of 
waters  is  present. 

33b-44.  He  who  observes  ritualistic  fasting  (unto  death),  O 
Yudhisthira,  there  in  that  Tlrtha  shall  certainly  depart  to  Rudraloka 
never  to  return  therefrom. 

Whether  of  his  own  accord  or  under  duress,  if  a  creature, 
dies  in  the  region  of  that  holy  spot,  he  shall  undoubtedly  be¬ 
come  an  attendant  of  Rudra. 

He  who  gives  a  virgin  well  adorned  according  as  his  resources 
permit  at  Suklatlrtha  (derives  great  merit  thereby).  What  has 
been  declared  by  Rudra  by  way  of  indicating  the  merit  of  ritu¬ 
alistic  dedication  of  a  bull  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions, 
O  excellent  king,  I  shall  recount  it:  O  king;  listen  to  it  with  an 
attentive  mind.  He  is  honoured  in  Rudraloka  for  as  many  thou¬ 
sand  years  as  the  number  of  pores  in  the  separate  limbs  of  the 


450 


Skanda  Purana 


bull.  What  is  gifted  in  Suklatlrtha  at  the  time  of  solar  and  lunar 
eclipses  gets  increased  fifteen  times. 

If  a  person  remains  pure  and  circumambulates  Suklatlrtha, 
he  attains  merit  of  circumambulating  the  entire  earth. 

If  a  devotee  honours  an  excellent  couple  with  Rudra  in  view, 
he  will  never  meet  with  separation  (from  his  beloved)  for  seven 
births. 

Thus,  O  king,  the  great  merit  has  been  succinctly  recounted 
to  you,  i.e.  the  merit  of  (visiting)  Suklatlrtha  in  the  manner 
heard  by  me  from  the  Lord. 

He  who  devoutly  listens  to  this,  shall  undoubtedly  obtain  the 
merit  laid  down  in  the  Purana. 

This  is  true.  This  is  true.  Again  and  again  it  is  asserted  (to 
be  true).  He  who  seeks  salvation  shall  obtain  salvation  as  the 
great  fruit  of  the  holy  bath  and  the  gift  made. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTYSEVEN 
The  'Greatness  of  Humkarasvaml 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-9.  Next  to  it,  O  king,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Suklatlrtha  is 
the  Tirtha  of  Vasudeva  honoured  in  all  the  worlds. 

Indeed  that  is  an  ancient,  well-known,  meritorious  Tirtha  on 
Narmada  where  Reva  flows  to  a  distance  of  a  Krosa  (3  Kms.) 
merely  making  the  hissing  sound  of  Hum. 

O  leading  king,  ever  since  the  river  began  to  flow  with  a 
hissing  sound,  the  deity  is  named  Humkara  by  learned  men. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Humkara  Tirtha  and  visits 
the  immutable  Acyuta,  is  rid  of  all  sins  incurred  in  the  course 
of  seven  births. 

Excepting  Narayana,  the  Lord  of  the  universe,  there  is  no 
other  deity  capable  of  redeeming  a  man  immersed  in  the  ocean 
of  worldly  existence,  perpetrating  more  and  more  sinful  activities. 

That  tongue  is  the  real  tongue  which  eulogizes  Hari;  that 
mind  is  genuine  which  is  dedicated  unto  Him.  Only  those  hands 
are  worthy  of  praise  that  worship  Him. 


V.iii. 157.10-15 


451 


Nothing  inauspicious  happens  at  any  time  in  any  of  the  ac¬ 
tivities  of  those  persons  in  whose  hearts  is  present  Lord  Hari, 
the  abode  of  all  auspiciousness. 

Merely  by  prostrating  before  Hari,  a  man  obtains  the  same 
merit  as  (is  derived)  from  the  adoration  of  other  deities. 

He  is  honoured  in  Visnuloka  for  as  many  thousands  of  years 
as  there  are  dust  particles  sticking  to  his  dusty  limbs. 

10-15.  By  sweeping,  sprinkling  with  water  and  plastering 
the  temple  premises,  all  sins  of  men  and  women  perish.  By 
visiting  with  devotion,  the  sins  of  excellent  persons  get  dis¬ 
solved. 

If  Lord  Vasudeva  is  adored  by  anyone,  the  sin  incurred  by 
him  in  the  course  of  life  perishes.  With  the  sins  shaken  off,  he 
goes  to  the  world  of  the  Garuda-emblemed  Lord  and  becomes 
worthy  of  being  worshipped  by  groups  of  Suras. 

Even  if  one  makes  obeisance  to  the  Discus-bearing  Lord 
hypocritically,  the  sins  incurred  by  him  in  the  course  of  seven 
births  vanish  immediately. 

There  is  no  doubt  about  it.  Rudra  is  pleased  by  adoration; 
Divakara  (Sun)  by  means  of  Japa  and  Homa.  The  Lord  with  the 
conch,  discus  and  club  in  his  hands,  becomes  pleased  with 
prostration. 

A  raft  in  the  form  of  Visnu  can  be  the  sole  refuge  unto  men 
without  a  raft,  getting  immersed  in  the  chaotic  waters  of  sen¬ 
sual  objects,  entangled  in  the  ocean  of  worldly  existence,  as¬ 
sailed  by  the  typhoons  of  Dvandvas  (mutually  opposed  pairs 
e.g,  pleasure-pain)  and  afflicted  with  the  burden  of  protecting 
sons,  daughters  and  wives. 

O  leading  king,  O  tiger  among  men,  whatever  is  performed 
in  Humkara  TIrtha,  whether  auspicious  or  otherwise,  does  not 
get  lost. 


452 


Skanda  Purana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTYEIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Sahgamesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

]-9.  Thereafter,  a  devotee  should  go  to  another  excel¬ 
lent  Tirtha  named  Sahgamesvara  Tirtha  on  the  southern  bank 
of  Narmada.  It  eradicates  the  fear  of  all  sins. 

Proceeding  towards  the  Kailasa  mountain  after  his  arrival 
from  Pitrloka,  O  excellent  king,  Dhanada  had  rested  there  for 
a  short  while. 

As  for  the  proof,  O  excellent  king,  on  the  earth  indeed  black 
stones  appear  as  bright  as  crystals. 

An  excellent  river  Punyatoya  (a  river  of  meritorious  waters) 
originating  from  a  spring  in  the  Vindhya  mountain  enters  the 
waters  of  Narmada,  destructive  of  all  sins. 

One  who  takes  his  holy  bath  at  the  confluence  there  and 
worships  Sahgamesvara,  undoubtedly  attains  the  merit  of  an 
Asvamedha  sacrifice. 

One  who  offers  bells,  banners  and  awning  unto  the  deity, 
Sahgamesvara,  attains  Rudra’s  region  riding  in  an  aerial  chariot 
fitted  with  swans  and  surrounded  by  hundreds  of  celestial  la¬ 
dies.  He  shall  become  an  attendant  of  Rudra. 

One  who  fills  (covers)  the  Linga  of  the  Lord  with  rice  mixed 
with  curds  shall  stay  in  Sivaloka  for  a  desired  period  of  as  many 
years  as  there  are  grains  of  cooked  rice. 

One  who  covers  the  Lihga  of  Lord  Siva  with  Srlphalas  in 
spite  of  being  very  poor,  goes  to  Svarga  (heaven),  O  king,  and 
attains  the  same  benefit  (as  the  previous  one).  For  seven  births 
the  line  of  his  progeny  will  not  be  broken. 

10-16.  Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  of  that  person 
who  bathes  the  Lord  of  Devas  with  curds,  honey  or  ghee.  When 
Mahesvara  is  extremely  pleased,  those  men  go  to  that  place 
where  rivers  of  ghee  and  milk  flow  and  where  trees  exude 
honey. 

If  a  devotee  offers  even  water,  a  leaf,  a  flower  or  fruit  unto 
Mahesvara,  he  enjoys  everlasting  benefit  for  seven  births. 

Mahesvara  is  the  greatest  of  all  deities  worthy  of  being 
worshipped.  Hence  Mahesvara  should  be  worshipped  with  all 
effort. 


V.iii.158.17 — V.iii.159.6 


453 


One  who  steadfastly;  observes  (the  vow  of)  celibacy  forever 
and  worships  Lord  Siva,  lives  here  in  this  world  as  a  great  Lord 
and  on  death  attains  the  region  free  from  ailments. 

O  son  of  Kunti,  by  worshipping  one  eminent  Yogin  one  at¬ 
tains  the  same  benefit  as  is  obtained  by  learned  men  when  Siva 
is  worshipped. 

Their  life  is  an  excellent  life  and  blessed  are  those  noble- 
souled  ones  in  whose  houses  men  engrossed  in  devotion  to  Siva 
take  food. 

17-21.  The  holy  spots  of  Kuruksetra,  Naimisa  and  Puskara 
are  there  wherever  an  ascetic  with  all  the  sense-organs  per¬ 
fectly  restrained  stays.  By  feeding  a  single  Sivayogin,  O  son  of 
Kunti,  one  attains  that  benefit  which  is  obtained  when  Vedic 
scholars  hundreds  in  number  are  fed. 

The  Bull-emblemed  Lord  of  Devas  takes  food  along  with  his 
consort  there  where  a  person  with  all  his  limbs  smeared  in  ash 
takes  food  irrespective  of  his  being  ignorant  or  learned. 

By  offering  alms  alone  to  Sivayogins  one  attains  that  merit 
which  is  obtained  by  feeding  a  crore  of  Brahmanas  learned  in 
the  Vedas. 

If  anyone  casts  off  his  life  after  reaching  Sahgamesvaia  TTrtha, 
he  never  returns  from  Sivaloka. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTYNINE 
The  Greatness  of  Anarakesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  an  ex- 
tremelv  sacred  Tirtha  on  Narmada  named  Anarakesvara.  It  is 
of  Siddha  (spiritually  perfect)  nature  and  very  rarely  obtained. 
A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  O  descen¬ 
dant  of  Bharata,  does  not  see  the  extremely  terrible  gate  of 
what  is  termed  as  Naraka,  even  though  he  may  be  a  sinner. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

O  dear  one,  men  here  in  this  world  experience  pleasures 
(and  sorrows)  as  the  results  (of  deeds)  auspicious  and  mans- 


454  Skanda  Purdna 

picious.  O  excellent  one,  what  are  the  characteristic  features 
based  on  which  they  are  born  so? 

The  individual  soul  coming  out  after  leaving  the  body  is  not 
seen.  In  the  same  way,  it  is  not  seen  while  reentering  a  body 
constituted  of  the  five  elements. 

What  is  the  Sarnjha  (Pname,  consciousness)  that  comes  to 
men  in  the  conglomeration  of  faeces,  urine  and  semen,  along 
with  skin,  bone,  flesh,  suet,  blood  and  hundreds  of  hair  and 
nerves  and  tissues? 

On  being  asked  thus,  Markandeya,  conversant  with  Yoga  medi¬ 
tated  upon  the  eternal  Mahesvara,  Sarva,  the  Lord  of  Devas, 
and  began  to  say: 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

7-19.  O  son  of  KuntI,  listen  to  the  great  problem.  I  shall 
recount  it  in  the  manner  heard  earlier  by  me  from  Brahma  in 
the  assembly  of  sages  and  Devas. 

Preceptor  is  the  chastiser  of  self-controlled  ones;  king  is  the 
chastiser  of  the  wicked  ones.  The  chastiser  of  those  with  sins 
concealed  here  (in  the  world)  is  Yama,  the  son  of  Vivasvan. 

Those  who  did  not  perform  expiatory  rites  are  tortured  in 
various  ways  in  the  world  of  Yama.  They  are  then  born  as  various 
kinds  of  living  beings.  After  passing  through  those  stages,  they 
take  up  human  birth  when  they  will  have  distinct  marks  of  their 
sins.  I  shall  mention  them,  O  king.  Listen  attentively. 

After  going  to  the  abode  of  Yama  they  endured  all  sorts  of 
tortures.  After  undergoing  such  large-scale  tortures,  those  who 
rtetrn  to  the  mortal  world  are  marked  duly. 

A  habitual  liar  becomes  a  stammerer.  One  who  had  uttered 
a  lie  jeopardizing  cows  becomes  a  dumb  man.  A  person  with 
the  sin  of  slaying  a  Brahmana  becomes  a  leper.  A  drunkard  has 
blackened  teeth. 

By  stealing  gold,  one  gets  deformed  nails.  A  man  who  defiles 
the  bed  of  the  preceptor  gets  skin  diseases.  One  who  is  in 
contact  with  sinners  becomes  deficient  in  generative  organs. 
One  who  has  never  made  any  gifts  becomes  impoverished. 

A  person  who  performs  Yajna  on  behalf  of  the  undeserving 
becomes  a  Grama  Sukara  (village  pig),  O  king.  One  who  per- 


V.iii.l59.20-34a 


455 


forms  Yajna  on  behalf  of  many  becomes  an  ass.  One  who  takes 
food  uninvited  becomes  a  dog. 

One  who  takes  food  indiscriminately  without  examination 
shall  be  born  as  a  monkey  in  a  desolate  forest.  One  who  threat¬ 
ens  others  becomes  a  cat.  By  burning  down  a  forest  of  dry 
wood,  one  becomes  a  glowworm. 

By  imparting  false  knowledge,  one  becomes  a  bullock.  One 
who  gives  stale,  cooked  rice  to  a  Brahmana,  may  become  im¬ 
potent. 

On  account  of  rivalry  one  is  born  as  congenitally  blind.  One 
who  steals  a  book  is  born  blind.  The  child  of  one  who  steals 
fruits  dies.  There  is  no  doubt  about  this.  On  death  he  becomes 
a  monkey.  Getting  released  therefrom,  he  becomes  Galadavan 
(?  with  a  pendulous  fleshy  purse  hanging  from  the  throat?).  A 
man  who  eats  those  fruits  without  giving  (to  others)  becomes 
one  without  children. 

One  who  steals  cloth  shall  become  an  alligator.  A  person 
who  administers  poison  becomes  a  serpent.  By  cohabiting  with 
an  ascetic  woman  one  becomes  a  vampire  in  desert. 

20-34a.  A  person  taking  away  water  becomes  gouty.  A  per¬ 
son  stealing  grain  becomes  a  mouse.  The  Sruti  says  that  one 


who  ravishes  an  immature  girl  becomes  a  serpent. 

One  coveting  the  wife  of  the  preceptor  shall  become  a  cha¬ 
meleon  and  remain  so  for  a  long  time.  A  man  who  breaks 
water-current  shall  become  a  fish.  A  man  who  sells  an  article 
the  sale  of  which  is  prohibited,  shall  become  one  with  de¬ 
formed  eyes.  An  Ayoniga  (one  who  introduces  the  penis  else¬ 
where  than  into  a  vagina)  shall  become  a  wolf.  One  who  prac¬ 
tises  deception  in  buying  shall  become  an  owl. 

One  who  takes  food  on  the  eleventh  day  of  the  death  of  a 
person,  becomes  a  dog.  After  promising  some  payment  of  money 
to  a  Brahmana,  if  one  does  not  give  it,  he  shall  become  a 

Madhuka  tree.  ...  a 

One  who  ravishes  a  queen  becomes  a  wicked  man.  A  thief 

becomes  a  filthy  pig.  One  who  spreads  scandal  about  the  people 
of  hiffh  caste  takes  up  the  form  of  a  toitoise. 

A  Devalaka  (one  who  supports  himself  by  the  offerings  to  an 
idol)  takes  the  birth  of  a  Candala.  A  seller  of  fruits  becomes 
unlucky.  A  consort  of  a  Sudra  woman  becomes  a  scorpiom 
One  who  treads  on  fire  becomes  a  cat.  One  who  eats  meat 


456 


Skanda  Parana 


belonging  to  others,  becomes  diseased  (chionically).  One  co¬ 
habiting  with  his  own  sister  becomes  an  impotent  fellow.  One 
who  steals  sweet  scents  becomes  a  stinking  person. 

A  Gramabhatta  (a  priest  of  the  rustic  multitude)  becomes  a 
barber.  A  Daivajna  (street  astrologer)  shall  become  a  donkey. 
A  person  professing  to  be  a  learned  man,  shall  become  a  cat. 
A  person  expounding  scriptural  texts  (professionally)  shall  be¬ 
come  a  dog.  O  king,  one  who  reveals  secrets  of  others  is  seen 
to  be  so  (a  dog).  One  who  does  enimical  act,  whether  small 
or  big,  takes  the  birth  of  a  brutish  creature.  There  is  no  doubt 
about  this. 

These  and  other  signs  are  brought  about  by  one’s  own  ac¬ 
tions,  wherefrom  men  are  clearly  seen  what  they  really  are. 
Birth  follows  death  and  death  follows  birth.  This  is  the  case  in 
all  creatures,  O  descendant  of  Bharata. 

When  auspicious  and  inauspicious  acts  become  equal  in 
magnitude  and  when  semen  and  blood  become  mixed  due  to 
the  intercourse  of  a  man  and  a  woman,  a  creature  is  born 
undoubtedly.  Equipped  with  the  five  elements  the  creature, 
the  Atman,  the  Lord  himself  becomes  the  sixth  of  the  series. 
The  Atman  is  beginningless  and  when  it  wishes  to  take  a  birth, 
all  these  things  come  to  it:  sense-organs,  mind,  vital  airs,  knowl¬ 
edge,  longevity  (life  expectation),  happiness,  fortitude,  sustain¬ 
ing  (retention),  inducement,  misery,  wish,  Aharhkara  (ego,  I- 
ness),  effort,  shape,  colour,  voice,  hatred,  birth  and  non-birth. 

Puranic  Embiyology 

34b-39.  In  the  first  month  it  is  a  phlegmatic  mass  with  the 
full  complement  of  the  bodily  ingredients.  In  the  second  month 
it  is  a  lump  of  flesh;  in  the  third  it  gets  equipped  with  sense- 
organs.  From  the  element  of  ether  it  derives  lightness,  subtlety, 
sound,  power  of  hearing,  strength  etc.  From  air  the  Atman 
obtains  sense  of  touch,  movement,  digestive  power  and  rough¬ 
ness.  From  fiery  element  the  sense  of  vision,  wrarmth,  digestive 
capacity,  colour  and  illumination  are  obtained.  It  takes  from 
watery  element  chillness,  fluidity,  dampness  and  softness.  From 
earth  element  it  takes  odour,  sense  of  smell,  weight  and  physi¬ 
cal  form.  These  the  unborn  Atman  takes  up  in  the  third  month 
and  begins  to  throb.  If  the  longing  of  a  pregnant  woman  is  not 


V.iii.l  59.40-53 


457 


fulfilled,  the  foetus  becomes  defective.  It  may  get  ugliness  or 
even  death.  Hence  the  woman  should  be  kept  pleased.  In  the 
fourth  month  the  limbs  get  firmness.  Blood  begins  to  flow  in 
the  fifth  month.  Physical  strength  is  obtained  in  the  sixth  month. 
Complexion  is  fixed  and  the  nails  and  hairs  grow  at  that  time. 

40-53.  In  the  seventh  month,  the  foetus  becomes  endowed 
with  consciousness  and  mind  and  the  body  has  all  the  nails  and 
hundreds  of  hairs.  In  the  eighth  month,  the  outer  skin  is  fixed 
and  the  foetus  becomes  endowed  with  the  power  of  memory. 

It  is  at  this  time  that  his  sin  pursues  the  foetus  and  the  mother 
as  well.  Hence  if  the  birth  is  premature  and  the  child  is  born 
in  the  eighth  month  it  dies  invariably.  Either  in  the  ninth  or 
the  tenth  month  the  child  comes  out  naturally  forced  by  the 
powerful  winds  at  the  time  of  delivery.  With  feverish  haste  it 
comes  out  like  an  arrow  from  the  hole  in  a  mechanical  device. 
Now  it  has  its  full  complement  of  the  limbs  of  the  body.  There 
are  one  hundred  vulnerable  joints  with  three  hundred  Asthas 
(bones?).  There  are  seven  skull-pieces  in  the  head  created  by 
the  Self-born  Lord  himself.  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  there  are 
three  and  half  crores  of  hairs  on  the  limbs.  There  are  seventy- 
two  thousand  Nadis  (neiwe  vessels)  fanning  out.  They  are  named 
Hita  and  Sasiprabha  is  one  of  them.  Thus  the  cycle  goes  on 
functioning  in  all  the  four  types  of  living  beings  and  the  birth 
and  death  of  all  embodied  beings  are  brought  about. 

The  upward  progress  is  due  to  righteousness  and  downfall 
is  due  to  unrighteousness.  Everything  in  regard  to  ah  classes 
of  people,  O  king,  is  due  to  the  acts  of  righteousness  of  the 

^"Sng  and  enjoys  f .  "V" 
birth.  O  great  king,  all  that  is  the  fruit  of  action  j^lTheii 
A  creature  may  sink  into  the  n£ 

brought  about  by  its  own  action  and  urged  by  lust  and  anger. 

There  is  no  redemption  therefrom.  •  his  single 

The  only  means  for  the  redemption  of  creatures  » 

excellent  Narakesvara1  Tirtha  situate  on  .  destruc- 

ft  dispels  Naraka  torture.  It  is  highly  menu*  ous.  It 
live  of  great  sins.  It  is  the  rarest  on  the  eait  . 

■  •  hut  due  io  metrical  exigency  A 
1.  The  name  oF .he  Tirtha  is  Anarakesvara  but  dt 

is  dropped  from  the  verse. 


458 


Skanda  Parana 


wlio  takes  Ins  holy  bath  theie  in  that  TIrtha  und  <idoics 
Mahesvara,  will  never  see  Naraka  though  he  might  have  in- 
curred  great  sins. 

One  who  makes  a  gift  of  an  auspicious  cow  which  is  the 
redeemer,  becomes  easily  liberated  from  the  VaitaranI  river 
undoubtedly. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

54-66.  What  is  the  form  and  what  is  the  extent  of  river 
VaitaranI  which  flows  near  the  gateway  of  Yama’s  terrible  world? 
O  Brahmana,  how  does  it  flow? 

How  do  people  escape  from  it?  Who  are  the  people  who 
have  to  remain  in  it  always?  To  whom  is  it  favourable?  Do 
expatiate  upon  all  these  points. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

O  mighty-armed  Dharmaputra,  listen  to  everything  uttered 
by  me.  The  great  river  at  the  threshold  of  Yama’s  world,  named 
VaitaranI,  is  very  deep.  It  is  vast  and  shoreless,  Even  at  the  very 
sight  it  strikes  terror.  Putrid  blood  constitutes  its  water  and 
flesh  is  its  mud.  That  water  whirls  swiftly  like  ghee  in  a  melting 
pot.  It  is  full  of  worms  and  putrid  matter  (like  pus). 

Alligators  and  sharks  of  adamantine  snouts  and  iron-like  bills 
resembling  big  scissors  fill  it.  There  are  other  aquatic  beings 
of  violent  features  capable  of  tearing  vulnerable  joints. 

Twelve  suns  burn  there  fiercely  as  though  at  the  time  of  the 
ultimate  annihilation.  Men  fall  therein  and  shriek  awfully.  “O 
my  brother!  O  my  son!  O  my  mother!”  Thus  they  cry  out 
frequently.  Who  can  save  one  falling  into  the  terrible  Asipatravana? 

Some  creatures  keep  floating,  some  sink  and  some  get  fa¬ 
tigued.  That  great  river  must  necessarily  be  seen  by  all  the  four 
types  of  living  beings. 

Through  the  means  of  good  gifts  they  remain  floating,  oth¬ 
erwise  they  go  down.  The  stay -there  is  perpetual  in  the  case 
of  those  who  do  not  honour  their  mothers  and  slight  their 
preceptors  or  other  elders. 

Those  sinners  who  forsake  a  chaste,  wedded  wife  of  decent 
habits,  steadfast  in  pious  habits,  remain  there  (in  VaitaranI) 
permanently. 


V.iiU  59-67-80 


459 


& 


Those  horrible  sinners  who  particularly  seek  weak  points  in 
women,  children,  old  people  and  wretched  ones  are  cooked 
(subjected  to  torture)  within  it.  They  continue  to  shriek  and  howl. 

67-80.  An  evil-minded  one  who  puts  in  obstacles  in  the 
case  of  a  Brahmana  tired  and  hungry,  is  eaten  by  worms  for 
a  period  of  three  hundred  Kalpas. 

One  who  promises  a  gift  unto  a  Brahmana,  invites  him  and 
says  “No”  has  to  stay  there  permanently. 

The  following  sinners  have  to  stay  there  permanently:  an 
arsonist,  a  person  administering  poison,  a  person  assailing  king, 
a  slanderer,  one  who  causes  interruption  in  the  narration  of 
a  (holy)  story,  a  perjuror,  a  drunkard,  one  who  destroys  diamonds, 
one  who  takes  away  what  is  offered  by  himself,  one  who  breaks 
the  embankments  of  excellent  fields,  a  ravisher  of  other  men’s 
wives,  a  Brahmana  who  sells  spirituous  beverages,  a  paramour 
of  a  s’udra  woman,  one  who  disturbs  herds  of  thirsty  cows  (while 
drinking) ,  a  violator  of  the  chastity  of  a  virgin,  one  who  torments 
the  recipient  after  making  a  gift,  a  Sudra  who  drinks  the  milk 
of  a  tawny-coloured  cow,  a  Brahmana  who  habitually  eats  meat  etc. 
O  king,  you  need  not  entertain  doubts  in  regard  to  this. 
Do  listen  to  O  king,  as  to  how  this  Vaitarani  can  be  turned 
into  a  favourable  one.  An  excellent  Dana  that  is  given  m  the 
holy  periods  of  the  transit  of  the  Sun,  the  equinox,  Vyatipata, 
the  close  of  the  day  (a  day  touching  three  Tithis)  etc.  and  a 
black  or  pink-coloured  cow  make  Vaitarani  auspicious. 

The  horns  (of  the  cow)  shall  be  fitted  with  caps  oOgoM 
and  the  hoofs  with  silver.  The  milking  pot  shall  he  m’de  of 
brass.  A  pair  of  black  cloths  should  cover  it.  Seven  vanettM  of 
grain  should  accompany  the  gift.  It  must  be  m. 
a  copper  vessel  filled  with  a  D,ma  (of  grain). 

The  image  of  Yama  should  be  made  °f  ^  Jth 

an  iron  staff.  A  raft  of  sugarcane  stumps  should  be  tied  w.t 

silk  cords.  nlaced  conceiving  it  as  origi- 

On  the  raft  the  cow  shouW  b  p^  ^  n  should  make 

nating  from  the  body  of  the  S  •  Brahmana. 

gif,  of  umbrella,  pair  of  shoes  rmg  and  clmhcs^^  „0m  , 

He  shall  catch  hold  of  its  tail  and  utt_  excessively  ter- 

am  desirous  of  crossing  River  ^t^arapi>  obeiSance  to  you! 
rible  threshold  of  Yama  s  abo  •  O  nsecratory  Mantra. 

I  make  this  over  to  you.  This  is  me 


460 


Skanda  Purana 


81-90.  “May  cows  be  in  front  of  me.  May  cows  be  behind 
me.  May  cows  be  in  my  heart.  I  live  in  the  midst  of  cows. 

Om  O  excellent  Brahmana  in  the  form  of  Visnu.  O  Sir, 
sanctifying  the  line  of  Brahmanas!  This  has  been  given  to  jou 
along  with  monetary  gift,  O  Vaitarani,  obeisance  to  you. 

This  is  the  Dana  Mantra.  The  devotee  circumambulates  the 
Brahmana,  (the  image  of)  Dharmaraja,  the  cow,  the  auspicious 
Vaitarani  and  then  makes  over  the  gift  of  these  to  Brahmanas. 

He  then  makes  the  Brahmana  go  ahead,  holds  the  tail  of 
the  cow  and  utters,  “O  dear  cow,  do  wait  for  me  at  the  ex¬ 
tremely  fearful  threshold  of  Yama  s  abode.  O  cow,  I  am  desii- 
ous  of  crossing  Vaitarani.  Obeisance  to  Vaitarani!” 

This  is  the  Mantra  for  following  the  cow. 

The  entire  household  should  follow  him  as  he  goes  after  the 
cow.  He  leads  the  entire  household.  If  this  is  done,  O  king,  the 
river  shall  be  flowing  favourably. 

That  river  flowing  with  the  water  redeems  the  donor  of  the 
Dana  through  that  cow.  He  attains  all  the  cherished  desires, 
both  divine  and  human. 

The  sick  shall  be  rid  of  all  ailments.  All  great  calamities 
become  quelled.  In  regard  to  the  healthy,  the  benefit  is  thou¬ 
sand  times  more  and  in  regard  to  the  sick  a  hundred  times. 
Only  in  the  case  of  a  dead  man,  the  gift  is  made  indirectly.  The 
benefit  then  is  remembered  as  on  a  par.  Hence  the  gift  should 
be  made  by  one’s  own  hand.  After  death  who  will  give  to  whom? 
O  great  king,  after  thinking  along  this  line,  what  is  offered  by 
one’s  own  hand  shall  be  of  great  benefit. 

Thus,  O  son  of  Dharma,  the  procedure  regarding  Dana  on 
Vaitarani  has  been  recounted  to  you.  One  who  listens  and 
recites  with  devotion  goes  to  the  immeasurable  region  of  Visnu. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

91-102.  At  the  advent  of  the  month  of  Asvayuja  on  the 
fourteenth  lunar  day  in  the  dark  half,  one  should  take  one’s 
holy  bath,  perform  the  Sraddha  rite  and  worship  Mahesvara. 
The  gift  on  behalf  of  the  Pitrs  is  to  be  given  by  people  with 
devotion  and  faith. 

Thereafter  the  person  should  keep  awake  listening  to  the 
stories  about  saintly  persons  and  the  like.  Early  at  dawn  he 
should  take  his  holy  bath  in  the  waters  of  Narmada  and  duly 


V.iii.160.1-9 


461 


perform  the  rites  of  libation  unto  the  Pitrs  and  Devas.  A  lamp 
of  gold  should  be  gifted  to  a  Brahmana  with  ghee  in  the  basin 
of  the  lamp.  Thereafter  he  should  feed  Brahmanas  and  take 
food  himself  without  feelings  of  jealousy. 

If  this  is  done,  O  leader  of  men,  a  creature  never  goes  to 
Naraka.  It  is  compulsory  that  men  should  survey  the  situation 
in  Naraka.  But  if  this  procedure  is  followed,  a  man  never  sees 
Naraka. 

If  people  die  in  the  Tlrtha  after  these  procedures  are  duly 
followed,  O  king,  they  will  stay  in  the  rare  Sivaloka  for  a  period 
of  one  Manvantara. 

By  means  of  an  aerial  chariot  dazzling  with  the  colour  of  the 
Sun  and  resplendent  with  hundreds  of  tinkling  bells,  he  goes 
there,  O  blessed  one,  being  attended  upon  by  groups  of  celes¬ 
tial  damsels.  He  enjoys  different  kinds  of  pleasures  undoubt¬ 
edly  for  the  period  of  time  as  mentioned  before. 

When  the  period  is  complete  he  comes  over  here  in  human 
form  when  he  will  be  bereft  of  all  ailments.  He  shall  live  for 
a  hundred  years. 

At  the  advent  of  the  month  of  Asvayuja,  on  the  fourteenth 
day  in  the  dark  half,  a  devotee  should  observe  fast  for  a  night 
and  a  day  and  worship  Mahesvara.  Even  if  he  has  incurred 

great  sins  he  shall  undoubtedly  get  rid  of  them. 

O  Yudhisthira,  there  are  twenty-eight  crore  Narakas.  Devo¬ 
tees  shall  be  unaffected  by  the  miseries  of  Naraka.  They  go  to 
Sivaloka.  After  enjoying  great  pleasures  with  divine  Aisvarya 
(richness)  they  will  come  again  as  human  beings  which  (man¬ 
hood)  is  difficult  to  obtain. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTY 
The  Greatness  of  Moksa  Tirtha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

i  Q  Thereafter,  O  son  of  Pandu,  one  should  go  to  the 
excellent  Moksa  Tlrtha  which  is  resorted  to  by  Devas,  Gandharvas, 
sages  and  ascetics. 


462 


Slcanda  Purana 


Many  who  have  been  deluded  by  Visnu’s  Maya  do  not  know 
thatTirtha.  Here  blessed  sages  and  ascetics  have  become  Siddhas. 
Pulastya,  die  learned  Pulaha,  the  highly  intelligent  Kratu,  Pracetasa, 
Vasistha,  Daksa,  Narada  and  many  other  fortunate  ones,  more 
than  seven  thousand  in  number,  have  attained  salvation  along 
with  their  sons.  Hence  that  Tirtha  is  the  bestower  of  salvation. 

River  Tamaha  flows  into  the  stream  of  thatTirtha.  The  confluence 

there  is  a  Tirtha  that  quells  all  sins. 

By  a  perfect  Japa  of  Gayatri  in  accordance  with  the  injunc¬ 
tions  at  that  Tirtha,  one  will  obtain  that  benefit  which  is  ob¬ 
tained  when  the  Vedic  passages  of  Rk,  Yajus  and  Saman  are 
repeatedly  recited. 

What  is  given  as  a  religious  gift,  whatever  is  consigned  to  the 
holy  fire  in  Homa,  the  Mantras  and  holy  names  uttered  as  Japa- 
the  benefit  obtained  from  all  these  shall  be  everlasting  and 
shall  be  the  excellent  means  of  attaining  salvation. 

If  Brahmanas  who  have  renounced  the  world  as  Sannyasins 
die  there  in  the  Tirtha,  their  departure  shall  be  one  without 
any  return,  due  to  the  power  of  Moksatirtha.  Thus  the  proce¬ 
dure  has  been  succinctly  recounted  to  you  by  me,  O  sinless 
one.  The  benefit  from  this  Tirtha  is  very  great  and  it  has  been 
mentioned  in  the  Purana. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTYONE 
The  Greatness  of  Sarpa  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the 
excellent  Sarpa  Tirtha  where,  O  Yudhisthira,  great  serpents 
performed  penance  and  became  Siddhas. 

They  are  the  serpents  Vasuki,  Taksaka  the  terrible  serpent, 
Airavata,  the  highly  fortunate  Kaliya,  Karkotaka,  Dhananjaya, 
the  highly  refulgent  Sankhacuda,  Dhrtarastra,  Vrkodara,  Kulika, 
Vamana  and  the  sons  and  grandsons  of  all  these  who  per¬ 
formed  a  very  difficult  penance  there  at  that  highly  meritorious 
Tirtha.  (Thereby)  now  they  enjoy  different  kinds  of  pleasures. 
They  now  sport  about  as  they  please. 


V.iii. 161.8 — V.iii.l  62.5 


463 


Sankara  has  formerly  declared  that  one  who  takes  his  holy 
bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  offers  libations  to  Pitrs  and  Devas, 
obtains  the  benefit  of  a  Vajapeya  sacrifice.  O  descendant  of 
Bharata,  men  who  have  taken  their  holy  baths  in  the  Sarpatlrtha 
have  seldom  fear  from  serpents,  scorpions  and  the  like  any¬ 
where  on  the  earth. 

One  who  dies  there  goes  to  the  city  of  Bhogavatl  and  is 
honoured  by  great  serpents  surrounded  by  Naga  maidens.  He 
shall  be  the  Lord  of  great  enjoyments. 

8-11.  On  the  eighth  lunar  day  in  the  dark  half  of  the  month 
of  Margaslrsa,  a  person  should  be  pure  and  observe  fast.  He 
should  cover  the  Lihga  with  gingelly  seeds.  In  accordance  with 
his  capacity,  he  should  adore  with  sweet-smelling  flowers.  After 
doing  thus  duly,  he  should  prostrate  and  crave  for  forgiveness. 

O  leader  of  men,  listen  to  the  benefit  that  has  been  enjoyed 
in  his  case.  O  king,  he  rejoices  for  as  much  time  in  Svarga 
(Amaravatl)  as  he  desires,  nay  as  many  years  as  there  are  gingelly 
seeds,  leaves,  flowers  and  fruits  (in  the  adoration). . 

Having  slipped  down  from  Svarga,  he  is  reborn  in  a  pure 
family.  He  will  be  handsome,  fortunate  and  highly  rich.  He  will 
become  a  Lord  of  crores. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTYTWO 
The  Greatness  of  Gopesvara  Tirtha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1  5  Thereafter,  next  to  Sarpaksetra,  one  should  go  to 
GopeSvara  where  men  are  liberated  from  sins  merely  by  a  single 

baOne  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  casts 
off  his  life,  shall  go  to  the  palace  of  Siva  even  though  he  is 

d'o'ne  who'."  kes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and  adores 
One  wn  ,  frQm  all  sins.  He  goes  to  Rudraloka. 

£tp  sporting  about  in  Rudraloka  as  he  pleases,  the  devotee 

of  peat  austerities  attains  human  birth  and  becomes  a  ngh- 

teous  king. 


464 


Skanda  Purana 


He  will  be  richly  equipped  with  elephants,  horses  and  chari¬ 
ots  and  will  be  accompanied  (served)  by  male  and  female  slaves. 
He  will  be  honoured  by  other  kings  and  shall  live  happily  for 
a  hundred  years. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTYTHREE 
The  Greatness  of  Naga  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-4.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the 
excellent  Naga  Tirtha. 

On  the  Fifth  lunar  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of 
Asvina  one  should  remain  pure  and  observe  regulations.  Then 
he  has  to  keep  awake  for  the  whole  of  the  night  while  offering 
sweet  scents,  incense  and  food. 

Early  next  morning,  he  should  take  his  holy  bath  and  duly 
perform  Sraddha.  He  will  be  liberated  from  all  sins.  No  hesi¬ 
tation  need  be  felt  in  this  respect. 

O  king,  one  who  casts  his  life  off  there  in  the  Tirtha,  shall 
have  a  departure  from  which  there  is  no  return.  So  said  Siva 
himself. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTYFOUR 
The  Greatness  of  Samvauresvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  a  person  should  go  to  the  excellent  Sarhvaura 
Tirtha  where  Bhanu  (Sun-god)  is  present  and  is  adored  by 
Suras  and  Asuras. 

Those  who  have  become  lame,  those  whose  noses  and  nails 
are  defective,  those  whose  limbs  are  split  due  to  itches,  scabies 
etc.,  those  whose  wounds  are  infested  with  flies  and  worms, 
those  bereaved  of  mothers  and  fathers,  abandoned  by  brothers 


V.iii.164.8 — V.iii.165.1 


465 


and  wives,  those  helpless  creatures  defective-in  limbs  who  suffer 
a  great  deal  of  misery,  do  find  this  deity,  the  Lord  of  Samvaura, 
the  source  of  origin  of  the  universe,  very  helpful.  This  deity 
stationed  on  the  banks  of  Narmada  is  destroyer  of  miseries  of 
the  worlds  and  quells  pains. 

Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  of  a  person  who  regularly 
bathes  in  the  Tlrtha  there  for  a  month  and  continuously  wor¬ 
ships  Lord  Bhaskara. 

O  son  of  KuntI,  the  benefit  that  one  derives  by  taking  the 
holy  dip  in  the  four  seas,  viz.  northern,  eastern,  western  and 
southern  seas,  is  derived  by  taking  holy  bath  there  in  this  Tirtha. 

Merely  by  taking  the  bath  in  Samvaura  all  the  sins  acquired 
during  childhood,  youth  and  old  age  get  destroyed. 

8-13.  Undoubtedly  one  obtains  that  benefit  which  is  usually 
obtained  by  fasting  on  the  seventh  lunar  day  and  keeping  awake 
at  night.  O  excellent  king,  by  bathing  in  that  Tlrtha  one  ob¬ 
tains  the  benefit  of  offering  Arghya  with  red  sandalpaste. 

The  waters  of  Narmada  are  beautiful  and  destructive  of  all 
sins,  especially  of  the  section  looked  at  by  the  noble-souled 
Samvaura  deity. 

Those  who  take  bath  and  visit  the  excellent  Lord  of  Devas, 
Samvaura,  are  blessed  ones.  They  are  great  souls.  Their  life  is 
an  ideal  one.  By  resorting  to  Samvaura  for  seven  births,  one 
can  permanently  avoid  ailments,  poverty  and  separation  from 
beloved  ones.  A  devotee  shall  stay  in  Suryaloka  until  the  de- 
struction  of  all  living  beings. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTYFIVE 
The  Greatness  of  Siddhesvara  Tirtha 


Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1.7  It  is  heard,  O  Lord,  that  the  great  Tlrtha  well  known 
as  Siddhesvara  on  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada  was  created 

by  T^Siha  there  is  highly  meritorious,  the  most  sacred  of 
all  the  Tirthas.  O  great  king,  it  is  situated  on  the  southern  bank 
of  Narmada. 


466 


Skanda  Purana 


Men  should  take  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tlrtha  and  offer 
libation  to  Pitrs  and  Devatas.  If  a  Person  should  offer  Sraddha 
there  with  the  Pitrs  in  view,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  un¬ 
doubtedly  his  Pitrs  are  propitiated  for  twelve  years^ 

A  devotee  should  take  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and 

devoutly  worship  Siva.  _ 

Keeping  awake  at  night,  he  should  read  the  Purana.  Early 
in  the  morning  he  should  perform  ablutions  duly.  Thereafter 
he  should  visit  the  Consort  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain. 

He  shall  attain  the  greatest  goal.  Formerly  great  sages  be¬ 
ginning  with  Kapila,  Siddhas  of  great  fortune,  performed  the 
Tapa  of  the  great  Brahman.  There  of  great  Vratas  achieving 
perfection  in  Yoga  attained  the  greatest  Siddhi  by  the  power 
of  Narmada. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTYSIX 
The  Greatness  of  Siddhesvan  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Then  there  is  the  Vaisnavl  goddess  named  Siddhesvan. 
She  is  destroyer  of  sins.  By  seeing  the  excellent  spot  people 
have  attained  great  bliss. 

One  should  take  his  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  adore  the 
Pitrs  and  Devatas.  He  who  devoutly  visits  the  goddess  is  rid  of 
all  sins. 

A  woman  whose  dear  child  has  died,  a  barren  woman  and 
one  who  invariably  gives  birth  to  girls,  (after  worshipping  the 
deity)  begets  a  son  endowed  with  good  qualities  and  good 
conduct. 

A  devotee  should  take  his  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and  visit 
the  goddess  with  great  devotion  on  the  eighth  or  fourteenth 
day,  or,  O  king,  it  may  be  on  any  day. 

A  woman  or  man  should  take  the  holy  bath  at  the  confluence. 
The  goddess  (if  pleased)  gives  them  sons  and  wealth. 

When  visited  and  perfectly  adored,  the  goddess  accords  good 
protection  to  the  family.  There  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  on 
being  adored  she  protects  the  progeny  always. 


V.iii.167.1-14 


467 


A  person  should  take  his  holy  bath  on  the  ninth  lunar  day, 
O  great  king.  He  should  observe  fast.  With  his  mind  purified 
with  faith,  he  should  worship  the  goddess  with  deep  devotion. 
He  goes  to  the  greatest  world  inaccessible  even  to  Suras. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTYSEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Markandesvara  Tirtha 


Yudhisthira  said: 

1-8.  O  great  sage,  there  is  a  Tirtha  on  the  southern  bank 
of  Narmada  distinguished  with  characteristic  features.  Do  re¬ 
count  (glory  of)  this  Tirtha  to  me  along  with  its  origin. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Formerly  at  the  beginning  of  Krtayuga,  I  lived  for  a  long 
time  in  Dandaka  (forest)  on  the  excellent  mountain  Vindhya 
endowed  with  all  qualities.  I  was  regular  in  my  diet  and  other 
habits  and  the  groups  of  sages  extended  to  me  the  greatest 
hospitality. 

I  lived  there  very  happily  for  ten  thousand  years.  Then  I 
took  leave  of  those  sages,  O  blessed  one.  I  came  to  the  banks 
of  Narmada  followed  by  my  disciples. 

Accompaied  by  multitudes  of  Brahmanas,  I  made  a  beauti¬ 
ful,  meritorious  spot  as  my  abode.  It  was  destructive  of  all  sins. 
It  abounded  in  people  of  various  sorts,  such  as  celibate  reli¬ 
gious  students,  those  well  established  in  the  life  of  a  house¬ 
holder,  ascetics,  recluses  who  had  controlled  their  diet  as  well 
as  their  minds  fully,  saints  of  esteemed  honour  and  devoid  of 
lust  and  anger. 

I  performed  very  severe  penace  for  ten  thousand  years  and 
propitiated  Lord  Vasudeva,  the  creator  and  master  of  all.  Re¬ 
sorting  to  the  banks  of  Narmada,  I  carried  on  myjapa,  Tapas 
and  observance  of  vows. 

9-14.  Thereupon,  O  Yudhisthira,  the  two  gods  (Siva  and 
Visnu),  granters  of  boons,  resplendent  like  (two)  Suns  incar- 


468 


Skanda  Purana 


nate,  embellished  as  it  were  (accompanied)  by  Uma  and  Sri 

arrived  there.  _  .  .  , 

I  bowed  down  to  the  Lords  devoutly  and  spoke  these  words: 

I  requested  the  Lords,  the  auspicious  bestowers  of  boons:  “I 
pray  for  adherence  to  righteousness,  O  highly  esteemed  Lords, 
and  excellent  devotion  unto  you  both.  Let  me  stay  here  in  this 
spot  like  a  young  man  of  twenty-five  years,  without  getting  old 
and  devoid  of  ailments,  undoubtedly  along  with  the  Devas. 

On  being  prayed  to  thus  by  me,  O  son  of  Kunti,  those  two 
Lords,  Krsna  and  Sankara,  became  pleased,  O  Yudhisthira,  to 
stay  here  and  told  me: 


The  Lords  said: 

Know  that  we  are  stationed  here  in  this  spot  along  with 
Devas  including  Vasava. 


After  saying  thus,  the  Lords  vanished  there  itself. 

I  installed  there  both  Sankara  and  immutable  Krsna  (Visnu). 

I  adored  them  with  mental  concentration.  I  felt  contented 

(with  my  achievement).  — 

15-25.  A  man  who  takes  his  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  ot 
Markandesvara,  whether  it  be  Lord  Paramesvara  or  Visnu  the 
Lord  of  the  three  worlds,  shall  go  to  the  greatest  region  of 
Visnu  or  Siva. 

A  devotee  should  offer  curd,  milk,  ghee,  honey  as  well  as 
Narmada  water,  sweet  scents,  incense,  splendid  offerings  of 
flowers  and  Naivedyas  (food  offerings)  with  full  self-conti  ol. 

With  great  devotion  he  should  thus  keep  awake  at  night 
propitiating  Visnu.  Remaining  pure  mentally  and  physically,  O 
king,  he  should  perform  the  holy  ablution  etc.  The  devotee 
should  observe  fast  on  the  twelfth  or  fourteenth  lunar  day  m 
the  bright  half  of  the  month  of  Jyestha.  The  man  devoted  to 
Visnu  should  carry  out  the  adoration  of  the  Lord.  By  doing 
thus  he  attains  Visnuloka  and  becomes  one  on  a  par  with 

Visnu.  .  . 

A  devotee  of  Mahesvara  rejoices  like  a  Gana  in  the  city  ot 

Mahesvara.  . 

If  a  devotee  performs  with  steady,  mind  Sraddha  there  with 
the  Pitrs  in  view,  they  undoubtedly  attain  everlasting  satisfac¬ 
tion. 


V.iii.167.26-31 


469 


A  Brahmana  devotee  should  take  his  holy  bath  in  Narmada 
silently,  with  the  mind  fully  controlled.  He  should  perform 
Sandhya  prayers  staying  there  itself.  After  performing  the  aus¬ 
picious  Japa,  he  should  offer  libations  to  the  Pitrs  and  Devas 
and  human  beings  too  duly. 

Staying  in  front  of  Krsna  or  of  Markandesvara,  he  should 
assiduously  recite  the  Mantras  of  Rk,  Yajus  and  Saman. 

If  only  a  single  Rk  of  Rgveda  is  recited  he  will  derive  the 
benefit  of  reciting  the  entire  Rgveda;  by  reciting  a  single  Yajus 
verse  he  will  derive  the  benefit  of  the  recitation  of  the  entire 
Yajurveda;  and  by  reciting  a  single  Saman  the  benefit  of  the 
entire  Samaveda. 

26-31.  If  only  a  single  Brahmana  is  fed,  it  will  be  as  though 
a  crore  of  Brahmanas  have  been  fed. 

A  woman  whose  child  is  dead,  a  barren  woman  and  one  who 
successively  begets  only  girls,  should  make  the  following  ar¬ 
rangement.  A  Brahmana  fully  conversant  with  the  principles 
of  the  Vedas,  should  repeat  the  Rudra  Mantras  duly.  An  aus¬ 
picious  Kalasa  (sacred  waterpot)  should  be  placed  on  the  southern 
side  of  the  Linga.  Repeating  eleven,  times  the  Rudra  Mantra 
(. Rudrddhydya )  the  devotee  then  pours  water  from  the  pot  and 
bathes  the  deity.  A  woman  who  sponsors  this,  O  leading  king, 
obtains  a  sinless  son  destined  to  live  long. 

One  who  sees  the  groves  of  trees  growing  at  the  Markandesvara 
TIrtha,  even  from  very  far,  is  rid  of  such  sins  as  arise  from 
Brahmana-slaughter  etc.  So  said  Sankara. 

He  who  listens  to  this  or  reads  it  with  devotion,  O  excellent 
king,  becomes  undoubtedly  one  purified  of  all  sins. 

In  the  case  of  those  who  read  or  listen,  this  brings  about 
destruction  of  all  sins.  It  is  conducive  to  fame,  long  life  and 
plenty  of  wealth.  It  is  destructive  of  evil  dreams. 


470 


Skanda  Parana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTYEIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Ankuresvara  Tirlha 
Sn  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  The  excellent  Ankuresvara  TIrtha  is  on  the  southern 
bank  of  Narmada.  It  is  endowed  with  all  good  qualities  and  is 
well-known  in  all  the  three  worlds. 

There  a  great  Raksasa  propitiated  Mahesvara  and  became  a 
Siddha.  He  propitiated  Sankara,  the  very  life  of  the  universe, 
the  deity  that  transports  a  devotee  merely  when  remembered. 

Yudhislliira  said: 

Who  was  that  Raksas  (i.e.  Raksasa)?  O  excellent  Brahmana, 
what  was  his  name?  In  whose  family  was  he  born?  O  sinless 
one,  mention  this  to  me  in  detail. 

Those  men  who  commit  sins  and  who  are  turned  blind  due 
to  ignorance,  do  see  the  world  consisting  of  mobile  and  im¬ 
mobile  beings,  thanks  to  the  people  like  you  who  guide  them 
like  lamps. 

On  hearing  the  words  of  Dharmaputra,  Markandeya,  the 
eminent  sage,  smiled  and  began  to  narrate  that  tale  destruc¬ 
tive  of  sins. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

6-15.  There  was  a  mental  son  of  Brahma  named  Pulastya, 
O  king.  He  was  an  expounder  of  the  Vedas  and  scriptures.  He 
was  as  if  another  Vedhas  (Brahma)  in  person. 

The  daughter  of  Trnabindu  became  the  wife  of  that  learned 
Paramesthin.  Thanks  to  his  holy  communion,  a  noble-minded 
son  was  born. 

Since  the  Vedas  and  Itihasas  along  with  the  six  Angas,  Pada 
and  Krama  (Pathas  of  Vedas)  rested  in  him,  the  name  Visravas 
was  given  to  him. 

On  a  certain  occasion  the  great  sage  Bharadvaja  gave  his 
daughter  with  pleasure,  to  Visravas,  O  king. 

He  sported  along  with  her  like  Indra  with  PaulomI  (Saci). 


V.iii.168.16-25 


471 


The  Brahmana,  the  foremost  among  those  conversant  with  the 
Vedas,  sported  with  her  with  great  joy  (like  Indrawith  IndranI). 

After  some  time  a  son  endowed  with  all  the  qualities  of  a 
son  was  born  to  Visravas.  He  became  well  known  as  Vaisravana. 

With  the  guilelessness  of  a  child,  O  Yudhisthira,  he  observed 
the  vow  of  silence  while  granting  freedom  from  fear  to  all 
living  beings. 

Mahadeva  was  pleased  with  him  and  granted  him  his  own 
friendship  and  the  status  of  Dhanada  (giver  tof  wealth).  Along 
with  Brahmana-sages,  Brahma  came  to  him  and  told  him:  “You 
will  become  the  fourth  of  the  group  of  Yama,  Indra  and  Varuna, 
and  attain  Lokapalatva  (guardianship  of  the  worlds) .  After  granting 
this  desired  Lokapalatva,  Brahma  went  away  quickly. 

On  another  occasion  a  demoness  named  KaikasI  left  Patala, 
came  to  the  earth  and  desired  Visravas  as  her  husband. 

1 6-25.  O  excellent  descendant  of  Bharata,  Ravana  was  born 

as  her  son.  So  also  were  Kurhbhakarna,  a  great  Raksasa,  and 


the  noble-souled  Vibhlsana. 

Kurhbhakarna  had  two  sons  named  Kumbha  and  Vikumbha. 
They  were  very  great,  O  most  excellent  one  among  men.  They 
possessed  great  strength  and  virility. 

Ankura,  the  most  excellent  Raksasa,  was  a  great  son  of  Kumbha. 
Emulating  Vibhlsana  in  good  qualities,  he  became  the  most 

excellent  one  among  Raksasas.  , 

On  attaining  mature  youth,  he  came  to  know  that  his  grand¬ 
father  was  a  Raksasa.  He  became  very  much  disgusted  and 


performed  a  very  great  penance. 

He  performed  pilgrimage  to  the  four  oceans  southern,  western, 
northern  and  eastern,  and  came,  incidentally  to  Narma  a. 

Ankura,  the  Lord  of  Raksasas,  performed  a  very  great  penance 
for  a  hundred  divine  years.  Thereat  Mahadeva,  the  conqueror 
ofthedu's  of  the  enelie,  became  pleated. 

Lord  granted  him  freedom  of  choosing  any  boom  O  fair  one, 
choose  your  boon.  O  devotee  of  good  Vratas,  I  shall  grant  . 

On  seeing  Mahesvara,  the  god  of  Devas,  standing  before 
him  as  the  granter  of  boons,  he  bowed  to  him  again  and  again 

anrf^“r:^ed,  o  Lord  of  Suras,  if  you 
are  ready  to  grant  a  boon,  grant  unto  me  immortality  which 
■s  ver^  rare  in  the  case  of  all  living  beings.  O  Slayer  of  Tnpuras, 


472  Skanda  Purana 

stay  here  after  my  name  by  this  boon.  It  behoves  you  to  be 
always  present  here.” 

Isvara  said 

26-33.  As  long  as  you  adhere  to  piety,  as  long  as  you  follow 
the  advice  of  Vibhlsana  with  steadiness  of  the  mind,  this  will 
be  true. 

After  saying  this,  the  Lord  honoured  by  all  deities  went  away 
to  the  Kailasa  mountain  by  means  of  an  aerial  chariot  of  lus¬ 
trous  hue  of  the  Sun. 

When  the  Lord  vanished,  the  demon  took  his  bath  and 
sipped  water  ritualistically  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions, 
O  great  king,  and  installed  the  excellent  Ahkuresvara. 

He  then  adored  the  Lord  of  Suras  with  scents,  flowers,  in¬ 
cense,  garments  and  ornaments,  banners,  chowries,  umbrellas 
and  (saying  the)  auspicious  words  like  ‘Jaya’  (‘Be  victorious’) 
etc.  He  eulogized  the  Lord  with  plenty  of  prayers  pleasing  to 
the  heart.  The  Raksasa  then  went  to  the  abode  where  King 
Vibhlsana  was  present. 

He  was  suitably  honoured  with  gifts  and  other  honours. 
Treated  like  own  brother,  he  stayed  there  with  great  joy. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and  worships 
Paramesvara  named  Ahkuresvara  shall  obtain  the  merit  of  a 
horse-sacrifice. 

The  sacred  region  of  Mahesvara  begins  from  the  pond  known 
as  Mandavya  and  extends  to  the  auspicious  confluence  of  Reva 
and  Amalakl. 

34-43.  The  Ahkuresvara  Tirtha  is  to  the  west  of  Mandavya- 
khata.  A  devout  man  should  take  his  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha 
and  remain  physically  and  mentally  pure. 

He  should  assiduously  say  Sandhya  prayers  and  perform  the 
Japa,  O  descendant  of  Bharata.  O  excellent  one  among  the 
descendants  of  Bharata,  he  should  offer  libations  to  the  Pitrs 
and  Devas  and  human  beings.  Continuing  to  wear  the  wet 
clothes  and  observing  silence,  he  should  adore  the  Lord. 

Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefits  of  the  worshipper  who 
duly  observes  fast  on  the  eighth  and  fourteenth  lunar  days  and 
performs  worship  (of  Ahkuresvara). 


V.iii.169.1-4 


473 


There  are  Tlrthas  and  shrines  over  an  area  of  a  hundred 
Yojanas.  It  will  be  as  though  all  these  shrines  have  been  visited 
by  him.  Thereafter  he  is  liberated  from  sins. 

After  duly  bathing  there  in  the  Tlrtha,  Dana  should  be  of¬ 
fered  to  a  deserving  person  with  the  Lord  in  view.  It  shall  be 
everlasting  in  benefit. 

It  is  said  to  be  ten  times  more  than  that  of  Homa.  The 
benefit  in  Japa  is  more  than  that.  By  observing  fast,  the  benefit 
is  three  times  more  and  by  holy  ablution  it  is  four  times. 

One  who  renounces  the  world  or  casts  off  his  life  (therein) 
attains  the  region  of  Rudraloka  from  which  there  is  no  return 
for  him. 

Even  worms,  insects  and  birds  that  die  there  in  the  Tlrtha 
named  Ankuresvara  attain  liberation. 

Thus,  O  king,  the  origin  of  Ankuresvara  has  been  recounted 
to  you.  The  Tlrtha  is  endowed  with  all  good  qualities.  It  is 
destructive  of  sins. 

Those  who  devoutly  listen  to  this  being  glorified  as  yielding 
great  benefit,  attain  the  abode  of  Siva.  There  is  no  doubt  about 

it. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SIXTYNINE 
The  Abduction  of  Kdmamohini 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-4  Thereafter,  one  should  go  to  a  great  meritorious  Tii  tha 
destructive  of  sins.  It  was  there  that  Sage  Mandavya  became  a 

Siddha.  So  also  did  Sage  Narayana. 

Formerly  service  was  rendered  to  Mandavya  who  was  im¬ 
paled  on  a  spike  by  Narayana.  By  taking  the  holy  bath  there, 
O  great  king,  one  is  rid  of  the  coat  of  sin. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

O  sage  what  has  been  mentioned  by  you  is  a  mysterious 
story  in  a  1  the  worlds.  Tha,  penance  was  performed  by  one 
impaled  on  stake  has  neither  been  seen  nor  heard. 


474 


Skanda  Purdna 


Mention  all  this  to  me  in  the  company  of  the  sages.  Describe 
the  greatness  of  this  Mandavya  Tlrtha  with  eagerness. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

5-15.  Listen,  O  king,  to  what  happened  on  the  earth  in 
Tretayuga.  There  was  a  highly  intelligent  king  comparable  to 
the  Guardians  of  the  world.  King  Devapanna  was  a  person  who 
had  performed  Yajnas  and  was  always  engaged  in  making  gifts. 
He  was  conversant  with  all  holy  rites  and  fully  conscious  of 
what  was  performed  (by  all).  Like  a  father  protecting  his  bosom- 
born  children,  he  assiduously  protected  his  subjects. 

DalyayanI  was  the  beloved  wife  of  that  king.  She  was  always 
amiable  to  him.  With  the  sounds  of  her  necklaces  and  anklets, 
she  made  the  atmosphere  resonant  with  jingling  sound  (Jhankara) . 
O  king,  their  mutual  love  increased  day  by  day.  The  king  ruled 
the  earth  full  of  wealth  and  equipped  with  vehicles  and  filled 
with  elephants,  horses  and  chariots.  He  possessed  all  good 
qualities  but  had  no  issues.  The  king  was  thus  in  a  state  where 
the  perpetuation  of  the  family  had  stopped. 

He  was  overcome  with  a  great  misery.  He  became  distressed 
in  the  absence  of  his  own  progeny.  He  performed  holy  ablu¬ 
tion  and  Homa  everyday,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  and  con¬ 
tinued  this  for  twelve  years. 

He  strictly  adhered  to  the  restrictions  of  holy  vows  and  fasts 
along  with  his  wives  and  propitiated  Goddess  Camunda,  the 
destroyer  of  Munda,  by  means  of  many  holy  prayers  and  de¬ 
vout  rites  of  adoration  and  meditation: 

“O  Goddess  Varahl,  O  Camunda,  O  three-eyed  goddess,  be 
victorious,  be  victorious!  O  Brahml,  O  Raudri,  O  Kaumarl,  O 
KatyayanI,  I  make  obeisance  to  you!  O  fierce  Bhairavi,  O  Raudri 
of  great  Yogic  powers,  proceeding  through  the  sky!  In  the 
entire  range  of  the  three  worlds  consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile 
beings  there  is  nothing  without  you.” 

Being  pleased  by  the  eulogy  offered  by  the  king  the  goddess 
spoke  those  words:  “Choose  a  boon  as  you  please,  whatever 
may  be  in  your  mind.  I  have  been  devoutly  propitiated  by  you. 
I  am  pleased  and  shall  grant  you  the  boon.” 


V.iii.l  69.1 6-31 


475 


Devapanna  said: 

16-22.  O  goddess  of  Devas,  if  you  are  pleased,  if  I  deserve 
a  boon,  do  kindly  redeem  me  who  has  become  distressed  for 
want  of  a  male  child.  Cause  the  protection,  continuation  of  my 
family.  Save  my  dynasty. 

Indeed  houses  of  men  without  children  resemble  a  crema¬ 
tion  ground.  His  Pitrs  do  not  partake  of  food  along  with  the 
deities  and  sages.  Though  I  perform  Sraddha  everyday,  my 
ancestors  appear  to  me  in  my  dream  as  afflicted  with  hunger. 


On  hearing  these  words  of  the  king,  the  goddess  began  to 
meditate.  The  three  worlds  consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile 
beings  were  perceived  by  her  with  her  divine  eyes.  With  the 
face  beaming  with  pleasure  the  goddess  thus  spoke  to  the  king: 

“In  the  entire  range  of  the  three  worlds,  consisting  of  mobile 
and  immobile  beings,  O  king,  there  is  no  child  of  thine.  Per¬ 
form  a  Yajna  with  the  Yajnapurusa  (Lord  Visnu)  in  view.  Oth¬ 
erwise  there  is  no  hope  of  a  child  unto  you.  The  entire  range 
of  the  three  worlds  has  been  perceived  by  me  with  my  divine 


y  After  saying  thus,  the  goddess  went  away  and  the  king  re¬ 
turned  to  his  abode. 

23-31  •  He  performed  the  Yajna  dedicated  to  the  Yajnapurusa 

and  thereupon  a  daughter  was  born.  She  was  radiant,  beautiful 

and  charming  unto  all  the  people. 

Such  a  lovely  maiden  could  be  found  neither  in  Devaloka 
nor  in  Gandharvaloka.  Out  of  delight  she  was  named 

^XTcoursedf^me^she  grew  up  and  stunned  the  world 
with  her  beauty,  sportive  gait  like  that  of  a  swan,  excellent 
eyebrows  and  the  downward  stoop  due  to  the  weight  of breasts. 

She  was  dazzling  in  her  earrings  and  other  ornaments.  She 
used  to  wear  red  garlands  and  garments  with  divine  unguent. 
She  used  to  be  guarded  duly  by  her  female  companions 

sembUng  black  bees.  She  smiled  sweetly  and  her  lips  sparkled 
like  a  Bimba  fruit. 


476 


Skanda  Purana 


With  her  eyes  extending  upto  her  ears,  she  appeared  to 
drink  in  the  lovers.  She  seemed  to  attract  Manmalha  through 
the  fragrance  of  the  betel  leaves  mixed  with  camphoi . 

Her  neck  was  like  a  conchshell.  Her  slender  waist  was  rav¬ 
ishing.  The  nails  of  her  toes  were  copper-coloured.  The  navel 
was  deep  and  the  front  part  of  her  buttocks  was  excellent.  Her 
thighs  resembled  plantain  stems. 

She  was  wholly  splendid  with  excellent  rows  of  teeth. 

She  increased  the  delight  of  her  parents,  friends  and  others 
by  her  sports.  On  a  certain  day  she  went  (to  a  temple)  for  the 
adoration  of  the  goddess,  taking  with  her  flowers  and  incense 
and  other  things  such  as  sandalpaste,  agallochum,  betel  leaves, 
incense,  bunches  of  flowers  etc.  She  was  accompanied  by  groups 
of  her  friends. 

32-37.  All  of  them  took  off  their  garments  and  ornaments. 
Placing  them  on  the  bank  of  the  lake  they  went  deep  into  it 
in  the  middle  of  the  lake  and  began  their  lively  water  sports. 

On  seeing  her  sporting  about  along  with  her  friends  in  the 
clear  water,  a  demon  named  Sambara  came  there  in  the  form 
of  a  hawk.  KamapramodinT  who  was  in  the  middle  of  the  waters 
was  caught  hold  of  by  him.  The  wicked-minded  one  leaped  up 
into  the  sky  seizing  the  ornaments  too. 

O  descendant  of  Bharata,  while  he  was  on  the  aerial  path 
along  with  the  lovely  maiden,  the  earrings  and  other  orna¬ 
ments  fell  into  the  waters  of  Narmada  where  the  great  sage 
Mandavya  was  absorbed  in  meditation,  O  great  Lord,  in  the 
great  region  of  Narayana  with  full  control  of  sense-organs. 

His  younger  brother  who  attended  upon  him  had  become 
very  lean  due  to  his  penance  and  Japa.  He  meditated  upon 
Lord  Janardana. 


V.iii.170.1-15 


477 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTY 


Mandavya  Impaled 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  On  seeing  her  being  carried  away  by  him,  all  those 
friends  of  KamapramodinI  came  out  from  the  water  and  la¬ 
mented  loudly. 

All  of  them  went  into  the  palace  and  spoke  in  great  sorrow: 
“O  king!  KamapramodinI  has  been  carried  away  by  a  huge 
bird-a  hawk,  even  as  she  was  sporting  about  in  the  lake  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  Lord.  A  search  for  her  should  be  carried  out  by 
you  by  tracing  the  path  of  that  bird.” 

On  hearing  the  words  of  those  girls,  Devapanna  was  ex¬ 
tremely  distressed.  “Alas!  Alas!”  He  cried  aloud  getting  up  from 
his  excellent  royal  seat. 

Along  with  the  ministers  he  went  to  the  lake.  Not  finding 
out  any  clue  as  to  the  path  taken  by  the  bird  he  swooned  due 
to  great  sorrow. 

6-15.  All  the  citizens  too  became  miserable  due  to  the  king’s 
sorrow.  Presently  the  king  was  consoled  by  the  ministers  and 

the  priests.  ,  . 

“What  shall  we  do?  What  should  be  done  at  this  juncture? 

He  said  and  had  causultations  with  all  of  them. 


Then  he  said:  “I  shall  send  to  all  directions  the  four  divi¬ 
sions  of  the  army  with  the  full  complement  of  elephants,  horses 

and  chariots.”  ,  ,  ,  .  . 

Drums  and  other  instruments  were  played  and  everything 

in  a  chaotic  condition. 


»• 


478 


Skanda  Purana 


O  dear  one,  in  the  meantime  the  guard  of  the  city  met  the 
king  with  her  ornaments  in  his  hand.  All  the  ornaments  of  the 
various  limbs  were  there  such  as  earrings,  armlets,  bracelets, 
necklaces,  anklets,  etc. 

He  reported  to  the  king:  “On  searching  these  were  seen  by 
me  in  the  hermitage  of  the  sages  where  Mandavya  surrounded 
by  other  sages  is  present.” 

16-26.  On  hearing  this  report  of  the  chief  police  officer 
and  seeing  the  ornaments  of  the  body  of  the  princess  clearly 
produced,  the  king  became  angry  with  reddened  eyes.  Looking 
at  the  ministers  and  the  elite  public  he  said:  “Such  a  Brahmana 
is  living  in  my  city,  who  indulges  in  the  activity  of  a  thief! 
Under  the  garb  of  a  man  of  holy  vows,  he  is  stealing  other 
people’s  wealth.  He  must  be  a  sinner  in  the  guise  of  a  sage 
by  whom  my  daughter  has  been  abducted. 

“Assuming  the  form  of  a  bird  even  as  he  was  in  the  water, 
he  went  up  into  the  sky.  No  sin  is  incurred  if  one  kills  heretics, 
a  perpetrator  of  prejudicial  (prohibited)  activities,  those  who 
observe  Bidalavratas  (hypocrites),  rogues,  flatterers,  thieves  and 
men  of  evil  conduct.  This  sinner,  thief  and  abductor  of  a  virgin 
need  not  be  seen  (examined)  by  me  in  person.  Let  him  be 
impaled  on  the  stake  immediately.  There  need  not  be  any 
formal  trial  in  his  case.  That  wicked  one  is  to  be  killed  by  me. 
He  is  a  demon  in  the  guise  of  an  ascetic.” 

Saying  thus  in  anger  he  commanded  the  police  officer  and 
went  away.  Without  taking  into  consideration  what  should  be 
done  and  what  should  not  be  done,  he  got  the  Brahmana 
impaled  on  the  stake. 

All  the  citizens  and  the  rural  folk  were  filled  with  tears  in 
their  eyes.  “Alas  !  Alas!”  They  said  and  cried.  They  told  one 
another  thus: 

“A  despicable  act  has  been  committed  by  the  king  acting 
like  a  Candala.  A  Brahmana  should  not  be  killed,  especially 
when  he  is  an  ascetic.  If  any  of  his  activities  deserved  anger 
he  should  be  banished  out  of  the  city.  Never  should  a  Brahmana 
be  killed  even  if  he  has  indulged  in  all  types  of  sins.  He  should 
be  banished  from  the  kingdom  along  with  his  entire  property 
intact.”  O  king  (Yudhisthira),  none  of  the  citizens  took  his 
food  at  home;  there  was  no  fire  even  in  their  houses.  All  of 
them  were  gloomy  in  mind  and  unmindful  of  their  domestic 
duties. 


V.iii.171.1-22 


479 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTYONE 


Dialogue  between  Sanditi  and  the  Sages 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  In  order  to  see  the  said  Brahmana  who  had  been 
impaled  on  the  stake,  all  the  great  sages  went  to  Narayana 
along  with  ascetics  such  as  Narada,  Devala,  Raibhya,  Yama, 
Satatapa,  Angiras,  Vasistha,  Jamadagni,  Yajnavalkya,  Brhaspati, 
Kasyapa,  Atri,  Bharadvaja,  Visvamitra,  Aruni,  Muni  and  other 
groups  of  sages  beginning  with  Valakhilyas  and  the  members 
of  their  family. 

The  eminent  sages  saw  Mandavya  placed  on  the  stake.  They 
said  to  Brahmana  Narayana,  “What  shall  we  do  to  please  you? 

All  of  them  became  agitated  in  the  presence  of  the  noble- 
souled  Mandavya.  They  came  near  him  in  great  agitation  and 

said,  “Is  he  dead?  Is  he  alive?" 

On  seeing  his  plight,  they  became  excessively  distressed. 
Unable  to  bear  that  sorrow  mentally,  they  said:  “Let  him  be 
asked.  If  he  consents,  reduce  the  king  to  ashes:” 

On  hearing  this  Narayana  spoke  these  words: 

8-13.  “Even  when  I  am  alive  my  brother  has  fallen  into  this 
plight.  Fie  upon  my  life!  But  yet  there  is  the  efficacy  of  the 
penance.  On  seeing  my  brother  impaled  on  the  stake,  my  mind 
is  torn  asunder.  Yet  I  am  going  to  do  something  wherby  the 
entire  kingdom  including  the  king  shall  be  reduced  to  ashes 
by  me.  Let  me  be  pardoned  by  you  all." 

After  saying  this,  he  took  water  into  his  hand  and  charged 

it  with  incantations.  . .  . 

Even  as  he  surveyed  in  anger  there  was  heard  a  Humkara 
sound.  The  sages  were  dismayed  thereby.  They  were  taken 

aback  bv  the  Humkara  sound. 

ThosI  excellent  Brahmanas  went  near  Mandavya  and  asked 
him  “O  Brahmana,  do  you  wish  to  withold  the  curse  that  is 
sure  to  kill  the  king  by  whom  a  sinless  person  has  been  brought 

t0  On  helnengfthewo?rds  of  the  sages  Mandavyaka  said  with 

V'SST  “O  sages,  welcome  unto  you  always.  I  salute  you  all 


480 


Skanda  Purana 


with  my  (bowed)  head.  Be  seated  here  ye  all  who  deserve 
Arghya,  honour  and  adoration.” 

With  fully  concentrated  mind,  Mandavyaka  spoke  to  all: 

“The  terrible  misery  which  I  am  undergoing  is  the  fruit  of 
what  was  incurred  in  the  previous  life.  Do  not  feel  aggrieved 
over  that.  Indeed  the  sin  committed  has  to  be  borne  (by  reap¬ 
ing  the  fruit  thereof).” 

The  sages  said: 

What  is  the  act  which  results  in  one’s  taking  up  another 
birth?  As  a  fruit  of  what  Dana  or  Dharma  (charity  and  pious 
act)  does  one  go  to  Svarga? 

Mandavya  said: 

Those  who  sustain  themselves  at  the  expense  of  other  people’s 
fortune  and  those  who  do  not  make  liberal  donations  are  reborn. 

O  excellent  Brahmanas,  these  people  fall  into  terrible  hell 
and  are  reborn  as  Candalas:  those  who  do  not  take  holy  bath 
regularly;  those  who  do  not  practise  Japa,  Homa,  worship  of 
Suras,  hospitality  to  other  people,  performance  of  Pitr  Sraddha 
during  Parvas  and  also  regular  Dana.  Again  they  become  very 
poor  and  again  they  commit  sins.  They  stay  on  in  Naraka  as 
a  result  of  the  power  of  the  sins.  For  the  same  reason  they 
undergo  the  experience  of  being  born  in  the  transmigratory 
mortal  world  that  is  the  primary  cause  of  life.  They  are  reborn 
as  worms  and  insects. 

Those  who  regularly  take  the  holy  bath,  those  who  are  devoted 
to  Brahmanas  and  Devas,  those  who  have  conquered  the  sense- 
organs,  those  who  invariably  take  pity  on  living  beings,  live  in 
the  worlds  of  Devas.  Those  who  are  always  pious  and  who  have 
conquered  arrogance  and  anger  live  with  great  delight.  Those 
who  are  well  educated  and  polite,  those  who  do  not  harass 
others,  those  who  utterly  exclude  other  men’s  wives  and  remain 
contented  with  their  own  wives  need  not  be  afraid  of  anything 
in  the  world.  They  are  innately  pure  and  devoid  of  sins. 

The  sages  said: 

23-33.  O  great  Brahmana,  what  was  that  sin  committed  by 


V.iii.171 .34-44 


481 


you  in  the  previous  birth?  Wherefore  was  this  suffering  under¬ 
gone,  the  despicable  fact  of  being  impaled  on  the  stake? 

All  of  us  have  assembled  here  on  seeing  that  you  are  im¬ 
paled  on  the  stake.  May  we  see  you  alive  safely  taken  off  from 
it?  Despite  the  sufferings  due  to  the  pain  and  distress,  you 
seem  to  be  not  feeling  it  at  all? 

Mandavya  said: 

What  is  committed  by  oneself  is  to  be  borne  (reaped)  by 
oneself.  No  one  else  experiences  (the  fruits  of)  either  merit 
or  demerit  of  the  previous  actions. 

Just  as  a  calf  finds  out  its  mother  from  among  thousands  of 
cows,  so  also  the  previous  action  comes  back  to  the  perpetrator 
himself. 

No  one  can  shake  off  the  actions  except  by  experiencing  the 
good  or  bad  effect  thereof.  Neither  his  mother  nor  his  father, 
neither  his  brother  nor  his  wife,  neither  sons  nor  friends,  can 
be  expected  to  experience  them. 

I  have  been  asked  by  you.  May  my  statement  be  listened  to. 
O  Brahmanas,  during  my  earlier  years  of  life,  I  used  to  wait 
long  during  my  baths  at  the  time  of  removing  dirt.  Due  to  my 
ignorance  and  puerile  nature,  the  lice  were  pricked  with  thorns. 
When  oil  was  applied  over  my  head  and  all  over  the  body  the 
lice  were  not  retained  by  me.  I  used  to  comb  my  hair  and  prick 
the  lice  with  thorns.  Since  sin  was  committed  in  regard  to 
them,  this  result  has  befallen  me. 

After  spending  some  more  time  I  will  attain  unailing  libera¬ 
tion.  O  great  sages,  you  all  need  not  be  distressed  at  all.  While 
experiencing  this  plight,  I  shall  not  curse  anyone,  nor  sin  against 
any  one.  I  shall  cause  the  sin  to  be  wiped  off  by  remaining  on 
the  stake  for  a  few  days. 

O  Brahmanas,  I  shall  bear  the  brunt  of  the  previous  action 
committed  by  me  and  experience  the  result  thereof.  The  king’s 
misdemeanour  should  be  excused.  Let  the  anger  be  dispelled. 

34-44.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Mandavya,  the  great  sages 
derived  great  pleasure  and  esteemed  him  much  and  shouted, 
“Bravo!” 


482 


•  Skanda  Purana 


Narayana  said: 

Where  shall  I  drop  this  Mantra-charged  water  intended  for 
the  king’s  being  reduced  to  ash  along  with  his  priests  and  the 
kingdom? 

Mandavya  said: 

Preserve  this  water  which  is  comparable  to  Kalakuta  poison. 
I  shall  get  it  cast  off  into  the  ocean.  The  time  for  the  task  of 
Devas  has  arrived. 

Thereupon  all  those  sages  beginning  with  Kasyapa  bowed 
down  to  Mandavya.  Taking  leave  of  him,  they  went  back  to 
their  abodes  with  great  delight. 

Even  as  they  were  preparing  to  leave,  they  were  told,  “O 
ascetics,  promise  to  come  back  to  my  presence  on  the  fifth 
day.” 

“So,  shall  it  be,”  promised  Narada  and  others.  When  those 
leading  Brahmanas  went  out  of  sight,  the  female  ascetic  Sandili 
came  there  on  the  second  day.  She  was  carrying  her  husband 
on  her  head  and  wandering  about  at  night. 

She  did  not  see  the  sage  (Mandavya) .  O  Yudhisthira,  she  was 
staggering  due  to  the  excess  of  burden.  The  Brahmana  on  the 
stake  was  not  noticed  by  her.  The  chaste  lady  faltered  and 
slipped  down  against  the  knees  of  the  Brahmana  on  the  stake. 

Due  to  the  fall  of  the  faltering  lady  much  pain  was  caused 
to  the  sage.  Along  with  the  previous  predicament  caused  by 
fate,  the  present  situation  became  will-nigh  intolerable.  He 
said:  “A  further  infliction  of  the  fruit  of  sin  !  Alas!  My  pain  is 
great!  O  sinful  lady,  I  have  been  further  pained  by  you  in  a 
fruitless  task.  Why?  I  see  you  as  a  wanton  woman  wandering 
as  you  please.  Are  you  a  female  thief  or  an  ogress?”  After 
saying  this  and  lamenting  again  and  again  he  fell  into  a  swoon. 

45-54.  The  sages  and  all  the  ascetics  were  agitated  in  their 
minds  on  being  aware  of  the  sufferings  of  the  sage  (Mandavya) . 
They  then  asked  her,  O  Yudhisthira: 

“Why  do  you  wander  about  at  night.  What  is  it  that  you  are 
carrying?  Something  weighty  has  been  put  into  this  sack.  What 
is  the  purpose  of  your  arrival  here?  You  have  caused  pain  to 
this  sage,  O  lady,  reeling  in  misery  and  going  through  sorrow 
after  sorrow! 


V.iii.  171.55-60 


483 


Sandili  said: 

Know  ye  all  that  I  am  neither  an  Asurl  nor  a  GandharvI, 
neither  a  PisacI  nor  a  Raksasl.  Understand  that  I  am  a  chaste 
woman  loyal  to  my  husband  and  steadfast  in  my  penance. 

I  am  not  overwhelmed  with  lust  or  anger,  I  have  no  enmity 
with  anyone,  nor  am  I  afflicted  by  jealousy.  I  did  falter  and  slip 
down  due  to  ignorance  and  due  to  the  fact  that  my  eyes  could 
not  see  properly.  It  behoves  you  to  pardon  me. 

For  the  comfort  of  my  husband,  I  carry  him,  as  at  day  time 
he  is  troubled  by  his  ailment.  Please  know  that  he  who  is  always 
in  the  sack  is  my  husband.  I  bear  him,  feed  him,  dress  himtis 
he  is  a  patient.  Know  that  this  sage  is  the  leader  of  Saunaka 
clan  and  that  I  am  his  wife  Sandili.  Please  do  not  get  angry 
with  a  chaste  woman  serving  my  husband  righteously.  Treat 
(us)  as  guest.  It  behoves  you  all  to  pardon  me  who  have  come 
near  saintly  persons  like  you. 

The  sages  said: 

Moving  about  at  will,  you  appear  to  be  unaware  of  other 
people’s  distress  and  pain.  In  the  morning  as  soon  as  the  sun 
rises  your  husbad  will  die.  O  low-born  woman,  only  your  own 
misery  you  know  and  not  that  of  any  other  person. 

Sandili  became  chagrined  at  those  terrible  words.  Afflicted 
with  grief,  she  was  lost  in  meditation  for  a  short  while.  Then 
her  eyes  became  red  with  anger.  Staring  at  the  sages  she  spoke 
these  words: 

55-60.  "When  a  good  person  visits  the  house,  he  should 
be  accorded  the  adoration  due  to  a  guest  with  gentle  and 
welcoming  words.  It  seems,  I  have  come  to  the  house  of  you 
good  people  in  the  guise  of  one  committing  an  offence.  This 
is  the  type  of  hospitality  accorded  to  me  by  you  all!  The  righteous 
conduct  conducive  to  heavenly  pleasures  and  salvation  was  not 
at  all  noticed  by  you.  I  am  a  Prajapatya  (the  progeny  of  a 
patrichal  family)  but  you  see  me  like  a  barbarous  woman.  May 
you  and  the  deities  in  heaven  see  women’s  power  in  me  today. 
My  husband  will  not  die.  The  sun  will  not' rise.  The  entire 
universe  will  be  covered  with  darkness.  The  night  will  not  come 
to  an  end.” 


484 


Skanda  Purana 


When  these  words  were  uttered  by  her,  the  sun  remained 
paralysed.  Everything  fell  into  gloom.  All  Vasatkaras  and  holy 
rites  remained  suspended.  There  was  no  Svahakara,  ot  Sva- 
dhakara  or  the  rite  of  five  Yajfias.  Theie  was  no  Snana,  Dana 
or  japa.  All  Sandhya  rites  stood  suspended.  For  six  months  the 
rites  of  libation  and  the  offer  of  balls  of  rice  stood  unper¬ 
formed. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTYTWO 
The  Greatness  of  Mandavya  Tirlha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Then  all  the  sages  and  Devas  with  Indra  at  their  head 
came  to  the  meritorious  hermitage  of  Mandavya  on  the  banks 
of  Narmada. 

The  courtesans  began  to  dance  to  the  tunes  of  the  songs  of 
the  celestial  damsels.  Lights  shone  and  conchs  and  Dundubhi 
drums  were  sounded. 

Some  people  began  to  eulogize  narrating  the  tales  of  the 
sage  impaled  on  the  stake. 

Eighty-eight  thousand  hermit  -  householders  assembled  there 
with  a  desire  to  see  everything.  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesana 
came  there  with  great  pleasure  along  with  the  Devas. 

The  Mothers  beginning  with  Mallika,  Ksetrapalas,  Vinayakas, 
Dikpalas  (Guardians  of  quarters),  the  guardians  of  the  worlds, 
the  excellent  rivers  beginning  with  Ganga  etc.,  came  there. 

In  that  pleasant  gathering  of  sages  and  Devas,  the  king  too 
came  along  with  the  citizens  and  the  rural  folk. 

Some  came  there  with  great  curiosity;  some  with  agitated 
minds.  Their  minds  were  shaken  with  fear  and  they  stood  around. 

8-21.  In  that  divine  assembly  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Isa  spoke: 
“O  Mandavya  of  great  vitality,  along  with  the  Devas  we  are 
ready  to  grant  you  boons.  After  a  great  deal  of  suffering  and 
austerities,  you  will  now  attain  spiritual  perfection.  Request  as 
you  please,  whatever  may  appeal  to  your  mind. 

Know  that  the  whole  world  has  become  devoid  of  the  sun. 


v.iii.l  72.22-27 


485 


It  is  in  a  confused  state  without  Vasatkaras.  All  the  pious  rites 
have  become  defunct.  Make  it  attain  normalcy. 

Further,  O  excellent  Brahmana,  we  request  for  your  bless¬ 
ings  to  Sandili.  See  here,  the  king  who  has  given  you  much 
trouble  is  present  before  you.  O  Brahmana-sage,  grace  (gratify) 
the  entire  group  of  people  including  the  Devas  and  Asuras.” 


Mandavya  said: 

If  the  deities  are  pleased  with  me  and  have  come  here  along 
with  Suras,  they  should  stay  here  in  this  Tlrtha  on  all  the  three 
Sandhyas  along  with  the  sages.  May  my  physical  pain  and  dis¬ 
comfort  subside  forever  with  your  favour. 


The  Lords  of  Devas  said:  “So  be  it.”  O  son  of  Pandu,  even 
as  they  said  so,  the  demon  came  there  taking  the  girl 
KamapramodinI  with  him. 

He  said  to  them:  "O  holy  Sirs,  formerly  UrvasI  had  cursed 
me  and  said, ’When  you  abduct  a  girl,  your  curse  will  cease.’ 
My  despicable  activity  is  actuated  by  the  curse.  This  misdemeanour 
by  one  who  is  not  highly  learned  should  be  excused. 

After  saying  this  he  disappeared. 

After  he  had  gone  the  lotus-eyed  girl  was  seen  carefully  by 
all  the  Suras.  They  had  mutual  consultation  and  then  offered 


her  to  the  wise  Mandavya. 

They  poured  the  sacred  waters  of  Narmada  over  the  Vajrasulika 
(the  adamantine  stake)  and  took  Sage  Mandavya  off  the  stake 
to  the  accompaniment  of  auspicious  shouts  of  “Be  victorious 
etc.  Mandavya  the  great  sage,  married  the  girl  and  offered 

obeisance  to  all  of  them  (Suras). 

The  king  who  was  nearby  and  who  had  been  earlier  scolded 
by  all  the  people  saying  “Fie  upon  you!”  now  made  all  of  them 
delighted.  The  Brahmanas  were  propitiated  by  means  of  orn 
menu,  garments  and  food  and  also  with  gifts  of  a  crore  of  gold 
pieces  They  were  requested  to  forgive  him. 

P  After  the7  marriage  was  over  Mandavya  called  Sandili  and 


22-27  ’“Honour  these  Brahmanas.  Get  the  Sun  release  (from 
vour  curse)  It  is  his  mercy  that  dispels  the  darkness  immediately. 

7  On  hearing  the  words  of  the  sage,  Sandili  said  in  her  distress. 
“O  Brahmanas,  if  the  Sun  were  to  rise,  my  husband  will  die. 


486  Skanda  Parana 

How  can  I  get  him  released?  That  will  be  detrimental  to  my 
interest. 

O  great  sages,  what  do  I  gain  by  urging  (the  Sun)  to  resume 
his  movement?  Is  it  your  idea  that  I  should  be  without  my 
husband,  without  anyone  to  look  after  me?  Ye  all  stand  in 
darkness.  I  do  not  wish  that  the  Sun  should  rise.  ’ 

At  those  words,  all  the  Devas,  Asuras  and  great  sages  shook 
their  heads  and  said:  “That  is  all  right,  but,  O  highly  esteemed 
chaste  lady,  O  ascetic  lady,  listen  to  our  words.  If  you  honour 
all  of  us,  carry  out  the  words  spoken  (to  you).” 

Sandill  said: 

28-36.  All  of  you  think  well  and  do  what  will  increase 
happiness.  Do  that  whereby  my  husband  will  not  die  but  the 
words  of  the  sage  will  be  true  as  well. 

On  hearing  her  words,  they  made  the  sage  fall  into  a  stu¬ 
porous  coma.  Even  as  Sandill  was  watching,  he  was  made  to 
vanish  for  a  short  while.  All  the  sages  then  revived  him  and 
made  his  body  free  from  wounds.  That  sage  was  washed  with 
the  waters  of  Narmada  and  handed  over  to  Sandill. 

On  seeing  her  husband  refulgent,  she  became  delighted  in 
her  mind.  She  then  bowed  down  to  the  sages  and  Devas.  The 
bright  Sun  then  shone  all  over  the  world. 

All  the  worldly  activities  were  resumed.  The  Devas,  Gandharvas 
and  human  beings  were  all  delighted  and  they  went  to  their 
respective  abodes  and  great  penance  groves. 

The  chaste  lady  stayed  in  that  Asrama  along  with  her  hus¬ 
band  for  a  month.  On  being  permitted  by  Mandavya,  she  bowed 
to  him  and  went  to  her  hermitage. 

When  all  those  persons  had  gone,  Mandavya  installed  Lord 
Acyuta  by  the  name.  Mandavyesvara.  He  was  remembered  as 
Narayana  too. 

O  descendant  of  Bharata,  he  worshipped  the  deity  for  a 
thousand  divine  years  and  then  he  went  to  Amaraparvata  along 
with  the  groups  of  sages.  Even  today,  O  descendant  of  Bharata, 
the  brothers  are  continuously  performing  penance  and  medi¬ 
tating  upon  the  highest  station  (Being)  with  their  selves  under 
control. 


V.iii.172.37-59 


487 


37-48.  One  should  take  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tlrtha  and 
offer  libations  to  Pitrs  and  Devatas.  By  the  offer  of  balls  of  rice 
Pitrs  become  propitiated  for  ten  years. 

At  the  beginning  of  a  fortnight  a  person  should  do  the 
wiping  and  applying  of  plaster  in  the  temple.  By  this  smearing 
and  application  of  plaster  one  gets  twice  the  benefit  derived 
when  a  hundred  thousand  cows  are  gifted. 

By  adoration,  the  benefit  shall  be  fourfold.  The  merit  of 
lighting  lamps  is  cited  as  eightfold. 

Those  who  bathe  the  Lord  with  curd,  honey,  ghee,  milk  or 
the  waters  of  Narmada  become  persons  endowed  with  divine 
vision  in  the  three  worlds  including  mobile  and  immobile  beings. 

Those  who  adore  Virupaksa  or  Lord  Narayana  Hari  by  means 
of  flower  garlands  and  unguents,  sport  about  in  divine  aerial 
chariots  for  a  period  of  a  Kalpa. 

One  who  lights  eight  lamps  on  the  eighth,  eleventh  and 
fourteenth  days  of  the  dark  half  of  a  month,  does  not  see  Yama. 

Those  who  fill  the  Liriga  with  various  kinds  of  fruits  move 


about  by  means  of  an  aerial  chariot  and  are  served  by  Siddhas 
and  Caranas.  There  shall  be  bells  and  banners  in  the  aerial 
chariot.  So  also  flower  garlands  as  well  as  befitting  musical 
instruments.  It  will  pass  to  the  vicinity  of  Siva. 

He  who  builds,  makes  a  temple  of  Visnu,  Mandavyesvara,  is 
a  pious-souled  devotee  and  he  lives  in  Svarga  until  all  living 
beings  are  annihilated. 

The  devotee  should  feed  Brahmanas  in  the  shrine  name 
Mandavyanarayana.  If  a  single  Brahmana  is  fed,  it  is  as  good 

as  a  crore  of  them  are  fed.  ,  .  , 

In  the  month  of  Asvina,  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  bright 
half,  a  devotee  should  observe  fast  and  other  restraints  and 
keep  awake  at  night.  Rows  of  lights  shall  be  lit  in  all  the  four 
quarters  and  the  worship  shall  be  performed  m  accordance 

49-59  Whether  the  devotee  is  a  man  or  a  woman  he 
she  shall  carry  on  the  programme  of  music,  dance ^and  dis¬ 
courses.  When  the  day  dawns,  O  king  he  or  she  *ould  con¬ 
clude  all  the  rites  such  as  the  hoiy  abluuon  etc.  and  see  the 
deity  thus  in  silence.  The  devotee  shall  be  rid  of  all  sins  and 

"  OrTthl  month'of  MargSsIrsa,  Caitra,  Vaisakha  or  Sravana 


488 


Skanda  Purana 


or  in  fact  at  any  time,  it  shall  be  as  meritorious  as  Sivaratri. 
Thus  has  Siva  told.  The  benefit  shall  be  like  that  of  a  Vajapeya 
or  Asvamedha.  Not  otherwise. 

A  woman  may  be  unlucky,  miserable,  barren  or  poor,  or  her 
child  may  have  died.  If  she  performs  the  holy  ablution  with 
Rudraghatas  (?  eleven  waterpots),  she  shall  attain  all  cherished 
desires. 

Worms,  insects  and  locusts  that  die  in  that  Tirtha  go  to 
Svarga  and  assume  divine  forms,  O  king. 

If  those  who  are  afflicted  with  sickness  die  by  fasting,  drown¬ 
ing  or  by  being  burnt  in  fire,  they  will  have  that  goal  from 
which  there  is  no  return.  Undoubtedly  they  go  to  Rudraloka. 

O  king,  one  who  bows  down  to  both  Siva  and  Narayana 
everyday  attains  the  benefit  of  the  gift  of  a  cow  by  the  power 
of  that  Tirtha. 

O  great  king,  if  one  makes  a  circumambulation  of  the  temple, 
it  is  as  good  as  if  the  entire  earth  including  oceans  and  moun¬ 
tains  has  been  circumambulated. 

Outside  the  Mallikabhavana  there  are  one  hundred  fifty 
TIrthas.  O  excellent  kings,  that  is  the  extent  of  the  Tirthas. 

If  a  devotee  ties  round  the  holy  spot,  or  the  temple  of  Siva 
or  the  Liiiga  of  Siva  a  thread,  he  attains  merit.  Listen  to  it. 

60-67.  The  entire  earth  has  seven  continents  viz.  Jambudvlpa, 
Salmall,  Kusa,  Kraunca,  Saka,  Puskara  and  Gomeda.  The  merit 
attained  by  the  devotee  tying  the  thread  is  on  a  par  with  that 
of  one  who  embellishes  the  entire  earth  including  mountains, 
parks  and  forests. 

On  the  southern  side  of  Reva  near  the  Sivaksetra  there  is 
the  highly  meritorious  Devakhata  (a  well  dug  up  by  Devas) 
prepared  by  the  Tridasas  (Devas).  He  who  takes  his  holy  bath 
there,  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

The  devotee  should  perform  Sraddha  on  a  full-moon  day, 
new-moon  day,  Vyatlpata,  transit  of  the  Sun  and  Samgraha 
(immediately  after  the  eclipse  is  over).  He  shall  attain  the 
greatest  goal. 

All  the  three  deilties,  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesvara,  stay  in 
Devakhata  along  with  sages,  Pitrs,  and  groups  of  the  Devas. 
There  in  that  Tirtha,  in  the  month  of  Asvina,  especially  on  the 
fourteenth  day,  Sankara  stands  on  the  aerial  path  along  with 
the  Devas. 


V.iii. 172. 68-90 


489 


For  two  days,  all  the  TTrthas,  rivers  and  oceans  ail  over  the 
earth  enter  Devakhata. 

In  Mandavesvara,  the  devotee  attains  that  merit  which  is 
normally  obtained  in  Gayasira,  Prayaga,  Amarakantaka  and  in 
Somatlrtha. 

68-78.  On  the  full-moon  day  in  the  month  of  Asvina  coin¬ 
ciding  with  AsvinI  constellation,  if  the  devotee  offers  adoration 
at  Mandavesvara  shrine,  he  will  attain  the  same  merit  as  by 
pilgrimage  to  Lakulesvara  and  offering  of  Pattabandha  (silk 
cloth  offering). 

In  the  TTrtha  named  Mandavya  the  same  merit  is  eternally 
obtained  as  at  Mahakala  shrine  in  UjjayinI,  Tripuskara  in  Varanasi 
and  at  Sannihati. 

After  understanding  these  facts,  O  great  king,  and  realizing 
that  this  TTrtha  is  the  most  excellent  of  all  TTrthas,  the  devotee 
should  adore  the  Pitrs  and  Devas  by  means  of  holy  ablutions, 
gifts,  adorations  etc.  He  should  observe  fast  on  the  fourteenth 


day  and  remain  pure.  He  shall  adore  the  deity,  Siva,  with  great 


devotion  and  keep  awake  during  the  night.  The  deity  is  bathed 
with  different  kinds  of  ablutions,  and  adored  with  gai  lands 
and  unguents  of  agallochum.  In  the  morning  of  the  full-moon 
day,  the  rites  of  holy  bath  etc.,  and  the  libations  should  be  duly 
performed.  The  Sraddha  through  Havya  and  Kavya  should  be 
duly  concluded.  Agnistoma  and  other  Yajnas  are  performed 
duly  with  requisite  monetary  gifts.  The  devotee  shall  wash  himself 
of  nil  cine  hv  these  means.  The  purified  soul  shall  attain  the 


£ 


V 


490 


Skanda  Puranci 


obtain  the  benefit  of  the  recitation  of  all  the  three  Vedas. 
Through  the  adoration  of  Siva  one  obtains  benefit  on  behalf 
of  a  hundred  crores  of  the  members  of  his  family  and  even 
more. 

By  means  of  the  holy  bath,  Dana,  Sraddha,  keeping  awake, 
singing  of  songs,  playing  on  the  instruments,  etc.  he  will  attain 
the  goal  of  Sivaloka  from  which  there  shall  be  no  return  at  any 
time.  After  a  great  deal  of  time,  he  may  return  to  the  mortal 
world.  Then  he  shall  become  an  intelligent  king  devoid  of 
every  kind  of  sickness.  He  will  live  for  more  than  a  hundred 
years  with  sons,  grandsons  and  adequate  wealth.  He  will  re¬ 
member  the  same  TIrtha  and  will  get  merged  into  Mahesvara. 

One  who  performs  Sandhya  worship  in  that  TIrtha  during 
Parva  days  gets  the  excellent  benefit  of  reciting  all  the  four 
Vedas  along  with  the  Aiigas  and  Uparigas. 

O  king,  the  Sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter  shall  be  afraid  to 
move  about  within  a  radius  of  the  distance  of  an  arrow-fall  all 
round  the  Siva  shrine. 

A  devotee  shall  stand  wherever  he  pleases  and  see  the  trees 
with  eagerness  to  visit  the  TIrtha.  Even  then  he  shall  be  lib¬ 
erated  undoubtedly  from  the  different  kinds  of  sins. 

There  is  a  Svabhrl  (abysm)  seen  there,  O  great  king,  in  the 
middle  of  the  water.  The  story  is  mentioned  in  the  Purana  that 
a  female  monkey  (attained  salvation)  by  resorting  to  the  TIrtha 
there. 

O  great  king,  there  is  also  a  well  created  by  the  Devas  on 
the  western  side  of  Siva. 

This  is  an  excellent  Sivaksetra.  If  a  devotee  performs  the 
rite  of  Vrsotsarga  (ritualistic  dedication  of  a  bull)  at  that  TIrtha, 
his  Pitrs  sport  about  in  the  heavenly  world  as  they  please.  If 
Vrsotsarga  is  performed  all  these  sins  perish  as  that  of  carnally 
approaching  a  prohibited  woman,  performing  Yajna  on  behalf 
of  an  undeserving  person,  stealing,  Brahmana-slaughter,  cow- 
slaughter  and  slaughter  of  the  preceptor. 

One  who  attentively  listens  to  the  greatness  of  Mandavya 
TIrtha  shall  be  rid  of  all  sins.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained 
in  this  respect. 


V.iii.173.1-15 


491 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTYTHREE 


The  Greatness  of  Suddhesvara  Tirtha 1 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the 
highly  splendid  Tirtha  that  destroys  all  the  sins,  on  the  south¬ 
ern  bank  of  Narmada. 

It  is  well  known  as  Siddhesvara  (Suddhesvara)  and  is  de¬ 
structive  of  great  sins. 

It  was  here  that  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  attained 
great  sanctity.  Earlier,  O  son  of  KuntI,  the  Trident-bearing 
Lord  of  Devas  had  incurred  the  sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter. 

Formerly  Brahma,  the  grandfather  of  the  worlds,  had  five 
heads.  For  some  reason,  a  lie  had  been  uttered  by  him. 

On  hearing  it,  Paramesvara  became  furious  with  him  imme¬ 
diately.  The  Lord  then  cut  off  his  head  with  his  fingers  (nails) . 
The  severed  head  stuck  to  his  hand  and  never  dropped  down. 
Thereupon  the  Lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas  roamed  all  over  the 
earth. 

6-15.  Then  he  went  to  Varanasi  and  the  head  dropped  down 
there.  Although  the  skull  fell  down,  the  Sin  of  Brahmana- 
slaughter  did  not  leave  him. 

Thereupon,  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  went  to  the  oceans 
in  the  east,  south,  west  and  north.  He  wandered  over  all  the 
TIrthas.  Still  the  Sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter  did  not  leave  him. 

The  Lord  reached  the  excellent  Tirtha  on  the  southern 
bank  of  Narmada.  After  reaching  Kulakoti,  the  self-possessed 
Lord  uttered  the  prayers.  After  performing  the  expiatory  rites, 

he  became  free  from  sins. 

Then  MaheSvara.  the  Lord  of  Devas  toe ndofdl 
Granting  that  holy  spot  to  Devas,  the  Lord  vanished  the 

ltseif-  .  ,  TTrthi  was  glorified  as  Suddharudra.  It 

Ever  since  then,  the  Tirtha  was  gioi 

became  well-reputed  as  the  greatest  eradicator  of 
Brahmana-slaughter  in  all  the  thiee  woi 

_ —  r— . .  .  sticking  to  Siva's  hand  is  repeated  elsewhere 

1.  The  story  of  Brahma  s  '1^  ^.  ^  from  lhe  skull  is  given  to 

in  SkP.  The  credit  of  freeing  Raj-  ^anda 

diffcrtn. Ttrthas  in 
gives  the  credit  to  Suddhesvara  Tirtha 


492 


Skanda  Parana 


One  should  duly  take  his  holy  bath  every  month  on  the  new- 
moon  day  and  in  the  bright  half,  O  Yudhisthira,  and  offer 
libations  to  the  Pitrs  and  Devatas.  He  should  offer  a  ball  of  rice 
to  the  Pitrs  with  the  self  duly  purified,  O  king.  The  Pitrs  will 
become  pleased  with  him  for  twelve  years. 

By  adoring  Paramesvara  named  Suddhesvara  by  means  of 
sweet  scents,  incense,  lights  and  other  things  one  is  honoured 
in  Sivaloka. 

Thus,  O  king,  the  excellent  Suddharudra  has  been  recounted 
to  you  in  the  manner  it  was  heard  by  me  from  the  Trident¬ 
bearing  Lord.  One  is  rid  of  all  sins  and  one  goes  to  Rudra 
Loka. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTYFOUR 
The  Greatness  of  Gopesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-11.  Thereafter,  a  person  should  go  to  the  Gopesvara  Tirtha 
on  the  northern  bank  of  Narmada,  where,  by  means  of  a  single 
bath,  men  are  liberated  from  their  sins. 

One  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  gives 
up  his  life  shall  go  to  the  Palace  of  Siva  by  means  of  a  vehicle 
drawn  by  peacocks. 

After  sporting  about  there  in  Sivaloka  for  a  long  time,  O 
king,  he  attains  human  birth  here  and  becomes  a  powerful 
king. 

The  man  shall  be  endowed  richly  with  elephants,  horses  and 
chariots  and  fully  equipped  with  male  and  female  servants.  He 
shall  live  for  a  hundred  years,  adored  even  by  leading  kings. 

On  the  ninth  lunar  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of 
Karttika,  the  devotee  should  observe  fast  and  remain  pure.  He 
should  then  light  lamps  there. 

After  adoring  with  scents  and  sweet-smelling  flowers  he  shall 
keep  awake  in  the  night.  O  king,  listen  to  the  benefit  indicated 
for  him. 

He  is  honoured  in  Sivaloka  for  as  many  thousands  of  Yugas 


V.iii.175.1-11 


493 


as  there  are  lamps.  This  is  the  fruit  of  his  merit.  Listen  to  the 
procedure  of  Lingapurana. 

Listen  to  the  fruit  of  the  merit  derived  by  him  who,  at  that 
TIrtha,  Fills  up  (that  is  wraps  around)  the  Lihga  with  gingelly 
seeds,  lotus  flowers,  and  boiled  rice  mixed  with  curds. 

O  king,  he  rejoices  for  as  much  time  as  he  desires,  for  as 
many  years  as  there  are  gingelly  seeds,  rice  cakes  and  lotus 
flowers. 

Whatever  is  given  as  religious  gift  at  that  TIrtha,  O  king, 
shall  have  crore-times  benefit.  It  cannot  be  calculated  adequately. 
Thus  the  most  excellent  TIrtha  has  been  recounted  to  you 
fully. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTYFIVE 
The  Greatness  of  Kapilesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6  On  the  northern  bank  of  Narmada,  in  the  middle  of 
the  region  called  Bhrguksetra,  Kapilesvara  Tirtha  is  well-known 

as  particularly  destructive  of  sins.  . 

The  eternal  Lord  who  is  cited  in  the  Purapa  as  Vasudev  , 
the  Lord  of  the  universe,  incarnated  as  Kapila. 

There  is  a  Patala  (nether  world)  named  Sutala.  Beneath 

expounders  of  Brahman.  tor  of  the  universe, 

O  great  lung,  even  as  Kapda,  the  P  ^  P  ^  |n  ^ 

stayed  there,  the  sons  of  Sagar  p 

°f  him<  ^  them  reduced  to  ashes,  Kapila,  the  ex- 

7-11.  On  seeing  them ‘  He  thought  that  he  had 

cellent  sage,  was  extremely  d 

incurred  sin.  ,  f  u  sensuous  objects 

‘When  the  mind  has  been  freed  irom 


494  Skanda  Purana 

and  when  every  contact  has  been  eschewed,  it  is  improper  on 
my  part  to  have  destroyed  sixty  thousand  men. 

A  thing  done  cannot  be  undone.  I  shall,  therefore,  go  to  the 
Kapila  Tlrtha  that  is  destructive  of  all  sins  and  get  rid  of  my 
sins.’ 

Thereafter,  Kapila,  the  excellent  sage,  left  Patala,  settled  on 
the  banks  of  Narmada  and  performed  a  great  penance. 

Having  become  extremely  disgusted  (with  worldly  affairs), 
he  adored  the  immutable  Rudra  by  means  of  different  kinds 
of  vows  and  restraints,  holy  ablutions,  Dana,  Japa  etc. 

12-19.  He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tlrtha  and 
worships  Paramesvara,  shall  undoubtedly  obtain  the  merit  of 
gifting  a  thousand  cows. 

On  the  fourteenth  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of 
Jyestha,  a  person  should  take  his  holy  bath  as  per  religious 
formalities  there  and  make  gifts  devoutly  to  a  deserving  Brahmana, 
be  it  very  little  or  much.  The  benefit  has  been  mentioned  as 
everlasting  by  Siva  Paramesthin  (the  Supreme  Absolute). 

Whether  a  man  or  a  woman,  one  should  take  one’s  holy 
bath  on  a  fourth  or  ninth  lunar  day  coinciding  with  a  Tuesday. 
With  devotion,  he  should  observe  fast.  For  seven  births  he  (or 
she)  always  obtains  exquisite  beauty,  unparalleled  prosperity, 
conjugal  felicity  and  good  progeny  again  and  again.  On  new- 
moon  day  and  full-moon  day,  one  should  offer  balls  of  rice 
after  taking  holy  ablution.  The  Pitrs  become  pleased  with  him 
for  twelve  years  and  go  to  heaven. 

If  with  great  devotion  anyone  offers  splendid  light,  O  great 
king,  the  splendour  of  his  body  becomes  very  great. 

In  regard  to  the  creatures  that  die  there  in  the  Tlrtha,  their 
departure  to  Sivamandira  (palace  of  Siva)  shall  be  without  a 
return  from  there. 


V.iii.176.1-11 


495 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTYSIX 
The  Greatness  of  Pihgalesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Pingalavarta  Tirtha  which  is  endowed  with  all  good  quali¬ 
ties.  It  is  worthy  of  being  liked  and  is  a  very  rare  (spot)  on  the 
earth. 

A  sin  committed  earlier,  whether  verbal,  mental  or  physical, 
will  perish  by  resor.ting  to  Pihgalesvara  Tirtha. 

Sankara  has  thus  said  that  a  holy  bath  and  Dana  performed 
there  at  the  Devakhata  (holy  well  dug  by  Devas)  shall  be  ev¬ 
erlasting  in  benefit. 

After  digging  the  well,  auspicious  water  was  taken  up  from 
all  the  TIrthas  on  the  earth  and  poured  into  it.  Thus  it  has 
become  the  famous  Devakhata. 


Yudhislhira  said: 

O  excellent  Brahmana,  how  was  that  Devakhata  formed? 
How  did  all  the  Suras  pour  the  holy  waters  from  (other)  TIrthas 
therein?  O  Brahmana,  tell  me  everything.  My  mind  is  eager  to 

hear. 


ri  Markandeya  said: 

6-11.  In  order  to  purify  (cleanse)  his  Sula  (trident)  Rudra 
andered  along  with  groups  of  Devas  all  over  the  pure :  earth 
ith  a  water  pot  in  hand.  Then  the  Suras  took  their  holy  bath 
i  Prabhasa  Ld  other  TIrthas.  Waters  taken  out  from  all 
Irthas  were  put  into  a  vessel  by  them.  r  tjie 

Reaching  (the  ^tha  called,  SOUhhe  ».  *e  mdent 
,ord  became  clean  and  pure,  taxing 

hey  came  to  Bhrgukacchaka.  engaged  in  a 

There  they  saw  the  tawny-eyed  sickly  Agn.  engag 

evere  penance  meditating  by  Brahmanas  and 

Due  to  the  parts  of  th  ,  jistreSssediwith  many  ailments, 
ings,  he  became  dyspeptic  a  Devas  collec- 

)n  seeing  Agni,  the  mouth  of ^Devas, ,  t  worlds: 

ively  said  to  Lord  Sankara,  the  benetacio 


496 


Skanda  Purdna 


i 


The  Devas  said: 

12.  O  Sambhu,  may  it  please  you  to  bless  the  tawny-eyed, 
dyspeptic  Agni.  O  Mahesvara,  do  something  whereby  his  body 
becomes  rid  of  sickness  and  capable  of  receiving  Havis  offer¬ 
ings  again. 

Isvara  said: 

13.  O  Suras,  I  am  delighted  with  his  penance.  Further, 
particularly  due  to  your  pleading  (for  him)  I  shall  grant  the 
desired  boon. 

Pingala  said: 

14.  O  Lord  of  Devas,  if  you  are  pleased,  if  the  desired 
thing  is  to  be  granted,  do  stay  here  with  a  sixteenth  portion 
after  making  the  Moon  and  the  Sun  your  eyes. 

Further,  O  Sankara,  do  that  whereby  my  body  will  be  re¬ 
juvenated.  O  Virupaksa,  obeisance  to  you  again  and  again. 

Markandeya  said: 

15.  Thereupon  Sambhu,  Sankara  adopted  the  form  of  Aditya 
and  removed  his  ailment. 

16-18.  Then,  when  he  (Pingala)  was  rejuvenated  he  addressed 
Sankara:  O  Sambhu,  do  stay  here  itself.  So  also  let  Bhaskara 
himself  stay  here  for  helping  living  beings  and  quelling  ail¬ 
ments,  for  destroying  sins  and  for  augmentation  of  welfare.” 
On  being  told  thus  by  the  noble-souled  Pingala  (Agni),  the 
Lord  incarnated  and  spoke  to  the  Devas  thus: 

Isvara  said: 

19-29.  To  the  north  of  my  shrine  dig  a  splendid  well 
(Devakhata)  and  pour  into  it  the  water  that  has  been  brought 
from  the  TIrthas.  Let  the  water  that  is  capable  of  destroying 
all  ailments  be  deposited  there.  Let  this  divine  water  that  quells 
all  sins  be  put  there  by  all  the  Suras  and  others. 

On  being  told  thus,  the  thirty-three  crores  of  Devas  dug  a 
deep  abysmal  pit  on  the  north  and  poured  the  water  from  the 
TIrthas  therein. 


V.iii.  176.30-33 


497 


All  of  them  with  Lord  Virupaksa  (Siva)  as  the  leader  said 
collectively  :  “Whoever  may  he  be,  a  person  should  take  his 
holy  bath  after  holding  a  bit  of  the  earth  from  Devakhata.  On 
a  Sunday,  the  holy  bath  is  to  be  performed  in  the  waters  of 
Narmada.  Then  he  should  perform  Sraddha  unto  the  Pitrs  and 
make  monetary  gifts  in  accordance  with  his  capacity.  Thus  the 
devotee  should  adore  Pingesa.  He  will  stay  in  heaven. 

What  was  uttered  by  the  Suras  the  entire  world  heard. 

“All  the  ailments  of  men  such  as  tuberculosis,  itching  sca¬ 
bies,  all  types  of  ailments  arising  from  hiccup,  bronchitis  and 
fever,  different  types  of  fevers  occurring  everyday,  on  alternate 
days,  once  in  three  or  four  days,  fevers  arising  from  attacks  by 
ghosts,  cutaneous  eruptions,  jaundice  and  other  defects  perish 
in  seven  days  due  to  the  holy  baths  on  Sundays.  Different  kinds 
of  leprosy  can  be  quelled  by  taking  the  holy  bath  on  one 
hundred  eight  Sundays.  After  adoring  Sankara,  the  devotee 
makes  the  gift  of  a  pot  of  gingelly  seeds  to  a  Brahmana.  Lep¬ 
rosy  becomes  quelled  like  serpents  by  Garuda.”  After  saying 
thus  all  the  Devas  went  to  heaven. 

Sri  Mavkandeya  said: 

30-33.  One  should  always  take  one’s  bath  in  Devakhatas, 
lakes,  rivers  etc.  The  man  becomes  rid  of  sins. 

The  benefit  of  the  bath  in  Devakhata  is  superior  to  that  of 
the  bath  in  sixty-six  thousand  TIfthas. 

O  king,  one  who  takes  his  bath  in  Devakhatas,  offers  liba¬ 
tions  to  Pitrs  and  worships  the  excellent  Pingalesvara,  the  Lord 
of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  obtains  the 
benefit  of  both  horse-sacrifice  and  Vajapeya.  There  is  no  doubt 
about  it. 


498 


Skanda  Purana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTYSEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Bhutisvara  Tirtha} 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  Bhutisvara 
Tirtha,  the  most  excellent  one  among  all  the  TIrthas.  Merely 
by  visiting  it,  all  the  sins  get  dissolved. 

At  that  holy  spot  formerly  the  Trident-bearing  Lord  of  Devas 
sprinkled  the  holy  ash  on  his  body.  Hence  it  is  called  Bhutisvara. 

On  a  day  of  Pusya  or  on  one’s  own  birthday  star,  and  par¬ 
ticularly  on  a  new-moon  day,  a  man  should  take  his  holy  bath 
in  Bhutisvara.  Thereby  he  shall  be  able  to  redeem  a  crore  of 
the  members  of  his  family. 

O  king,  listen  to  the  benefit  cited  as  accruing  to  one  who 
devoutly  smears  his  body  with  holy  ash  there  in  that  holy  spot. 

He  is  honoured  in  Sivaloka  for  as  many  thousand  years  as 
there  are  particles  of  ash  sticking  to  his  body  in  the  temple  of 
Siva. 

Bhasmasnana  (bathing  in  i.e.  application  all  over  the  body 
of  the  holy  ash)  is  remembered  as  the  greatest  of  all  modes 
of  baths.  It  has  been  so  said  by  ancient  sages.  It  is  mentioned 
in  all  the  Sastras  as  the  most  excellent  thing. 

This  Agneya  (fiery  i.e.  with  holy  ash)  bath  should  be  taken 
once,  twice  or  thrice  a  day  forever.  The  devotee’s  sin  perishes. 

O  leading  scion  of  the  family  of  Bharata,  Vayavya  (pertaining 
to  wind  i.e.  exposing  the  body  to  the  dust  particles  raised  by 
wind)  bath  is  better  than  Divyasnana  (standing  in  the  sun, 
divine  bath).  Brahmya  Snana  (bath  within  the  Brahman-Vedic 
Mantra)  is  better  than  Vayavya  and  Varuna  (dipping  in  the 
ocean)  is  better  than  Brahmya. 

9-18.  Agneya  is  better  than  the  Varuna,  since  it  has  been 
said  so  by  the  Self-born  Lord.  Hence  with  all  effort  one  should 
perform  the  Agneya  bath. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

I  am  interested  to  hear  the  nature  of  this  Agneya,  Varuna, 
Brahmya,  Vayavya  and  Divya  type  of  bath. 


L  This  chapter  deals  with  different  kinds  of  baths  such  as  Agneya,  Vdyavlya, 
Varuna,  Brahmya  and  Divya  and  decides  that  Agneya  bath  (smearing  holy 
ash  all  over  the  body)  is  the  best  bath. 


V.iii.177.9-18 


499 


Markandcya  said: 

Agneya  is  the  bath  in  the  holy  ash  i.e.  smearing  oneself  with 
the  ash.  Varuna  is  the  bath  by  plunging  into  the  water  of  a 
river,  lake  or  ocean.  Brahmya  is  the  Vedic  bath  by  sprinkling 
oneself  with  water  while  reciting  the  Mantra  “ dpohisthd ”  (RV 
X.9.1 ).  Vayavya  is  exposing  oneself  to  the  dust  particles  kicked 
up  by  cows. 

The  bath  when  the  sun  is  seen  (i.e.  sun  bath)  is  on  a  par 
with  that  in  the  Gaiiga  water.  That  Snana  is  mentioned  as  the 
fifth  one,  the  Divya  (divine  bath),  O  excellent  scion  of  the 
family  of  Pandu. 

Hence  one  who  assiduously  bathes  in  the  Bhutlsvara  Tlrtha 
and  adores  Lord  Isana  becomes  pure  internally  and  externally. 

Those  who  meditate  on  the  greatest  Pada  (  word,  region, 
position)  always  at  that  holy  spot,  the  subtlest  one  beyond  the 
ken  of  the  sense-organs,  are  undoubtedly  blessed.  That  Tlrtha 
is  the  Tlrtha  of  salvation,  the  most  excellent  one  of  all  the 
Tlrthas.  Merely  by  visiting  it,  all  sins  utterly  perish. 

There,  one  should  eulogize  and  adore  Mahesvara.  One  gets 
a  kingdom  thereby.  By  Japa ,  the  sins  are  eradicated.  By  medi¬ 
tation  one  attains  infiniteness. 

The  Mantra  for  meditation:  “Om,  Siva  is  the  Lord  of  all 
Yogas,  the  Lord  of  all  worlds,  free  from  delusion  and  grief,  can 
be  known  through  the  great  knowledge;  he  is  in  the  form  of 
Jyotis  (Luminary)  with  neither  a  beginning  nor  a  middle;  he 
is  never  produced.  There  is  no  word  that  can  express  him.  He 
is  immanent  in  all  living  beings.” 

O  Lord  of  men,  one  who  goes  there  to  that  Tlrtha  and  takes 
the  holy  bath  obtains  the  benefit  of  an  Asvamedha  Yajna.  Men 
who  expect  salvation  do  not,  Alas,  know  the  Lord  who  is  thus! 


500 


Skanda  Purana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTYEIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Gahgavahaka  Tirtha) 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Then,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent 
and  highly  meritorious  Gahgavahaka  TTrtha  on  Narmada  in 
the  vicinity  of  Bhrgutlrtha. 

There  the  highly  meritorious  Gahga  performed  severe  aus¬ 
terities  for  more  than  a  hundred  years  observing  a  great  Vrata. 

She  meditated  on  the  sinless  Lord  Narayana,  the  source  of 
origin  of  the  universe.  O  Lord  of  the  world,  that  river  medi¬ 
tated  on  the  greatest  splendour,  the  Supreme  Atman.  There¬ 
upon  Lord  Janardana  came  there  and  said  this: 

Visnu  said: 

O  river  born  of  the  lotus-like  feet  of  mine,  I  am  pleased  with 
your  penance.  O  fair  one,  what  do  you  wish  from  me?  Tell  me, 
what  shall  I  do  for  you? 

Gahga  said: 

6-20.  O  Lord,  I  have  slipped  down  from  your  lotus-like  feet 
and  naturally  begun  to  flow.  O  Lord  of  the  three  worlds,  in¬ 
cidentally  I  am  being  saluted  by  the  heaven-dwellers. 

King  Bhaglratha,  therefore,  performed  a  very  difficult  pen¬ 
ance  and  propitiated  Sankara,  the  Lord  of  the  universe,  the 
benefactor  of  the  worlds.  O  holder  of  the  earth,  he  thus  caused 
me  to  descend  down  to  the  earth. 

At  the  instance  of  both  of  you,  I  got  down  to  the  earth. 
Considering  that  I  pertain  to  Visnu  all  the  people  bathed  in 
me.  Those  who  were  Brahmana-slayers  in  the  world,  defilers  of 
preceptor  s  bed,  those  who  abandoned  their  mothers  and  fa¬ 
thers,  men  who  take  away  gold,  men  who  slay  cows,  those  who 
injure  living  beings,  those  who  carnally  visit  prohibited  women, 
those  who  eat  prohibited  food,  an  utterer  of  falsehood,  those 


1.  Gahga,  the  most  sacred  river,  gets  purified  by  joining  (taking  bath  in) 
Narmada  at  Sankhoddhara  Tirtha  or  Gahgavaha-Tirtha-syncrctism  between 
Saivism  and  Vaisnavism  attempted  here. 


V.iii.l78.21-29a 


501 


who  commit  breach  of  trust,  those  who  steal  the  assets  of  a 
deity  and  Brahmanas,  those  men  who  censure  Devas,  Brahmanas, 
preceptors  and  women,  those  who  are  burnt  by  the  curse  of 
a  Brahmana,  those  who  commit  suicide,  destroy  themselves, 
those  who  swerve  from  the  righteous  path  but  indulge  in  fasts! 
renunciation,  restraints  and  Vratas,  those  who  drink  prohib¬ 
ited  bevei ages,  those  who  prohibit  Dana  and  those  who  are 
averse  to  the  offer  of  Dana  to  deserving  persons,  those  who 
destroy  the  Rtu-cycle  of  their  own  wives,  those  who  are  not 
affectionate  towards  their  parents,  those  who  do  not  have  pity 
on  wretched  ones  and  kinsmen,  he  who  breaks  bunds  and 
embankments  in  Fields,  one  who  destroys  the  earlier  pathways, 
an  atheist,  one  who  has  given  up  scriptural  studies,  a  Brahmana 
bereft  of  Sandhya  prayers,  one  who  eats  what  is  not  offered  in 
Homa,  one  who  is  never  satisfied,  one  who  indiscriminately  eats 
everything,  one  who  sells  everything,  misers,  atheists,  cruel 
ones,  Brahmanas  who  arc  ungrateful,  those  who  indulge  in 
calumny,  those  who  sell  juices  (liquors),  those  who  are  de¬ 
prived  of  proper  occasions,  the  base  Brahmanas  who  enjoy 
women  of  their  own  Gotras  and  of  other  Gotras — all  these 
sinners  come  to  me  and  are  rid  of  the  series  of  sins  accumu¬ 
lated  by  them.  I  am  distressed  as  though  corroded  by  the  acidity 
of  their  sins. 

Hence,  O  Lord  of  the  universe,  do  something  so  that  I  will 
get  happiness  which  I  am  denied  now.” 

On  being  told  thus,  the  Lord  of  Devas  was  delighted  and  he 
said  to  Jahnavi: 


Visnu  said: 

21-29a.  I  shall  always  stay  here  with  Gangadhara  (Siva)  as 
my  associate.  Enter  Reva  here  itself  in  your  own  form. 

O  Triple-streamed  One,  come  to  my  Sole  (of  the  foot)  and 
flow  when  you  will  be  carrying  the  waters  of  Naimada  at  the 

time  of  the  flood.  .  ,  __ 

In  rainy  season  you  will  be  completely  Filled  wit  water,  ou 
will  then  overflow  both  the  banks  and  reach  me  lesi  ing  on 

the  northern  bank.  ,  — . 

Then  you  will  be  flooding  the  conch  held  in  my  hand.  That 


502  Skanda  Parana 

shall  be  the  Vaisnava  Parva,  excelling  a  hundred  other  Paruas 
(auspicious  occasions) . 

The  holy  periods  of  Vyatipata,  Sankrama  etc.,  cannot  be  on 
a  par  with  it.  It  is  more  meritorious  than  the  most  meritorious. 
Even  the  two  Ayanas  (Transits  of  the  Sun)  are  not  like  it. 

O  goddess  of  Devas,  a  man  who  touches  the  conch  on  that 
Parva  and  takes  his  holy  bath  in  the  mixed  waters  of  Ganga 
and  Narmada  shall  certainly  effect  the  destruction  of  clusters 
of  his  sins.  It  is  the  most  meritorious  of  all  meritorious  things; 
It  is  the  most  auspicious  of  all  auspicious  things,  because  it  has 
been  held  by  Visnu.. Hence  peace  emanates.  The  man  should 
take  his  holy  bath  in  Sankhoddhara  and  offer  libations  to  Pitrs 
and  Devatas. 

29b-32a.  The  Pitrs  will  be  pleased  for  twelve  years.  They  will 
attain  the  fulfilment  of  all  cherished  desires. 

If  a  devotee  offers  Sraddha  in  Sankhoddhara  in  Gangavaha 
the  Pitrs  dance  in  full  appreciation  of  that  offer  of  the  ball  of 
rice. 

O  Jahnavl,  a  man  should  take  his  holy  bath  in  Sankhoddhara 
and  worship  Bala  and  Kesava.  By  keeping  awake  at  night  he 
becomes  pure. 

What  you  consider  as  unbearable  sins  committed  by  the 
people  of  the  world  they  can  be  eradicated  fully  by  taking  holy 
bath  on  that  Parva. 

After  saying  this,  O  most  excellent  one  among  men,  Visnu 
vanished. 

32b-35.  Evei  since  then  that  Tlrtha  is  known  as  the  excel¬ 
lent  Gahgavahaka.  It  is  honoured  by  Brahma  and  others  as  well 
as  by  the  sages  following  the  tradition  thereof  O  descendant 
of  Bharata,  he  who  devoutly  bathes  in  that  Tlrtha  is  on  a  par 
with  one  who  has  taken  the  holy  bath  in  the  Ganga  Tlrtha. 

In  regard  to  the  men  of  purified  souls  who  die  there  in  that 
Tirtha,  there  is  no  return  from  Visnuloka  at  any  time.  Their 
departure  is  ultimate. 


V.iii. 179.1-16 


503 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  SEVENTYNINE 
The  Greatness  of  Gautamesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Gautamesvara  Tirtha  that  destroys  all  sins  and  is  well- 
known  in  all  the  three  worlds. 

O  Yudhisthira,  penance  was  performed  there  at  that  Tirtha 
by  Gautama  for  a  period  of  one  thousand  divine  years.  There¬ 
after  Mahesvara  was  pleased. 

Gautama  bowed  down  his  head  and  installed  Paramesvara. 
Since  Isa  was  installed  by  Gautama,  the  deity  is  called  Gautamesvara. 

By  propitiating  Paramesvara  there,  excellent  Siddhi  has  been 
achieved  by  Devas,  Gandharvas,  sages,  Pitrs  and  Devatas. 

One  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  wor¬ 
ships  the  Pitrs  and  Devatas  and  adores  the  great  Isana  is  lib¬ 
erated  from  all  sins. 

Deluded  by  the  Maya  of  Visnu  many  do  not  know  that  the 
trident-bearing  Lord  Mahesvara  is  present  there. 

O  Lord  of  men,  one  who  remains  celibate,  takes  his  holy 
bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and  adores  Mahadeva  shall  obtain  the 
benefit  of  an  Asvamedha  (horse-sacrifice). 

One  who  remains  celibate  and  offers  libation  to  the  Pitrs 
and  Devatas  and  adores  the  great  Isana  is  absolved  of  all  sins. 

9-16.  The  Dana  offered  with  devotion  to  Brahmanas  in 
that  Tirtha  shall  be  of  everlasting  benefit.  No  doubt  need  be 
entertained  in  this  respect. 

O  king,  in  the  month  of  Asvayuja  on  the  fourteenth  day  in 
the  dark  half,  a  person  should  take  his  holy  bath  duly  and  offer 
a  hundred  lights,  after  worshipping  Mahadeva  with  sweet  scents, 
flowers  etc.  The  man  is  liberated  form  all  sins.  After  death  he 

goes  to  Siva’s  City.  .  . 

On  the  eighth  and  fourteenth  lunar  days,  particularly  on 

the  full-moon  day  in  the  month  of  Karttika  a  devotee  should 
observe  fast,  remain  pure  and  bathe  Siva  with  ghee  Pancagavya 
honej,  curd  or  cold  water.  That  man  obtains  the  benefit  of  all 

^  Afterwards  he  should  worship  (Siva)  with  devotion.  He  shall 
get  the  excellent  benefit. 


504 


Skanda  Purana 


A  man  who  worships  Gautamesvara,  with  Kusa,  Apamarga, 
Kadamba  and  Drona,  Mallika  and  Karavlra  of  red,  yellow,  white 
and  black  flowers  obtains  all  desires. 

One  who  worships  with  other  flowers,  according  to  their 
availability,  regularly  for  six  months  shall  obtain  all  desires.  On 
death  he  shall  go  to  Siva’s  City. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTY 
The  Greatness  of  Dasasvamedha  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  great 
Tirtha  Dasasvamedhika  endowed  with  all  good  features.  It  is 
destructive  of  all  great  sins. 

^  After  going  there,  taking  the  holy  bath  and  worshipping 
Isvara,  a  man  derives  the  benefit  of  ten  horse-sacrifices. 


Yudhisthira  said: 

Asvamedha  is  a  great  Yajna  requiring  many  requisite  things 
and  much  wealth  for  distributing  monetary  gifts.  It  cannot  be 

PU  n\iuy  urdinary  men-  How  can  lhey  get  the  benefit 
thereof?  What  has  been  mentioned  by  you  is  very  astonishing. 

Do  tell  me  in  such  a  way  as  to  create  credence  in  me  and 
impart  to  me  longevity  of  life. 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

th™“^d?r,5hU*-  The  Threc-'yc<l  Lord  was  asked 
wEv;nu“  v°11  hav' 

Formerly  seated  on  his  bull,  Sankara,  the  Lord  of  Devas 

accompatned  by  Uma,  was  roaming  about  on  the  earth  He 
reached  the  banks  of  Narmada.  eaun.  He 

On  seeing  the  Dasasvamedhika  Tirtha  the  three-eyed  Mahesvara 

reverently  jotned  pa,ms  Tirtha  and  made TeT 


V-iii-1 80.9-28 


505 


On  seeing  the  Lord  with  palms  joined  in  reverence,  the 
goddess  said  thus: 

The  Devi  said: 

9-1 8a.  What  is  this,  O  Lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas  bowed 
down  to  by  mobile  and  immobile  beings?  You  appear  to  be 
endowed  with  great  devotion  with  palms  joined  in  reverence 
and  head  bowing  down.  This  is  a  great  surprise  without  a  par¬ 
allel.  O  Lord,  tell  me  everything. 


Isvara  said: 

See  the  benefit  from  the  Tirtha  directly.  Do  not  be  sur¬ 
prised.  Even  as  I  remain  on  the  ground  watch  me  steadily 
remaining  in  the  air  itself. 


After  saying  this,  the  Lord  of  Devas  became  a  fair-complex- 
ioned  Brahmana.  He  was  completely  dried  up  with  the  veins 
visible  on  the  body  everywhere.  He  had  matted  hair  and  he 
appeared  emaciated  due  to  hunger  with  the  throat  parched. 

He  sat  on  bare  ground  and  repeated  Vedic  Mantras  in  a 
sweet  tone.  Mahadcva,  fond  of  Krama  Patha  (a  mode  of  Vedic 
recitation)  delighted  everyone  with  the  sweetness  of  his  voice. 

On  hearing  that  sweet  voice  of  the  Deva  Brahmanas  who 
had  all  come  there  for  their  baths  became  agitated  and  con- 

fused.  ,  r  • 

Everyone  forgot  his  own  daily  routine  due  to  the  confusion 

created  by  what  they  heard.  On  seeing  him  going  on  with  his 
recitation  though  afflicted  by  hunger  and  thirst  ascertain 
Brahmana,  invited  him  for  food  with  great  devotion:  O  Bi  ahmana, 
may  you  be  pleased  to  take  your  food  in  my  house.  Today  my 
life  has  become  fruitful.  Today  all  my  sacred  rites  have  become 
fruitful  All  my  delighted  grandfathers  will  grant  me  my  cher¬ 
ished  desires  if  you  take  food,  O  excellent  Brahmana.  Be  pleased 

with  me  certainly.”  . 

T8b  28  On  being  told  thus,  Mahadeva  who  was  in  the  guise 

of  a  Brahmana  laughed  and  replied  in  sweet  words  to  the 

Br  “Penance  was  performed  by  me  for  a  thousand  years  without 
food.  Now,  O  excellent  Brahmana,  I  will  take  food  in  the  house 


506 


Skanda  Parana 


of  that  person  by  whom  ten  horse-sacrifices  have  been  per¬ 
formed  and  Parana  (ritualistic  breaking  of  the  fast)  as  well.” 

On  being  told  thus  by  the  Lord  of  Devas,  the  Brahmana 
became  surprised.  He  shook  his  head  and  went  away  to  his 
house. 

Thus  when  the  invitation  was  not  accepted  many  Brahmanas 
turned  away.  Many  Ndslikas  (non-believers)  who  did  not  know 
the  implication  of  the  Purana,  went  away. 

Ultimately  a  certain  Brahmana  who  was  highly  learned  and 
conversant  with  the  sense  of  the  Purana  and  the  reality  thereof, 
invited  Siva  in  the  form  of  a  Brahmana. 

He  was  also  told  the  same  thing  by  the  Lord.  He  mentally 
reflected  on  the  meanings  of  the  Purana.  The  excellent  Brahmana 
decided  thus:  ‘What  has  been  mentioned  in  the  Smrtis,  Vedas 
and  Puranas  should  be  really  so’  and  said  to  the  Brahmana 
laughingly:  “O  Brahmana,  wait  till  1  return.”  Saying  this,  the 
Brahmana  went  to  the  great  Dasasvamedhika  TIrtha.  Holy  bath, 
Mahdlambhana  (the  great  seizing,  touching,  killing  etc.)  rite 
etc.  were  performed  by  that  Brahmana.  Japa,  Sraddha,  Dana 
etc.  were  performed  in  accordance  with  the  pious  rites.  He 
then  performed  the  Sarhkalpa  of  a  Kapila  (tawny  cow  intended 
for  Dana)  and  hastened  to  the  place  where  the  other  Brahmana 
was  waiting. 

29-38.  After  coming  there  he  said  to  the  Brahmana:  “The 
horse-sacrifice  has  been  performed  by  me.  Get  up.  Let  us  go 
to  our  beautifull  house  for  taking  food.” 

On  being  told  thus  by  that  Brahmana,  Sankara  became  sur¬ 
prised.  The  Lord  said  to  the  Brahmana:  “You  went  from  this 
place  just  now,  O  excellent  Brahmana:  How  were  the  stipu¬ 
lated  ten  Yajnas  involving  great  amount  of  money  performed?” 

The  Brahmana  said: 

You  need  not  worry.  Undoubtedly  the  Yajnas  have  been  per- 
formed. 

If  the  Vedas  are  valid  and  also  Brahmanas  are  Devas  on  the 
earth,  if  the  Dasasvamedhika  TIrtha  is  real,  O  excellent  Brahmana, 
!f  what  has  been  stated  in  the  Vedas  and  Puranas  shall  happen 
undoubtedly,  then  everything  has  been  attained  by  me.  No 
doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  respect. 


*  *  * 


V.iii.  180.39-49 


507 


On  being  told  thus,  the  Lord  of  Devas  pondered  over  his 
faith  and  belief  in  his  mind  but  did  not  say  anything  by  way 
of  reply. 

He  went  to  his  beautiful  house  reciting  the  eternal  Vedic 
passages.  On  reaching  the  house,  the  local  Brahmana  adored 
the  other  Brahmana  (Siva)  devoutly  with  Pddya  and  Arghya. 
Afterwards  a  good  meal  with  dishes  of  all  the  six  tastes  was  also 
given  by  him  duly. 

Then  when  Mahadeva,  identical  with  all  the  Devas  (Siva 
wholly  consisting  of  all  the  Devas)  Finished  his  meal,  a  shower 
of  flowers  fell  on  his  head  from  the  Firmament.  On  observing 
his  faith  and  belief,  Sankara  became  pleased  and  said: 

Isvara  said: 

O  excellent  Brahmana,  tell  me,  I  am  the  bestower  of  boons. 
What  shall  be  done  for  you?  Certainly  even  that  which  cannot 
be  given  ordinarily,  I  shall  give  you  who  are  single-minded. 

The  Brahmana  said: 

39-49.  O  Lord,  if  you  are  pleased  with  me,  if  a  boon  has 
to  be  granted  to  me,  O  Mahadeva,  you  will  have  to  stay  in  this 
TIrtha  always  for  helping  (the  world).  O  Lord  of  Devas,  this 
shall  be  an  ideal  boon  unto  me. 

After  saying  so,  the  excellent  Brahmana  climbed  on  to  an 
aerial  chariot  that  could  grant  all  desires  (that  could  be  loved 
by  all)  and  that  was  fully  crowded  with  Gandharvas  and  Apsaras. 
Being  eulogized  he  went  to  that  place  where  all  the  people 
were  free  from  ailments. 

Markandeya  said: 

On  seeing  this  unprecedented  miracle,  the  goddess  was 
extremely  surprised.  With  the  eyes  beaming  with  wonder,  she 
asked  Sankara: 


Pdrvati  said: 

How  can  this  be  true?  Why,  this  is  unreasonable?  O  Mahesvara, 


508 


Skanda  Purana 


many  do  bathe  here.  Do  they  go  to  Svarga  like  this  Brahmana 
who  has  gone  to  heaven  now?  How  did  this  happen?  Tell  me, 
great  is  my  surprise. 

On  hearing  this,  the  Lord  of  Devas  laughingly  said  to  her: 
“None  should  express  incredulous  surprise  in  regard  to  a  Vedic 
passage,  the  meaning  of  the  Purana,  the  idea  conveyed  by  a 
Smrti  and  the  utterance  of  a  Brahmana.  It  is  a  valid  means  of 
testimony.  If  some  people  take  up  only  one  of  the  sides  (regarding 
it  doubtful)  and  consider  what  is  sung  about  in  the  Purana  as 
impossible,  O  Parvatl,  they  will  not  get  Siddhi.  There  is  nothing 
surprising. 

If  the  people  are  non-believers,  if  they  break  the  bounds  of 
decorum  and  convention,  they  will  never  have  Siddhi.  If  there 
is  belief,  if  there  is  faith,  it  will  certainly  happen.” 

After  hearing  this  narration,  the  goddess  bowed  down  to  the 
excellent  Tlrtha  that  is  established  on  Narmada,  that  is  meri¬ 
torious  and  destructive  of  great  sins. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

50-59.  O  great  king,  Dasasvamedha  is  the  most  excellent 
one  of  all  excellent  Tirthas.  It  possesses  all  good  qualities.  It 
is  destructive  of  great  sins. 

Sarasvati  is  a  meritorious  river.  It  is  the  foremost  one  of  all 
meritorious  rivers.  It  is  the  most  excellent  one  among  all  rivers. 

Merely  by  means  of  its  name  one  is  rid  of  all  sins.  Those  who 
take  their  holy  bath  in  it,  go  to  heaven.  Those  who  die  therein, 
are  not  reborn. 

That  river  Sarasvati  too  comes  to  Dasasvamedha  with  a  desire 
to  have  the  holy  bath.  O  king,  she  observes  the  vow  of  Brahmacarya. 
By  propitiating  the  Lord  of  Devas,  she  attains  the  greatest 
relief  in  salvation. 

In  order  to  wash  off  the  sins  accumulated  in  the  course  of 
a  year,  the  river  born  of  Brahma  comes  here  on  the  tenth  day 
in  the  month  of  Asvina. 

After  observing  fast  for  the  night  and  worshipping  the  Slayer 
of  Tripura,  she  becomes  free  from  sins  and  on  the  morrow 
attains  the  eternal  region. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

Sarasvati,  the  most  excellent  one  of  all  the  rivers,  the  highly 


V.iii.180.60-70 


509 


meritorious  river,  comes  once  a  year  to  Dasasvamedha  in  order 
to  bathe.  Will  the  Tirtha  have  some  special  effect  on  DasamI 
(tenth)  day? 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

O  king,  in  the  month  of  Asvayuja  on  the  tenth  day,  it  be¬ 
comes  augmented  (in  sanctifying  power).  In  all  the  Tlrthas  of 
the  earth,  it  is  the  most  perfect  one. 

In  Dasasvamedhika,  O  king,  DasamI  (tenth  lunar  day)  is 
always  auspicious.  Especially  in  the  Asvina  month,  the  tenth 
day  of  the  bright  half  is  destructive  of  great  sins. 

On  that  day,  a  devotee  should  be  engaged  in  the  observance 
of  fast  after  taking  the  holy  bath  and  worship  Devas.  After 
performing  the  Sraddha  rite  in  accordance  with  the  injunc¬ 
tions,  he  should  worship  Siva. 

60-70.  He  should  also  adore  the  divine  river  Sarasvatl  present 
there  and  desirous  of  taking  the  holy  bath  (and  address):  “Obei¬ 
sance,  obeisance  to  you,  O  goddess  of  Devas,  born  of  the  body 
of  Brahma!  O  divine  river,  destroy  the  sins.  Redeem  me  from 
the  worldly  existence.” 

He  should  adore  with  sweet  scents  and  incense  again  and 
again.  After  circumambulating  ten  times,  he  should  encircle  it 
with  a  thread.  (A  Kapila  cow  should  be  encircled?)  Without 
any  ill  feeling,  the  devotee  offers  the  Kapila  to  a  Brahmana. 

After  gifting  the  Kapila  possessing  all  good  features  and 
offered  along  with  the  appurtenances  to  Brahmanas,  the  devo¬ 
tee  need  not  repent  for  his  omissions  and  commissions. 

Thereafter,  he  should  light  the  lamps  with  ghee  and  keep 
awake  for  the  night  reading  the  Puranas,  dancing  and  singing. 
He  should  worship  the  Moon-crested  Lord  by  means  of  Japyas 
mentioned  in  the  Vedas. 

When  the  Sun  has  dawned  clearly,  he  should  take  his  holy 
bath  in  the  Narmada  water  and  devoutly  feed  Brahmanas  and 

Yogins  who  are  devotees  of  Siva. 

By  doing  thus,  O  king,  he  shall  obtain  the  benefit  of  the 

Tirtha  perfectly.  ,  ,  , 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and 

worships  Sankara,  obtains  the  excellent  merit  of  the  Avabhrtha 
(valedictory  bath)  of  ten  horse-sacrifices. 


510 


Skanda  Parana 


With  the  soul  purified  by  that  merit,  he  goes  to  Rudraloka 
riding  on  a  great  (aerial)  vehicle  that  is  very  splendid  and  that 
can  go  wherever  it  desires  to. 

There,  the  divine  Apsaras  fan  him  with  chowries  and  raise 
auspicious  sounds  of  ‘Be  victorious’  etc.  He  thus  sports  for  a 
long  time. 

In  due  course  of  time,  he  comes  down  to  the  earth  here  and 
certainly  becomes  a  king  who  will  scorch  his  enemies,  enjoy 
great  pleasures  and  be  richly  endowed  with  elephants,  horses 
and  chariots. 

71-81.  The  Dana  made  over  to  Sivayogins  at  the  Dasasvamedha 
Tirtha  shall  undoubtedly  be  on  a  par  with  ten  Asvamedha 
sacrifices. 

Of  all  Yajnas,  Asvamedha  is  the  most  excellent  one.  It  is 
inaccessible  to  men  of  meagre  wealth  and  more  so  in  the  case 
of  men  of  sinful  activity. 

Sankara  has  said,  O  great  king,  that  though  it  is  inaccessible 
to  Suras  and  Asuras,  it  shall  be  attained  through  the  holy  bath 
and  offering  of  Dana  in  that  Tirtha. 

Whether  he  is  desirous  of  it  or  not,  O  Lord  of  men,  one  who 
dies  there  shall  attain  the  status  of  a  Deva.  No  doubt  need  be 
entertained  in  this  respect. 

O  excellent  one  among  men,  one  who  enters  fire  there  at 
the  Tirtha  shall  stay  in  Agniloka  until  the  annihilation  of  all 
living  beings. 

O  Lord  of  men,  one  who  meditates  on  Mahadeva  and  gets 
drowned  there  in  the  Tirtha,  shall  attain  Varunaloka. 

This  is  the  statement  of  the  Sruti  that  if  anyone  were  to  cast 
off  his  body  in  Dasasvamedha  in  a  heroic  activity,  his  goal  shall 
be  everlasting. 

Neither  those  who  fall  off  precipices  nor  the  staff-bearing 
Dandin  Sannyasins  nor  Sankhyas  and  Yogins  obtain  that  goal 
obtained  by  persons  dying  in  a  great  battle  reverberating  with 
the  sounds  of  Dundubhi  drums  and  conchs  and  having  the 
banners  chaotically  fluttering  therein.  A  heroic  man  who  is 
encircled  by  enemies  and  killed  by  them  but  never  utters  a 
pathetic  cry,  will  attain  everlasting  worlds  as  reward. 

If  one  adopts  life  of  a  recluse  (Sannyasa)  at  the  Das'asvamedha 
Tirtha,  he  will  never  ruturn  from  Rudraloka.  O  Yudhisthira 
the  merit  accruing  from  Dasasvamedha  has  been  succinctly 
recounted  with  devotion  (by  me).  It  is  destructive  of  all  sins 


V.iii.181.1-20 


511 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTYONE 
The  Creation  of  Bhrgnkaccha  ( Broach ) 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-9.  Henceforth,  I  shall  recount  the  details  of  the  Bhrgutlrtha, 
on  hearing  which  a  Brahmana-slayer  and  a  man  guilty  of  cow- 
slaughter  are  liberated  from  all  sins. 

In  the  Tlrtha  there  is  a  well  well-known  as  Vrsakhata.  O 
great  king,  formerly  a  penance  was  performed  by  Bhrgu  there. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

Tell  me  the  reason  why  that  eminent  Brahmana  lived  in 
Bhrgukaccha  and  attained  great  Siddhi  after  performing  an 
elaborate  penance. 

What  is  it  that  is  called  Vrsa?  Who  dug  the  Khata  (abyss) 
there?  O  sinless  one,  narrate  all  this  in  detail  to  me. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

O  king,  listen  with  concentration  of  mind.  I  shall  recount 
everything  in  reply  to  this  question,  O  great  king,  asked  by  you. 

The  sixth  mental  son  of  Brahma,  the  excellent  Bhrgu,  per 
formed  an  elaborate  penance  in  the  excellent  holy  spot  Srivrta 
for  a  thousand  divine  years. 

The  excellent  sage  abstained  from  food  and  pleasure  and 
stood  emaciated  like  a  dry  piece  of  wood  and  a  steady  rock. 

Once  the  glorious  Lord  of  Devas  came  by  that  path  there, 
riding  in  an  excellent  aerial  chariot  and  accompanied  by  Uma. 

On  seeing  the  highly  esteemed  Bhrgu  standing  there  like  an 
anthill,  the  goddess  asked  the  Lord  of  Devas  thus:  O  Lord, 
what  is  this  that  appears  here?” 

Isvara  said:- 

10-20  O  great  goddess,  the  sage  named  Bhrgu  meditates 
upon  me  and  has  been  performing  a  very  severe  penance  for 
a  thousand  divine  years. 

Once  in  a  month  he  drinks  a  drop  of  water  by  means  of  the 


512 


Skanda  Purdna 


tip  of  a  Kusa  blade.  O  lady  of  excellent  countenance,  he  is  in 
this  standing  posture  for  more  than  a  hundred  years. 

On  hearing  this  the  eyes  of  Gaurl  rolled  in  anger.  The 
goddess  spoke  to  the  trident-bearing  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of 
Devas:  “O  Bull-emblemed  One,  truthfully  you  have  been  made 
well-known  all  over  the  world  as  Ugra  (the  fierce  one).  You  are 
bereft  of  mercy,  very  difficult  to  propitiate  and  extremely  terrifying 
to  all  living  beings. 

Tell  me  why  you  do  not  grant  any  boon  to  this  Brahmana 
who  has  been  meditating  on  Sankara  for  a  thousand  divine 
years.” 

On  being  told  thus,  O  tiger  among  men,  the  Lord  of  Devas 
laughed  and  said  to  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain  in  a  tone 
as  majestic  as  the  rumbling  sound  of  a  cloud: 

“A  woman  is  doomed  through  pride;  a  penance  perishes 
due  to  anger;  bulls  and  cows  die  by  traversing  long  distances; 
and  an  excellent  Brahmana  perishes  by  partaking  of  cooked 
food  from  a  Sudra. 

O  Gaurl,  this  Brahmana  is  highly  irascible.  Hence  he  gets 
no  Siddhi  (achievement  of  perfection),  nor  will  he  get  it  in  the 
course  of  ten  thousand  or  hundred  thousand  years.  O  dear, 
there  is  no  other  reason.  Anger  has  wrought  a  great  havoc  in 
him,  though  he  is  of  such  a  (laudable)  nature.” 

After  saying  thus,  Sambhu  thought  of  his  bull  for  a  moment. 
Indeed  this  Vrsa  (Bull,  Nandin)  is  Lord  Brahma  and  Mahesvara 
in  the  form  of  a  bull. 

When  remembered  (by  Siva)  within  a  moment  he  reached 
there  and  began  to  bellow  frequently  and  said:  “O  Paramesvara, 
O  most  excellent  one  among  Suras,  what  can  I  do?  Why  have 
I  been  thought  of?  Whose  premature  death  shall  I  bring  about?” 

Isvara  said: 

21-33.  Go  and  infuriate  the  excellent  Brahmana  Bhrgu, 
so  that,  Gauri,  the  most  beautiful  woman  in  this  world,  may 
be  convinced. 

On  hearing  this,  the  bull  went  to  the  beautiful  bank  of 
Narmada  near  the  hermitage  of  Bhrgu  for  attacking  the  excel- 
lent  Brahmana. 


V.iii.181. 34-43 


513 


By  means  of  his  horns  Bhrgu  was  held  by  the  Vrsa  and 
hurled  into  the  waters  of  Narmada.  Bhrgu  became  very  angry. 
The  great  sage  seized  a  big  stick  with  his  hand  (and  said),  “I 
will  hit  your  head  with  the  stick  in  the  manner  you  deserve  as 
a  beast.” 

O  lady  of  excellent  countenance,  the  tuft,  the  sacred  thread 
and  the  cloth  he  wore  were  set  right  by  him.  Then  Bhrgu  ran 
behind  him  and  said: 

Bhrgu  said: 

O  bull  of  wicked  activities  and  sinful  deeds,  how  can  you  go 
away  after  insulting  me  by  making  a  deep  pit  with  your  hoofs? 

The  Vrsa  bellowed  loudly  and  made  the  Brahmana  fall  down. 

On  realizing  that  he  had  been  felled  on  the  ground  by  the 
all-powerful  Vrsa,  Bhrgu  blazed  with  anger  like  fire  after  an 
Ahuti  (ghee  offering)  has  been  put  into  it. 

O  Yudhisthira,  he  took  up  the  huge  stick  in  his  hand  as 
though  it  was  another  Brahmadanda.  The  sage  then  rushed  at 
the  bull  with  the  intention  of  killing  him. 

Seeing  him  rushing  at  himself  that  excellent  Vrsa  went  to 
various  places  (to  escape).  In  the  eastern  ocean  he  went  from 
continent  to  continent,  such  as  Jambudvipa,  Kusa,  Kraunca, 
Salmali,  Saka,  Gomeda  and  Puskara.  From  the  east  he  turned 
to  south.  He  travelled  from  island  to  island  in  the  northern 
and  western  oceans.  Then  he  went  to  the  nether  worlds,  viz. 
Patala,  Sutala,  Vitala,  Talatala,  Tamisra  and  Andhatamisra.  Then 
he  went  to  the  seventh  nether  world.  Seeking  the  safety  of  his 
life,  the  Vrsa  went  to  Bhur  Loka,  then  Bhuvah,  Svah,  Mahah, 
Satya  and  Jana  Loka  followed  by  the  Brahmana.  He  did  not  get 
relief  anywhere. 

34-43.  After  committing  a  sin,  being  induced  and  tormented 
by  the  force  of  lust  and  anger,  no  man  can  have  relief  or 
peace. 

Thereafter,  he  sought  refuge  in  Brahma  and  Visnu.  He  sought 
refuge  in  Indra,  Candra  and  others.  When  he  was  rejected  by 
all,  the  Guardians  of  world,  the  leaders  of  Suras  such  as  Adilyas, 
Yama,  Varuna  and  Maruta,  then  he  bowed  down  to  the  Lord 
and  said:  “6  Mahadeva,  save  me.  I  am  being  killed  by  Bhrgu, 
the  powerful  one.  O  Lord,  I  am  abandoned  by  all  the  people.” 


514 


Skanda  Purdna 


On  seeing  him  fallen  before  his  feet  like  a  helpless  orphan, 
the  Lord  spoke  these  words  smilingly: 

Isvara  said : 

O  highly  esteemed  fair  lady,  O  beautiful  one,  see  the  state 
of  the  mental  control  of  the  Brahmana: 

Parvati  said : 

If  you  wish  to  do  something  pleasing  to  me,  do  grant  him 
a  boon  immediately  so  long  as  the  Brahmana  is  not  furious 
with  us,  O  Paramesvara. 

Then  the  Lord  adopted  his  original  form  as  the  Trident¬ 
bearing  One  with  the  Moon  for  his  crest  jewel,  Uma  constitut¬ 
ing  a  half  of  his  body. 

He  said:  “O  excellent  Brahmana,  your  anger  has  not  yet 
subsided.  Hence,  O  dear  one,  this  shall  be  a  spot  of  anger.” 

On  seeing  the  excellent  Three-eyed  Lord,  Bhrgu  knelt  down 
on  his  knees  and  recited  this  prayer: 

Prayer  by  Bhrgu: 

44-55.  O  Lord  of  the  universe,  I  am  afraid  of  Samsara.  I 
wish  to  submit  something  after  making  my  obeisance  to  you, 
the  Lord  of  spirits  and  goblins  (or  all  living  beings),  the  source 
of  origin  of  the  world,  the  bestower  of  prosperity  and  one 
transcending  all  fears. 

What  power  has  this  mortal  being  to  recount  your  good 
qualities?  Even  Vasuki  who  has  a  thousand  mouths  cannot  recount 
them. 

Still,  O  Sankara  with  the  Moon  as  your  crest-jewel  that  has 
rendered  everything  white  with  its  clusters  of  rays,  O  Mahesvara, 
be  pleased  with  me  who  am  eloquent  in  my  eulogy  and  am 
devoutly  engrossed  in  meditating  on  your  feet. 

O  Lord,  you  are  Sattva,  Rajas  and  Tamas  capable  of  creat¬ 
ing,  sustaining,  and  destroying  (the  world).  I  am  eagerly  de¬ 
voted  to  the  refuge  in  you,  O  Lord  of  the  universe.  O  master 
of  the  worlds,  I  am  afraid  of  the  worldly  existence. 

Yama,  Niyama,  Yajna,  Dana,  recitation  of  the  Vedas,  reten- 


V.iii.181. 56-65 


515 


tion  of  breath,  Yogic  practice — all  these  do  not  merit  even  a 
thousandth  fraction  of  your  devotion  (devotion  unto  you). 

The  sign  of  those  who  have  prostrated  to  you  are  seen  clearly 
here  in  this  birth,  viz.  the  excellent  Siddhis  of  Rasa  (Mercury), 
Rasayana  (chemical  product) ,  Khadga  (sword),  Anjana  (collyrium, 
showing  hidden  treasures),  cavity  and  sandals  (capable  of  trav¬ 
elling  anywhere). 

Even  to  that  person  who  bows  to  you  roguishly,  you  bestow 
prosperity,  O  Lord,  as  much  as  he  wishes.  The  devotion  unto 
you,  O  Lord,  is  destructive  of  worldly  existence.  Devotion  (unto 
you)  has  been  evolved  for  the  sake  of  salvation. 

O  Paramesvara,  save  me,  (although)  I  am  involved  with  other 
men’s  wives,  and  assets,  engaged  in  looking  upto  other  people’s 
faces  and  distressed  due  to  the  grief  and  misery  occurring  due 
to  the  harassment  of  others. 

O  Sankara,  save  me  who  am  elated  due  to  excess  of  arro¬ 
gance,  who  flaunt  the  momentary  and  transient  affluence,  and 
who  have  turned  towards  the  wrong  path  ruthlessly.  Hence  I 
have  sought  refuge  in  you. 

I  am  a  wretched  Brahmana.  In  seeking  the  boon  my  hope 
has  not  been  fulfilled  by  kinsmen.  O  Mahesvara,  destroy  my 
thirst  (for  worldly  things).  Why  do  you  deceive  me  who  am 
already  deluded? 

Take  away  my  thirst  for  worldly  things.  Grant  me  Laksmi 
(fortune)  quickly  who  resides  in  your  own  heart.  Sever  the 
noose  of  pride  and  delusion.  O  Lord  of  Devas,  redeem  me 
from  the  worldly  bondage. 

This  prayer  is  divine  in  origin  and  is  termed  Karundbhyudaya 
(Rising  up  of  Compassion).  It  can  yield  all  Siddhis.  One  who 
reads  this  and  remembers  Bhrgu  goes  to  Sivaloka  when  the 
body  dies.” 


56-65.  On  hearing  this  eulogy  (hymn)  uttered  by  Bhrgu, 
Mahadeva  in  the  company  of  the  goddess,  spoke  to  the  most 
excellent  devotee,  “I  am  the  bestower  of  boon.” 

Bhrgu  said: 

O  Lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  if  you  are  pleased,  if  a  boon 
has  to  be  given  to  me,  may  this  holy  spot  be  a  Siddhiksetra  (a 


516 


Skanda  Purana 


sacred  spot  granting  excellent  achievement  and  perfection) 
named  after  me. 

All  of  you  should  be  present  along  with  Uma.  Let  this  meri¬ 
torious  region  be  a  Devaksetra  whereby  everything  will  take 

S  In  this  spot  I  shall  make  a  great  shrine,  O  Lord  of  the 
universe.  O  Lord  of  Devas,  let  my  desire  be  fulfilled  with  your 
favour. 

Isvara  said: 

This  has  been  already  done  by  Sri  formerly.  Was  it  not  known 
to  you,  O  Brahmana?  After  getting  the  assent  of  Goddess  Sri 
and  if  she  so  desires,  you  may  do  whatever  you  please.  What 
has  been  done  by  you  cannot  be  otherwise. 

After  saying  this,  the  Lord  went  away.  Bhrgu  then  had  his 
holy  bath  and  went  towards  Sri.  After  breakfast  the  Brahmana 
stayed  there  with  her  i.e.  Sri.  In  due  course  of  time,  he  said: 

Bhrgu  said: 

O  fair  lady,  if  this  appeals  to  you,  if  it  will  not  disturb  your 
seat,  I  shall  make  myself  an  abode  in  the  holy  spot  chosen  by 
you. 

Sri  said: 

O  Brahmana-Sage,  make  a  splendid  spot  as  you  deem  fit.  I 
have  nothing  against  it.  It  shall  be  in  your  name  or  in  my 
name. 

Bhrgu  said: 

This  Ksetra  stands  on  Kacchapa  (Lord  Visnu  in  the  Tortoise 
form).  It  is  on  his  back,  O  Rama.  Invoke  him  and  in  consul¬ 
tation  with  him,  make  (the  spot)  splendid. 


V.iii.182.1-22 


517 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTYTWO 


The  Greatness  of  Bhrgukaccha  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-9.  Thereafter,  Bhrgu  went  to  the  Kacchapa  (Tortoise) 
accompanied  by  Sri.  After  the  customary  obeisance  and  cour¬ 
tesies,  he  spoke  these  splendid  words: 

“The  entire  earth  as  well  as  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings 
are  supported  by  you.  Further,  O  highly  intelligent  one,  you 
remained  there  with  meritorious  feelings. 

I  shall  establish  an  institute  of  the  four  lores  with  the  help 
and  collaboration  of  Sri.  O  Lord,  if  you  consent  to  this,  then 
give  me  the  necessary  directions.” 


Kunna  said: 

Thus,  O  excellent  Brahmana,  there  will  be  a  city  named 
after  me.  It  will  be  well-established  on  me  for  a  long  time.  It 
will  be  immovable  and  steady.  O  dear  one,  O  fair-eyed  one,  you 
need  not  be  afraid. 


On  hearing  these  splendid  words  coming  out  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Kacchapa,  Bhrgu,  the  son  of  the  Lotus-born  One,  became 
delighted  and  contented.  So  also  was  Sri.  When  it  dawned  he 
dressed  himself  auspiciously.  O  descendant  of  King  Bharata,  in 
the  year  called  Nandana,  on  the  fifth  lunar  day  in  the  month 
of  Magha,  in  the  splendid  conjunction  of  Uttara,  when  the 
lunar  sphere  was  in  Kumbha  (Aquarius),  on  the  majestic  northern 
bank  of  Reva,  the  excellent  Sage  Bhrgu  made  that  holy  spot 
filled  with  hundreds  of  palaces.  It  faced  the  west  andthe  region 
extended  to  the  north  and  east.  It  had  a  crore  of  Tirthas  a,nd 
the  holy  spot  altogether  extended  to  a  Krosa  (3  Kms.).  The 
sage  who  was  endowed  with  the  power  of  penance  thought  of 
Visvakarma  (for  assistance)  and  completed  it  without  any  delay 

10-22  The  Brahmanas  were  learned  in  the  Vedas,  the 
Rsatriyas  were  protectors  of  the  kingdom;  the  Vaisyas  were 
engaged  in  their  avocations  and  the  Sudras  attended  upon  the 
other  three  castes. 


518 


Skanda  Purana 


Thus  the  holy  spot  chosen  by  Sri  was  highly  delightful  and 
pleasant.  O  dear  one,  this  holy  spot  that  is  destructive  of  sins 
was  made  by  Bhrgu. 

Thus  is  the  origin  of  Bhrgukaccha. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

After  a  long  time,  for  some  reason  LaksmI  quickly  went  to 
Devaloka.  She  handed  over  the  apartments  along  with  the  key 
to  Bhrgu,  the  expounder  of  Brahman  in  the  assembly  of  sages. 

(She  said:)  "Keep  the  place  safely.  O  sage  of  good  vows, 
keep  this  spot  of  mine.” 

After  completing  the  tasks  of  Devas,  Sri  came  back  once, 
again.  Goddess  Rama  came  to  Bhrgukaccha  hurriedly. 

Her  own  house  with  all  the  apartments  and  the  things  therein 
and  the  keys  thereof  were  demanded  by  her.  O  son  of  KuntI, 
Bhrgu  falsely  denied  everything. 

O  King,  thus  a  great  dispute  arose,  each  claiming  "This  is 
mine”,  “This  is  mine.”  After  a  long  time,  Bhrgu  gathered  a 
great  congregation  of  the  Brahmanas  well-versed  in  the  four 
Vedas  (four  lores)  for  the  sake  of  authorisation. 

He  said,  “O  fawn-eyed  beautiful  lady,  this  entire  city  is  mine. 
The  Brahmanas  well-versed  in  the  four  Vedas  know  it.” 

Sri  said: 

O  eminent  Brahmana,  undoubtedly  all  the  four  castes  are 
my  authority.  Let  the  excellent  Brahmanas  say  whether  it  is 
mine  or  yours. 

Thereafter,  all  the  scholars  discussed  with  one  another,  after 
surveying  the  place  under  dispute.  Among  all  those  eighteen 
thousand  Brahmanas,  all  those  eighteen  thousand  abstained 
from  making  any  decisive  answer. 

As  they  were  afraid  of  the  anger  of  Bhrgu,  ultimately  this 
was  said,  "He  who  has  the  key  in  his  hand  possesses  this.” 

On  hearing  this  decision  made  by  the  Vedic  scholars,  the 
goddess  was  overwhelmed  with  great  anger.  She  cursed  those 
leading  Brahmanas: 


V.iii.l  82.23-45 


519 


Sri  Devi  said: 

23-33.  Since  with  minds  overcome  by  greed  you  have  com¬ 
pletely  rejected  the  truth  and  my  legitimate  seat  has  been 
denied  to  me,  listen  to  my  words: 

Learning  will  extend  only  to  three  generations.  Wealth  will 
not  go  over  to  the  third  generation.  O  Brahmanas,  a  second 
Veda  will  not  be  yours  even  if  read  (your  knowledge  will  be 
limited  to  one  Veda).  The  houses  will  not  have  two  storeys.  O 
Brahmanas,  prosperity  will  not  be  steady;  your  pious  rites  are 
based  on  partiality  and  not  on  feelings  for  welfare. 

One  member  of  the  family  whose  mind  is  overwhelmed  with 
greed  has  been  made  the  favourite.  One  cannot  be  true  by 
setting  aside  the  claim  of  the  two. 

“From  now  onwards,  arrogance  will  be  predominant  in  the 
case  of  all  Brahmanas.  Neither  father  is  pleased  with  the  words 
of  son  nor  son  is  pleased  with  the  activities  of  father.  Undoubt¬ 
edly  all  will  be  swayed  with  arrogance.” 

After  cursing  thus, 'Goddess  Rama  immediately  went  to  heaven. 
When  Laksmi  had  gone,  the  Devas  and  pure  (sinless)  Biahmana- 
Sages  said:  “This  place  is  vitiated  by  anger  and  avarice.” 

On  seeing  that  the  goddess,  the  sages  and  the  ascetics  had 
gone,  the  highly  powerful  Bhrgu  was  much  distressed. 

Once  again  he  propitiated  Sankara,  the  slayer  of  Tripura, 
by  means  of  great  penance.  O  son  of  Kunti,  Mahesvara  became 

pleased  thereby.  .  . 

In  due  course  of  time,  he  spoke  thus  to  the  delight  of  the 

excellent  Sage  Bhrgu:  “O  eminent  Brahmana,  why  are  you 
distressed?  What  is  the  cause  of  your  grief?  Even  when  I  am 
pleased,  O  sinless  one,  why  should  you  have  this  state.  Tel 

me”. 

Bhrgu  said: 

Earlier  Laksmi  cursed  all  the  Brahmanas  and  went  away. 
Thereupon,  the  Devas  pronounced  this  spot  unholy  and  went 

away  too. 


Isvara  said: 

34-45.  As  has  already  been  said  by  me,  and  it  cannot  be 


520 


Skanda  Purdna 


otherwise,  this  is  the  place  of  anger.  Listen  to  another  point 
too. 

The  Brahmanas  hailing  from  that  holy  place  with  my  favour, 
will  hereafter  be  devoid  of  great  fear.  They  will  be  masters  of 
all  scriptural  texts.  They  will  conclude  the  valedictory  baths 
after  observing  the  vows  connected  with  Vedic  learning.  Even 
those  hundreds  and  thousands  who  came  here  hurriedly  (will 
do  so).  O  excellent  Bhrgu,  if  a  fool  does  not  learn  and  gets 
involved  in  various  miserable  states  to  him  even  Sakra  is  not 
capable  of  granting  anything. 

This  spot  will  be  Kotiitlrtha  (having  a  crore  of  Tirthas), 
destructive  of  all  sins  from  now  onwards,  O  great  Brahmana, 
undoubtedly. 

By  my  grace,  it  will  be  one  frequented  by  groups  of  Devas. 
With  my  favour,  even  worms  and  insects  that  die  in  Bhrguksetra 
will  take  up  residence  in  Sivaloka. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Vrsakhata  and  adores 
Mahesvara,  will  undoubtedly  get  the  benefit  of  a  sacrifice  called 
Sarvamedha  (a  Yajna  without  Soma1).  If  a  man  takes  his  holy 
bath  in  Bhrgutlrtha  and  offers  libation  to  Pitrs  and  Devatas, 
they  become  propitiated  and  enjoy  peace  for  twelve  years. 

Those  who  bathe  Virupaksa  by  means  of  curds,  milk,  ghee, 
honey  or  water  shall  have  their  residence  in  heaven. 

O  excellent  Brahmana,  with  my  favour  this  Bhrguksetra  will 
be  resorted  to  by  all  the  Devas  and  will  be  on  a  par  with 
Kuruksetra  etc. 

If  at  the  time  of  a  solar  eclipse  a  devotee  makes  a  golden 
barley,  places  it  on  the  head  and  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Bhrguksetra, 
O  excellent  Brahmana,  know  without  worry  that  he  is  one  who 
has  taken  his  holy  bath  in  Kurujahgala. 

46-57.  I  will  stay  here.  My  beloved  Ambika,  the  goddess 
who  destroys  all  miseries,  will  stay  here  under  the  name 
Saubhagyasundari  (the  beautiful  goddess  of  conjugal  felicity). 
I  will  stay  with  that  goddess  in  Bhrgukaccha. 

After  saying  thus,  the  Lord  as  well  as  Ambika  stayed  there 
at  Bhrgukaccha. 

Bhrgu  went  to  his  city  that  reverberated  with  the  chanting 
sound  of  the  Vedas.  Along  with  the  sounds  of  Rk,  Yajus  and 
Saman,  it  reverberated  with  that  of  Atharva  Veda. 


1.  Monier  Waliams  (1186) 


V.iii.182.58-65 


521 


He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  TIrtha  and  ritual- 
istically  (leaves  off  a  Vrsa,  bull)  attains  Sayujya  (Identity)  with 
Siva.  So  said  Sankara. 

One  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  TIrtha  and  per¬ 
forms  all  rites  in  the  month  of  Caitra,  worships  Saubhagyasundari 
and  offers  salt  to  a  Brahmana  or  cows,  plots  of  land  and  gold 
to  many  Brahmanas  uttering  the  Mantra,  “May  Lalita  and  Siva 
be  pleased”,  does  not  become  miserable  or  wretched.  A  woman 
does  not  get  separated  from  her  husband,  O  great  king,  by 
taking  the  bath  in  Bhrgutlrtha. 

O  excellent  king,  listen  to  the  benefit  that  one  obtains,  O 
son  of  Pandu,  who  daily  visits  Lord  Bhrgu  along  with  the  deities 
established  there  upto  Brahmasadana  (abode  of  Brahma).  He 
gets  certainly  the  benefit  of  offering  to  a  Brahmana  who  has 
observed  all  vows,  an  excellent,  young,  tawny-coloured  milch 
cow  of  good  nature  and  gilded  horns  accompanied  by  her  calf. 

O  Lord  of  men,  a  mortal  being  who  casts  off  his  body  by 
heroic  act  or  dies  by  drowning  (in  the  TIrtha)  gets  the  hos¬ 
pitality  of  Sakra  for  seven  thousand  years.  If  he  dies  in  Fire  (by 
self-immotalion)  he  gets  it  for  twelve  thousand  years. 

This  narrative  is  always  conducive  to  fame,  heavenly  plea¬ 
sures,  wealth,  progeny  and  long  life.  One  who  listens  to  this 
always  during  festivals  with  devotion  attains  everything.  He  will 
become  like  Ajamldha  (a  king  of  Puru  dynasty).  One  who  ad¬ 
opts  Sannyasa  (life  of  a  recluse)  in  Bhrgutlrtha,  in  accordance 
with  the  injunctions,  will,  after  death  attain  the  highest  place 

which  is  extremely  difficult  to  get.  , 

58-65.  On  hearing  this  uttered  by  the  Lord  of  Devas,  the 
excellent  Brahmana  Bhrgu  became  delighted  with  a  beaming 
face  and  stayed  there  itself. 

When  the7  Lord  vanished,  the  excellent  Brahmana  Bhrgu 
left  his  Murti  (idol)  there  itself  and  went  to  Brahmaloka. 

O  great  king,  O  son  of  Pandu,  the  story  of  the  origin  of 
Bhrgukaccha,  the  destroyer  of  all  sins,  has  been  succinct  y  re- 

asbeing  constituted  by  a 

when  a  day  of  Brahma  begins  the  Yugas  start.  Rudra  himself 


522 


Skanda  Purana 


has  mentioned  that  he  who  listens  to  this  with  devotion,  whether 
a  man  or  a  woman,  attains  to  the  greatest  world. 

The  holy  rites  a  man  performs  after  taking  the  holy  bath  in 
Devakhata,  such  as  offering  balls  of  rice  etc.,  O  excellent  king, 
are  everlasting. 

There  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  he  who  devoutly  listens 
to  the  description  of  Bhrgukaccha  attains  the  benefit  of  a  crore 
of  Tirthas. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTYTHREE 


The  Greatness  of  Kedaresvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the 
Tirtha  called  Kedara.  After  going  there  he  should  perform 
Sraddha  and  drink  water  after  worshipping  the  Lord  of  the 
chiefs  of  Devas.  He  will  obtain  the  benefit  arising  from  (such 
pious  acts  performed  at)  the  Kedara  shrine. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

O  excellent  one  among  Suras  (on  the  earth?),  how  did  the 
Tirtha  named  Kedara  itself  come  to  the  northern  bank  of  Narmada? 
Recount  this  in  detail. 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Formerly  at  the  beginning  of  Krtayuga,  Sankara  was  propi¬ 
tiated  by  Bhrgu  at  Bhrgukacchaka.  It  was  cursed  by  Sri  saying, 
“This  spot  is  devoid  of  sanctity.  It  will  be  bereft  of  all  Vedas.” 

After  saying  this,  O  excellent  king,  the  Beloved  of  Had  went 
away. 

Bhrgu  performed  an  elaborate  penance  for  a  thousand  years 
without  taking  any  food.  He  took  in  air  alone.  He  was  reduced 
much  and  the  veins  were  visible  spreading  over  his  body. 

Thereupon  Mahesvara  appeared  before  him  in  the  form  of 
a  Linga.  Piercing  through  the  seven  nether  worlds,  he  sud¬ 
denly  came  before  him.  Bhrgu  saw  the  Lord  like  a  bud  of  lotus. 


V.iii.183.9-17 


523 


He  eulogized  the  three-eyed  Lord  Sthanu.  On  being  eulogized 
thus,  the  Lord  laughingly  said  again  and  again,  “O  sage,  what 
for  do  you  wish  to  request  me?" 


Bhrgu  said: 

9-17.  O  Lord,  this  holy  spot  extending  to  five  Krosas  (5  x 
3  Kms.)  has  been  cursed  by  Padma  (LaksmI).  After  saying 
“This  holy  spot  will  become  unholy  and  bereft  of  all  the  Vedas”, 
the  goddess  went  to  heaven.  O  Mahesana,  please  do  see  to  this 
that  this  excellent  holy  spot  becomes  sacred  once  again,  if  you 
are  pleased,  O  Sankara. 


Isvara  said: 

O  Brahmana,  this  Liiiga  named  Kedara  shall  be  the  first 
one;  including  this  there  will  be  ten  primordial  Lingas.  The 
eleventh  one  shall  be  invisible  and  it  will  be  in  this  Ksetra. 

The  all-pervading  Lord  Himself,  the  eleventh  one,  will  sanc¬ 
tify  the  Ksetra. 

Similarly,  by  my  grace  the  twelve  Sun-gods  (Adityas)  who 
remove  ailments  and  miseries  shall  stay  at  Bhrguksetra^ 

(In  addition  to  them)  there  will  stay  eighteen  Durga-god- 
desses  and  sixteen  Ksetrapalas  (Guardians  of  the  Ksetra), 
Virabhadra  and  Mother-deities  at  Bhfguksetra.  This  Ksetra  shall 
become  permanently  sanctified. 


One  who  conquers  his  sense-organs,  takes  his  holy  bath  early 
in  the  morning  in  the  month  of  Magha  and  worships  Kedara 
for  a  whole  month  shall  go  to  Siva’s  place.  O  descendant  of 
Bharata,  one  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  that  TIrtha  and  per¬ 
forms  Sraddha  with  the  Pitrs  in  view,  in  accordance  with 
injuctions,  makes  his  grandfathers  pleased. 

Thus  the  holy  spot  named  Kedara  has  been  described  to  you 
in  full  details.  It  is  meritorious  and  destructive  of  all  sins, 
dispels  all  miseries. 


524 


Skanda  Purana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTYFOUR 
The  Greatness  of  Dhautapapa  Tirtha 


Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  a  person  should  go  to  Dhautapapa  Tirtha. 
It  is  in  the  vicinity  of  Bhrgutlrtha.  It  was  there  that  Bhrgu  was 
shaken  (thrown  in  the  Tirtha)  frequently  by  the  bull  (Nandin). 

Hence  it  became  well  known  in  all  the  worlds  by  the  name 
Dhautapapa.  For  the  sake  of  the  pleasure  of  the  excellent 
Bhrgu,  Mahadeva  stationed  himself  there. 

O  king,  even  if  one  takes  his  holy  bath  roguishly  at  that 
place,  he  is  rid  of  all  sins.  No  doubt  need  be  felt  in  this  con¬ 
nection. 

One  who  duly  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  accordance  with 
the  injunctions  and  worships  Siva,  Devas  and  Pitrs  are  rid  of 
all  sins. 

The  Sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter  and  cow-slaughter,  O  Yudhisthira, 
is  always  afraid  (of  the  Tirtha)  and  hence  it  does  not  enter 
there.  Even  if  it  enters,  it  is  duly  destroyed. 


Yudhisthira  said: 

6-15.  O  excellent  Brahmana,  do  explain  this,  that  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  very  wonderful  in  this  world,  that  the  Sin  of  Brahmana- 
slaughter  cannot  have  access  to  the  Dhautapapa  Tirtha.  There 
will  not  be  a  sin  like  that  of  the  slaughter  of  a  Brahmana.  O 
Brahmana,  how  does  it  perish  on  entering  Dhautapapa?  Do 
tell  me  in  detail.  I  eagerly  ask. 


Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

In  the  course  of  the  earlier  first  creation,  on  seeing  the 
distorted  fifth  face  resembling  that  of  a  horse,  of  the  all-pow¬ 
erful  Brahma,  Sambhu  clipped  it  off  with  his  thumb  in  con¬ 
junction  with  one  of  the  fingers.  As  soon  as  the  head  was 
severed,  he  incurred  the  sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter. 

Possessing  the  sin  of  Brahmaria-slaughter,  he  remained  on 
the  northern  bank  of  Narmada.  There  the  bull  in  the  form  of 
piety  s  oo  o  lnS  and  installed  the  goddess  as  Dhautesvari 

venerated  by  all  the  demes.  Lord  Sadtbhu  visited  Goddess  Durga, 


V.iii.184.16-24 


525 


Dhautesvari,  the  destroyer  of  the  Sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter. 
After  the  visit  Sankara,  the  slayer  of  Tripura,  rested  there. 

He  considered  himself  rid  of  Brahmahatya  by  the  power  of 
the  TTrtha.  Seeing  the  Brahmahatya  far  away  from  the  Tirtha, 
the  distinguished  Lord  of  Devas  was  surprised. 

He  thought  thus:  ‘The  Hatya  is  afraid  of  the  goddess.  Thanks 
to  the  power  of  her  piety,  the  Hatya  will  not  enter  Vidhautapapa 
Tirtha  that  is  very  much  honoured.  Brahmahatya  is  like  a  dark- 
complexioned  woman  wearing  red  garments  and  red  garlands 
and  attracted  by  red  garland-strings.  She  is  desirous  of  catch¬ 
ing  hold  of  my  shoulders  secretly  but  remains  far  off  due  to 
the  power  of  the  excellent  Tirtha.’  Thinking  thus  mentally, 
the  Enemy  of  Smara  decided  to  stay  there  in  the  Tirtha. 

16-24.  After  reflecting  upon  it  many  times,  he  remained 
there  himself.  He  has  become  famous  as  Vidhautapapa  on  the 
earth.  He  became  a  permanent  resident  of  the  place  in  the 


vicinity  of  Vidhautapapa. 

Ever  since  then,  O  great  king,  that  Tirtha  Vidhautapapa 
became  established  on  Narmada  as  a  Tirtha  destructive  of 

BrThTnimh  lunar  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of 
Asvayuja  is  of  special  significance  there  at  that  Tirtha.  In  ac 
the  three  days  beginning  with  the  seventh  day  are  important, 

°  TheTe^no  doubt  about  it  that  he  who  observes  fast  and 
recites  the  Vedas  called  Rgveda,  Yajurveda  and  Samaveda  along 
with  their  ancillaries,  during  day  and  night,  shall  be  rid  of  the 

^Vne^vhTifgldUy  of  cohabiting  with  ^  Vna^o^fe  of 
preceptor,  becomes  rid  of  the  sin  by  taking  bath  in  the  excel 

len;  x::  a  wopm°»naihi  ;“:sr'binh  » ** . 

'h^ 

Henshould  observe  fast 

""rSbl  on  the  ninth  day.  He  sh„.  be  rid 


526  Skanda  Purana 

of  a  group  (series)  of  sins.  Thus,  O  dear  one,  it  is  mentioned 
in  the  Puranas  by  great  sages. 

25-31 .  That  Dhautapapa  is  extremely  meritorious,  has  been 
told  to  me  by  Siva.  One  who  casts  off  one’s  life  in  water  or 
on  the  ground  by  means  of  fire,  shall  have  the  lustre  of  Fire- 
god  and  Sun.  He  shall  be  served  by  groups  of  Apsaras  even  as 
he  rides  an  aerial  chariot  Fitted  with  swans  and  peacocks  and 
goes  to  the  great  place  of  Siva  inaccessible  even  to  Suras.  He 
sports  about  there  as  he  pleases  as  long  as  the  moon,  the  sun 
and  the  stars  shine. 

A  woman  who  gives  up  her  life  in  Dhautapapa,  O  son  of 
KuntI,  will  attain  manhood  at  the  same  moment. 

Of  what  avail  is  too  much  of  talk?  Whether  auspicious  or 
inauspicious,  whatever  is  done  in  Dhautapapa  has  everlasting 
benefit,  O  king. 

One  can  invariably  give  up  food  and  sensual  pleasures  and 
(eating)  fruit,  roots  etc.,  but  one  should  not  give  up  water. 

One  who  does  so,  goes  to  Rudraloka,  6  son  of  KuntI.  After 
enjoying  all  pleasures  there,  he  is  reborn  on  the  earth  as  a 
king. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTYFIVE 
The  Greatness  of  Erandi  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  excel- 
lent  Erandi  Tirtha.  Merely  by  taking  his  holy  bath  therein 
Brahmahatya  is  dispelled. 

On  the  fourteenth  lunar  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month 
of  Asvayuja  (Asvina),  a  devotee  should  observe  fast  and  remain 
pure.  After  bath  he  should  offer  libations  to  Pitrs  and  Devatas. 

He  will  be  blessed  with  sons,  prosperity  and  handsome  fea- 
tures  He  wdl  hve  for  a  hundred  years.  On  death  he  goes  to 
Sivaloka.  No  doubt  need  be  entertained  in  this  respect. 


V.iii.l  86.1-1 5 


527 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTYSIX 


The  Greatness  of  Kanakhalesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  O  king,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent 
Kanakhala  Tirtha. 

As  soon  as  Garuda  was  born,  he  worshipped  Mahesvara  and 
performed  a  penance  for  a  period  of  a  hundred  divine  years, 
O  descendant  of  Bharata. 

He  was  seen  by  God  Sarhbhu  as  having  become  emaciated 
by  austerities  and  Japa.  Thereupon,  the  delighted  Lord  Mahadeva 
spoke  these  great  words  to  Garuda,  the  delighter  of  Vinata, 
whose  speed  was  like  that  of  mind: 

“O  blessed  one,  I  am  pleased  with  you.  O  devotee  of  excel¬ 
lent  vows,  choose  your  boon.  Even  if  it  happens  to  be  the  most 
inaccessible  thing  in  the  three  worlds,  O  bird  flying  in  the 
firmament,  I  shall  grant  it  to  you.” 


Garuda  said: 

I  wish  to  become  the  vehicle  of  Visnu,  O  Lord  of  Suras,  and 
also  to  have  the  status  of  being  the  chief  (Indratva)  of  birds 
It  is  my  opinion  that  when  you  are  pleased  everything  will 

come  to  me. 


Sri.  Mahesa  said: 

6-15  O  dear,  O  sinless  one,  the  boon  requested  for  by  you 
is  very  difficult  to  be  acquired  by  living  beings  The  ability  to 
carry  the  Lord  of  Devas,  and  the  status  of  being  the  king 
(Indratva)  of  birds  is  very  difficult  to  get.  _ 

The  entire  range  of  the  three  worlds  is  in  the  belly  of  Namyapa. 
All  mobile  and  immobile  beings  are  there.  How  can  that  pre¬ 
ceptor  of  the  universe,  the  Lord  of  Devas  be  carried  by  you? 

fodra  was  established  by  him  alone  (as  the  Lord)  in  the  vast 
expanse  of  the  three  worlds  consisting  * 

beings.  How  can  Indrahood  be  accessible  to  another.  Hence 

the  extreme  difficulty  of  achieving  it. 

Yet  at  my  instance  you  shall  become  the  vehicle  of  the  Lord 
who  has  the  conch,  discus  and  club  in  his  hands  and  who 


g28  Skanda  Purana 

carries  the  three  worlds.  Undoubtedly  among  birds  you  will  be 
the  Indra  (King). 


After  granting  him  this  boon,  Hara  vanished. 

After  Mahadeva  had  gone,  O  king,  the  younger  brother  of 
Aruna  propitiated  Camunda  embellished  with  skulls,  the  god¬ 
dess  who  being  the  resident  deity  of  cremation  ground,  was 
accompanied  by  many  goblins.  She  was  a  YoginI,  perfect  in  the 
practice  of  Yogic  exercise.  She  was  fond  of  suet,  flesh  and 
wine. 

Immediately  after  being  meditated  upon  by  him,  she  ap¬ 
peared  before  him. 

The  same  Siddhi  goddess  as  is  present  at  Jalandhara  (in 
Punjab),  Kaullna  and  the  great  Uddisa  tract  (Orissa)  was  wholly 
present  in  Bhrguksetra,  the  holy  Siddhaksetra.  ‘Goddess  Camunda 
remained  stationed  there  in  the  Siddhaksetra  (holy  spot  of 
Siddhas) . 

She  was  regularly  eulogized  by  sages  and  Devas  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  Yogaksema  (acquisition  and  preservation  of  what  is  ac¬ 
quired).  The  delighter  of  Vinata  devoutly  propitiated  the  YoginI, 
O  king,  by  means  of  Vedic  and  non-Vedic  hymns. 


Garuda  said  : 

( Eulogy  of  Camunda :) 

16-32.  Om.  May  the  goddess  Sri  Vlramata  Carmamunda 
resembling  the  pure  spotless  moon  protect  you  all!  Her  throat 
is  parched  with  thirst  and  hunger,  (but)  mouth  is  splashed 
with  fresh  blood.  She  is  seated  in  the  lotus-pose  on  dead  bodies. 
Armed  with  a  trident,  she  plays  with  various  groups  of  goblins 
in  her  abode  of  cremation  ground  and  has  for  her  upper  cloth 
a  garland  of  skulls,  dripping  the  blood  of  great  heroes  killed 
with  her  weapons. 

May  that  Carmamunda  protect  you  all.  Her  throat  is  parched 
with  thirst  and  hunger.  She  is  deformed  and  terrifying.  She 
strikes  terror  into  those  who  commit  evil  deeds.  She  chews  the 
flesh  of  the  departed  (corpses),  gnashing  her  teeth  emanating 
a  series  of  sparks  of  fire.  Her  tawny-coloured  tresses  of  hair  are 
tied  upwards.  Her  body  resembles  the  Sun.  She  wears  hide  of 
a  tiger  as  the  upper  garment.  She  is  bowed  down  to  by  leading 
Daityas,  Yaksas,  Raksasas,  Apsaras  and  Suras. 

May  that  Carmamunda  protect  you  all!  She  holds  in  her 


V.iii.186.16-32 


529 


fieice  baton-like  aims,  Damarus  and  bells  that  produce  ‘rana- 
sana'  and  'tam'  sounds.  She,  as  the  mother  of  goblins,  bounces 
and  leaps  and  generates  wild  gusts  of  winds  like  those  pro¬ 
duced  at  the  time  of  the  close  of  a  Kalpa,  which  strike  the  loud 
Pataha  drums.  She  is  emaciated  due  to  hunger,  and  her  belly 
is  dried  up.  She  shatters  and  powders  the  flesh  of  ghosts  with 
her  sharp  nails  and  produces  boisterous  laughter  with  the  sound 
of  ‘ghura-ghura  ’. 

May  that  Carmamunda  residing  in  cremation  ground  pro¬ 
tect  you  all!  She  is  refulgent  with  the  belly  caving  in.  She 
terrifies  the  fear  of  the  distorted  worldly  existence.  She  is  armed 
with  a  trident.  She  is  Camunda  crushing  the  necks.  She  ap¬ 
pears  beautiful  causing  the  sounds  of  Jhallarl  (big  cymbals) 
generating  jingling  sound,  when  the  skulls  dash  against  one 
another.  She  terrifies  all  the  three  worlds  with  diverse  awful 
sounds  of  7 iakahakahakaha’  and  dances  in  the  middle  of  the 
Mothers. 

May  that  Kanakesvarl  protect  me!  She  is  absorbed  in  (smell¬ 
ing)  the  Kanakaprasava  flowers;  she  is  excessiviely  refulgent 
and  supports  the  entire  universe  by  means  of  a  part  of  her 
power. 

May  that  Kanakesvarl  protect  me!  She  is  the  goddess  born 
of  Himalaya.  She  reveals  her  form  out  of  mercy.  She  is  the 
beloved  of  Siva  and  is  attached  to  him  (Siva). 

May  Kanakesvarl  protect  me!  She  is  in  the  form  of  Padma 
along  with  the  Discus-armed  Lord.  She  holds  jewels  within 
herself  and  is  fond  of  Vasus.  She  is  beginningless  and  is  the 
cause  of  the  universe. 

May  Kanakesvarl  protect  me!  She  bestows  happiness  on  those 
who  remember  her.  She  is  Savitri,  Gayatrl,  Mrdanl  (Parvatl), 
Vak  (Sarvasvatl)  and  Indira  (LaksmI). 

May  Kanakesvarl  protect  me!  She  is  the  supreme  power  and 
the  greatest  intellect.  She  creates  and  protects  the  universe 
always  with  her  gentle  and  non-gentle  forms. 

May  Kanakesvarl  protect  me!  She  is  the  mother  of  the  uni¬ 
verse,  the  Maya  of  the  universe.  She  is  the  greatest  creative 
power  at  the  time  of  the  creation  of  Brahma. 

May  Kanakesvarl  protect  me!  She  is  the  chief  goddess  that 
maddens  and  elates.  She  is  the  protective  power  of  Visnu  engaged 
in  the  protection  of  the  universe. 

May  Kanakesvarl  protect  me!  She  is  the  power  of  Rudra, 


530 


Skanda  Purana 


who  is  the  infinite  one  and  blissful  one.  She  is  the  chief  god¬ 
dess  in  the  matter  of  the  annihilation  of  the  universe  and  is 
resorted  to  by  Rudra. 

May  Kanakesvari  protect  me!  She  was  earlier  taken  away  by 
Bhasmaka  along  with  the  goddess  of  the  SvarnaketakI  plant 
growing  on  the  ridges  of  Kailasa. 

May  Kanakesvari  protect  me!  She  displays  the  single  emo¬ 
tional  fervour  as  an  Abala  (one  of  weaker  sex).  She  appears  to 
be  afraid  without  her  husband  and  longs  for  the  powerful 
influence  of  her  Lord. 

May  Kanakesvari  protect  me!  She  is  interested  in  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  the  universe.  She  is  guarded  by  Kanaka  (God).  She 
is  the  mother  of  everything  from  Brahma  to  a  blade  of  glass. 

May  Kanakesvari  protect  me!  She  is  the  first  power  and  she 
as  Sakti  enabled  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Isvara  to  take  up  physical 
forms. 

On  hearing  her  own  four-fold  activity  mentioned  by  Garuda, 
the  goddess  became  pleased.  Appearing  in  front  of  him  she 
spoke  these  words: 

Sri  Camunda  said: 

33-41.  O  devotee  of  excessive  inborn  strength,  I  am  pleased 
with  you.  Choose  a  boon  desired  by  you.  O  excellent  one  among 
birds,  I  shall  grant  you  whatever  appeals  to  you. 

Garuda  said: 

With  your  favour,  let  me  be  immortal,  devoid  of  old  age, 
incapable  of  being  assailed  by  Suras  and  Asuras  and  by  others 
as  well.  I  should  be  unconquerable.  Further,  you  must  stay 
here  always,  O  goddess,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  TTrtha. 

Sn  Markandeya  said: 

After  saying,  “It  will  be  so”,  the  goddess  who  was  eulogized 
by  Devas  went  through  the  firmament  accompanied  by  a  mul¬ 
titude  of  goblins. 

O  excellent  king,  when  the  excellent  city  was  established  by 
LaksmI,  it  was  dedicated  to  the  goddess  after  getting  her  per¬ 
mission  and  assent. 


V.iii.  187.1-9 


531 


Lahsmt  said1: 

O  goddess,  my  city  should  always  be  protected  by  you  like 
a  mother  for  the  purpose  of  the  achievement  of  Yoga  and 
Ksema  (acquisition  and  preservation  of  what  is  achieved)  and 
for  the  guarding  through  me. 

Garuda  too  took  his  holy  bath  and  adored  Kanakesvarl.  After 
establishing  the  Tirtha  too  there  itself,  he  went  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  firmament. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha  and  worships 
Pitrs  and  Devatas,  attains  the  benefit  of  a  Yajna  fully  equipped 
with  everything  desirable. 

One  who  adores  Kanakesvara  with  sweet  scents,  flowers  etc. 
achieves  Yogic  power  in  Yoga  Pithas.  Upon  death,  he  goes  to 
the  Yogcsvara  Loka  with  all  auspicious  things  like  the  sounds 
of  “Be  victorious”  etc.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it.  He  will  be 
accompanied  by  the  groups  of  Yoginis. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTY5EVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Kalagnirudra  Tirtha 
Sri  Mdrhandeya  said: 

1-9.  Thereafter,  a  person  should  go  to  Jalesvara,  the  first 
Liiiga  of  the  Self-born  Lord.  It  is  well-known  as  Kalagnirudra 
and  it  is  well-established  in  Bhrgukaccha. 

It  suppresses  all  the  sins.  It  destroys  all  calamities.  It  has 
sprung  up  for  the  destruction  of  sins  in  holy  spots. 

It  has  sprung  up  out  of  the  compassion  (of  the  Lord).  In 
an  earlier  Kalpa,  all  the  three  worlds  were  overrun  by  groups 
of  Asuras.  Dharma  (piety)  became  extinct,  since  Ved,c 

rites  became  defunct.  Celestial  sages,  ascetics  and  Siddhas,  of 
course,  retained  their  greatest  faith.  At  that  time  a  column  of 
smoke  originated  from  Kalagnirudra  as  thoug  issuing  rom 
the  god  of  Death  himself. 


1.  The  portion  hereafter  is  obscure. 


532 


Skanda  Purana 


From  the  column  of  smoke  issued  forth  the  Linga  piercing 
through  the  seven  nether  worlds.  Making  a  depression  in  the 
south,  the  Linga  stood  theie  itself.  _ 

There  in  the  TIrtha,  O  excellent  king,  there  is  a  Kunda  (Pit) 
from  which  sparks  of  fire  arose.  It  was  here  that  the  sparks  fell 
even  as  Siva  was  burning  the  city  (of  the  Tripuras).  There  the 
Avata  (depression)  occurred.  Thereafter  there  arose  a  spiral¬ 
ling  column  of  smoke  therefrom. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Kunda  in  the  waters 
of  Narmada,  performs  Sraddha  unto  the  Pitrs  and  worships  the 
Three-eyed  Lord  attains  the  greatest  goal  in  the  world  of 

Kalagnirudra.  .... 

Any  rite  with  some  cherished  desire,  or  an  Abhicanka  ute 
(of  black  magic) ,  or  a  rite  bringing  about  destruction  of  enemies 
or  any  rite  for  the  acquisition  of  a  progeny,  becomes  fruitful 
ere  long  provided  it  is  performed  in  this  TIrtha  heie. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTYEIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Salagrama  Tirtlia 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  one  should  go  to  the  Salagrama 
TIrtha  at  a  distance  of  forty  paces  therefrom.  It  is  adored  by 
all  the  Devas. 

It  is  there  that  the  primordial  god  Vasudeva,  Trivikrama,  the 
immanent  soul  of  the  world,  stays  himself  with  a  desire  for  the 
welfare  of  all. 

On  coming  to  know  that  Bhrguksetra  is  the  holy  spot  of 
spiritual  perfection,  penance  was  performed  by  Narada  himself 
on  the  banks  of  Reva  and  a  Sala  (large  assembly-hall)  was  made 
for  Brahmanas. 

The  Lord  of  Brahmanas  named  Salagrama  was  installed. 
Vasudeva  was  installed  for  the  sake  of  rendering  help  to  the  good. 

In  order  to  help  Yogins,  Janardana,  worthy  of  being  medi¬ 
tated  upon  by  Yogins,  resorted  to  the  banks  of  Narmada  in  the 
form  of  Salagrama. 


V.iii.188.7 — V.iii.189.7 


533 


On  the  eleventh  lunar  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month 
of  Margaslrsa  a  devotee  should  lake  his  holy  bath  in  the  meri¬ 
torious  waters  of  Reva  and  observe  fast  for  the  whole  of  the 
day. 

7-13.  He  should  keep  awake  at  night  after  worshipping 
Janardana.  When  the  day  dawns  on  the  twelfth  day,  he  should 
take  his  holy  bath  in  the  waters  of  Narmada.  He  should  then 
offer  libations  to  Pitrs,  Matrs  (Mothers)  and  Devas.  Thereafter 
he  should  perform  Sraddha  to  Pitrs  according  to  injunctions. 
He  should  honour  Brahmanas  in  accordance  with  his  capacity 
through  gift  of  gold,  cloth  and  food.  He  should  then  crave  the 
forgiveness  of  those  Brahmanas  and  the  bird-emblemed  Lord 
(Visnu). 

Listen  attentively,  O  excellent  king,  to  the  merit  one  attains 
by  doing  thus:  During  his  life  here  he  will  never  meet  with 
grief  and  misery.  On  death  he  attains  equality  with  Lord  Murari. 
He  will  dispel  all  great  sins.  Never  again  will  he  drink  the 
breast  milk  of  a  mother. 

One  who  visits  Salagrama  everyday  after  taking  the  holy  bath 
in  the  waters  of  Narmada  that  dispels  series  of  sins,  is  liberated 
from  sins  such  as  that  of  the  Brahmana-slaughter  by  the  tec- 
ollection  of  Narayana. 

Those  who  adopt  the  way  of  life  of  a  recluse  and  stay  theie 
with  miseries  dispelled  and  contacts  abandoned  and  meditate 
upon  the  fourth  Pada  of  Murari  (Visnuloka)  through  the  Sankhya 
way  go  there  alone. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  EIGHTYNINE 


The  Greatness  of  Udirna  Varaha  Tirtha 

1-7.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  the  person  should  go  to  an 
extremely  splendid  Tirtha,  where  the  divine  Boar  rose  up  holding 

the  Earth.  ,  /  , 

Holding  this  Earth  and  shaking  the  ternbiy  sharp-edged, 
curved  fangs,  he  rose  up.  He  alone  is  called  the  fifth  Vaiaha  , 
the  bestower  of  salvation. 

1.  The  five  Varahas  are  mentioned  in  w  14  onwards. 


534 


Skanda  Parana 


Yudhisthira  said: 

How  was  Varaha  the  holder  of  the  Earth,  in  the  form  of  one 
rising  up?  Why  did  he  adopt  the  form  of  a  boar?  Why  is  he 
termed  “the  fifth”? 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

In  the  primordial  Kalpa  formerly,  O  king.  Lord  Hari  was 
lying  on  his  serpent-couch  in  the  Milk  Ocean.  He  was  deeply 
lost  in  his  Yogic  slumber.  The  pair  of  his  feel  were  being  rubbed 
and  massaged  by  the  two  lotus-like  hands  of  LaksmI.  While  the 
Lord  of  Devas  was  asleep,  the  Earth  was  distressed  due  to  the 
excess  of  burden,  O  excellent  king.  She  went  to  the  presence 
of  Devas  and  said,  “I  am  distressed  due  to  the  overload.  I  (fear 
that  I)  will  sink  down  into  Rasatala.” 

On  seeing  this,  the  Devas  too  became  sad.  They  went  to  the 
place  where  Janardana  was  present.  Through  pleasing  words, 
they  eulogized  Kesava,  the  Lord  of  the  universe: 

The  Devas  said: 

8-17.  Obeisance,  obeisance  to  you,  O  Lord  of  Devas,  O 
omnipresent  Lord,  O  dispeller  of  the  distress  of  Suras.  O  Visvamurti 
(having  universal  forms),  obeisance  to  you!  Save  us  all  from 
the  great  fear. 

On  being  told  thus  by  the  Devas,  the  Lord  said:  “What  has 
befallen  you?  What  is  my  task?  Say,  O  Devas,  do  not  delay.” 

The  Devas  said: 

The  Earth,  the  support  of  living  beings,  is  sinking  down, 
highly  distressed  due  to  the  excess  of  burden.  O  Hrslkesa, 
raise  her  up.  Stabilise  the  worlds  in  her  steady  position. 

On  being  told  thus  by  all  the  Suras,  Kesava,  the  great  Lord, 
adopted  the  form  of  a  boar,  consisting  of  all  the  Yajfias.  He 
was  terrifying  due  to  the  curved  fangs.  The  eyes  were  tawny- 
coloured  and  the  hair  curly.  Making  Ananta  (the  serpent  of 
that  name,  Sesa)  his  foot-rest,  he  lifted  up  the  Earth  by  means 
of  the  tips  of  the  curved  fangs. 


V.iii.189.18-29 


535 


Lifting  up  the  Earth  with  the  ocean  as  her  girdle,  along  with 
the  mountains  and  forests,  Lord  Visnu  became  Udlrna  (rose 
up).  He  revealed  himself  in  five  forms  on  the  northern  bank 
of  Narmada.  The  first  one  was  in  Korala  and  the  second  in 
Yodhanipura.  The  third  one  was  of  the  form  of  a  Liiiga  deluding 
the  Asuras.  He  is  glorified  as  Jay  a'  in  the  holy  spot  named 
‘Jayaksetra’.  (The  fourth  one) is  called  Sveta,  O  tiger  among 
kings.  He  stationed  himself  for  the  purpose  of  sanctifying  the 
universe.  Since  he  has  the  lustre  of  the  moon,  he  is  termed 
Sveta.  After  lifting  up  the  goddess  of  the  worlds,  he  rose  up 
from  Bhrgukaccha.  Hence  the  term  Udlrna  Varalia  for  the  fifth 


one. 

18-29.  Thus,  O  son  of  Pandu,  the  five  Varahas  have  been 
described  to  you.  Seeing  all  these  simultaneously  dispels  the 
sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter. 

The  eleventh  lunar  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of 
Jyestha  is  specially  significant  here. 

On  the  tenth  day  itself  a  devotee  goes  to  Adivaraha.  Havisya 
rice  should  be  eaten  as  a  light  meal  when  the  sun  is  about  to 
set  in  the  evening.  He  should  keep  awake  at  night  in  the 
shrine  of  Adivaraha. 

When  the  day  dawns,  he  should  take  his  holy  bath  in  the 
waters  of  Narmada.  After  offering  libations  to  the  Pitis  and 
Devatas  with  gingelly  seeds  mixed  with  barley  grain,  he  should 
make  the  gift  of  a  cow  embellished  with  all  ornaments  to  a 
deserving  Brahmana. 

The  devotee  should  be  free  from  Mamatva  (sense  of  posses- 
sion)  and  from  Aliamkara  (egotism)  when  he  makes  the  gift  to 


Brahmanas.  r 

He  should  then  adore  Lord  Varaha  named  Adi  (the  fust). 
After  adoring  in  this  way,  he  should  go  to  the  Jaya  shrine 

^Hastening  to  Jaya  shrine  he  should  repeat  the  procedure  as 
in  the  first  case.  A  horse  should  be  given  as  a  gi  t  to  an  eminen 

Brahmana  at  the  shrine  of  Jaya.  .  ,  .  .  _x 

Gingelly  seeds  should  be  gifted  at  the  Lmga  (third  shnn  ) 

and  gold  at  the  Sveta  shrine.  .f  . 

At  the  Udlrna  shrine  a  plot  of  land  should  e  g 
The  previous  procedure  should  be  a  opte  . 

O  son  of  Kuna,  listen  with  mental  coneentrat.on  to  the 


536 


Skanda  Purdna 


benefit  acquired  by  one  who  visits  all  the  five  Varahas  before 
the  sun  sets. 

All  the  following  sins  will,  O  most  excellent  one  among  the 
descendants  of  Bharata,  perish  immediately  like  a  heap  of  cot¬ 
ton  in  fire;  the  sins  of  Brahmana-slaughter,  imbibing  liquor, 
theft,  intercourse  with  the  wife  of  preceptor,  associating  with 
those  sinners  mentioned  before,  breach  of  trust  of  those  who 
had  confided,  taking  as  wife  a  sister,  a  daughter  or  a  member 
of  sister’s  family,  in  fact  all  the  sins  committed  from  birth  to 
death.  All  these  sins  of  a  Vaisnava  sanctified  by  all  the  five 
TTrthas  perish. 

30-38.  Sins  may  be  as  big  as  peaks  of  mountains,  still  these 
perish  if  Narayana  is  remembered,  and  specially  so  if  Japa  and 
Dhyana  are  performed. 

The  devotee  should,  showing  great  manliness,  take  his  plunge 
into  the  waters  of  Narmada.  After  visiting  the  five  Varahas  and 
performing  the  Sraddha  duly,  he  should  visit  Lotanesvara  be¬ 
tween  sunrise  and  sunset.  He  shall  be  rid  of  (future)  physical 
bodies.  So  said  Sankara. 

He  immediately  attains  salvation  called  Paramesvari ,  the  one 
which  is  ordinarily  inaccessible.  If  Siddhi  is  not  achieved  even 
after  great  manly  endeavour,  they  say  that  the  sinner  may  go 
to  heaven. 


If  a  person  proceeds  elsewhere  but  happens  to  be  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  five  Varahas  on  the  eleventh  lunar  day  in  the 
month  of  Jyestha,  he  should  certainly  stay  there  wherever  he 
may  be.  The  five  Varahas,  Adi,  Jaya,  Sveta,  Liiiga  and  Udlrna 
should  be  visited  by  him. 

It  was  on  the  eleventh  day  in  Jyestha  that  the  powerful  Lord 
Vi?nu  assumed  the  Varaha  form  and  lifted  up  the  Earth.  Hence 
it  is  more  meritorious  than  the  most  meritorious  and  destruc¬ 
tive  of  all  the  masses  of  sins. 

After  visiting  the  five  Varahas,  the  Kroda  (Boar)  in  the  form 
of  Udirna  should  be  adored  in  accordance  with  the  injunction 
and  then  he  should  keep  awake. 

39  43.  At  the  time  of  the  Jagarana  (keeping  awake)  the 
devotee  should  wnh  devotion,  light  five-wicked  lamp,  filled 
w,th  ghee.  Purapas  should  be  listened  to  and  auspicious  songs 
and  dances  performed.  The  night  should  be  spent  with  the 


V.iii.190.1-7 


537 


Japa  of  Vedic  Mantras.  O  Ajamidha',  listen  to  the  merit  that 
a  man  obtains  thereby: 

The  waters  of  Reva  are  highly  meritorious  on  the  earth.  So 
also  Lord  Hari,  the  ruler  of  all  worlds.  O  Lord  of  men,  the 
EkadasI  is  destructive  of  sins.  It  is  obtained  (and  benefited)  by 
men  through  many  strenuous  efforts. 

Each  of  these  is  capable  of  destroying  a  series  of  sins  like 
Brahmahatya,  O  king.  Then  tell  me,  will  they  not  be  able  to 
destroy  if  they  are  united  together? 

O  son  of  Dharma,  this  has  been  told  to  you  in  the  same 
manner  as  it  was  heard  from  the  moon-crested  Lord  Sankara. 
After  listening  to  this  willingly  and  reciting  it,  one  is  rid  of  all 
sins  and  goes  to  the  region  of  the  Enemy  of  Vrtra. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETY 


The  Greatness  of  Candrahasa  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Somatlrtha  which  is  well  known  as  Candrahasa  and  adored 
by  all  deities.  It  is  there  that  the  kingly  Soma,  the  most  excel¬ 
lent  Sura,  attained  the  greatest  Siddhi. 


Yudhisthira  said: 

How  did  the  kingly  Soma,  the  Lord  of  the  universe,  attain 
Siddhi?  I  wish  to  listen  to  everything.  O  sinless  one,  do  tell  me. 


Sn  Markandeya  said: 


O  descendant  of  Bharata, 
Daksa,  the  learned  sage: 

“Since  you  do  not  stay  (as 
wives  impartially,  you  will  be 


it  is  said  that  he  was  cursed  by 

a  husband)  with  all  the  (other) 
a  victim  of  the  wasting  disease.” 


1.  A  descendant  of  Puru,  Yudhisthira. 


538 


Skanda  Purdna 


O  excellent  one  among  men,  listen  to  the  ultimate  fate  of 
those  who  do  not  resort  to  their  wedded  wives  (like  a  hus¬ 
band)  By  properly  courting  women  (wives  after  their  monthly 
course)  a  son  is  born.  It  is  the  exhortation  of  the  Sruti  that 
Svarga  and  salvation  can  be  obtained  through  a  son. 

Those  men  who  do  not  court  her  through  activities  befitting 
the  occasion  incur  the  sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter.  There  is  no 
doubt  about  it. 

8-17.  Enveloped  by  that  sin,  he  (i.e.  such  a  man)  will  fall 
into  Raurava.  (Other)  sinners  drink  his  blood  for  a  period  of 
time  they  like. 

In  due  course  of  time,  he  comes  down  and  is  born  in  dif¬ 
ferent  types  of  wombs.  In  all  those  wombs  that  evil-souled  one 
becomes  unlucky. 

The  lust  of  women  is  always  stronger.  Particularly  at  the 
time  of  monthly  course,  a  woman  is  pierced  by  the  darts  of  the 
god  of  Love. 

Slighted  by  her  husband,  a  woman  thinks  of  other  men  as 
her  husband.  A  son  born  to  her  roams  about  and  makes  the 
excellent  family  swerve  (from  the  correct  path).  The  moment 
he  (such  a  son)  is  born,  his  Pitrs  who  were  in  Svarga  before 
slip  down.  Hence  he  is  called  Kulata. 

The  Moon  became  a  victim  of  the  consumptive  disease  as 
a  result  of  his  Karma.  Leaving  off  the  world  of  leading  Suras, 
he  came  down  to  the  mortal  world.  After  wandering  over  many 
holy  spots  and  shrines,  he  came  to  Narmada,  the  destroyer  of 
all  sins.  For  twelve  years,  he  observed  fasts,  performed  holy 
rites,  observed  restraints  and  made  gifts.  Thereupon,  he  was 
rid  of  the  sins. 

He  installed  Mahadeva,  the  destroyer  of  all  sins.  Becoming 
fully  endowed  with  his  original  lustre,  he  went  to  the  excellent 
Somaloka. 

By  adorning  the  Lord  installed,  a  devotee  enjoys  his  world 
for  as  many  thousand  Yugas  as  the  number  of  years  he  wor¬ 
ships  the  Lord. 

18-26.  Hence  men  instal  deities  on'  the  earth  in  accor¬ 
dance  with  the  injunctions  whereby  the  benefit  becomes  ever¬ 
lasting  and  unmutilated. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Somatirtha  and  worships 
Lord  Isvara  becomes  pleasing  like  the  Moon  to  look  at,  and 
beautiful  when  reborn. 


V.iii.190.18-26 


539 


One  who  goes  to  Candraprabhasa  and  duly  takes  his  holy 
plunge,  shall  never  be  assailed  by  any  sickness.  If  one  is  af¬ 
flicted  with  the  consumptive  disease  he  should  take  his  bath 
in  Candrahasya  on  the  twelfth  day. 

On  the  fourteenth  day,  he  should  observe  fast  and  perform 
Homa  with  milk  Cam.  He  should  adore  the  Three-eyed  Isana 
with  five  Mantras.  After  taking  in  the  remnant  of  Havis  offer¬ 
ing,  he  should  visit  Candrahasyesa. 

By  this  procedure  Lord  Mahesvara  becomes  pleased.  He  is 
l'id  of  the  consumptive  disease  through  this  association  with 
the  Tlrtha.  A  devotee  who  takes  the  holy  bath  on  seven  (con¬ 
secutive)  Mondays  and  worships  Siva  is  rid  of  afflictions  in  the 

So  also,  O  king,  an  ailment  of  the  eyes  is  removed.  A  devo¬ 
tee  who  goes  to  Candrahasya  at  the  time  of  a  lunar  or  solar 
eclipse  and  devoutly  takes  the  holy  dip,  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

O  excellent  king,  everything  performed  in  Candrahasya,  the 
holy  bath,  Dana,  nay  all  types  of  auspicious  and  inauspicious 

activities,  yields  everlasting  benefit. 

27-33  Men  who  take  their  bath  in  Candrahasya  and  view  the 
eclipse  are  blessed  noble  souls.  Their  life  is  excellent.  Merely 
by  taking  the  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tlrtha,  O  great  king,  the 
verbal,  mental  and  physical  sins  incurred  earlier  become  dis- 


Many  persons  afflicted  with  great  delusions  do  not  know  it 
like  the  supreme  Atman  immanent  in  the  body  of  everyone. 

Undoubtedly  one  obtains  in  Candrahasya  the  entire  benefit 
of  those  who  go  to  the  Somatlrtha  in  the  western  ocean. 

A  man  who  bathes  in  Candrahasya  during  Samkranti  (transit 
of  the  Sun),  Vyatipata,  Visuva  and  Ayana  becomes  rid  of  all 


^"Those  who  do  not  know  Candrahasya  situated  on  Narmada 
are  deluded  and  wicked  in  conduct.  Their  life  is  aimless 
If  anyone  adopts  the  life  of  a  recluse  in  Candrahasya,  his 
departure  to  Somaloka  is  never  followed  by  a  return. 


540 


Skanda  Parana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETYONE 
The  Greatness  of  Dvadasaditya  Tirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  one  should  go  to  the  Siddhesvara  Tirtha 
very  near  it.  That  is  the  first  Linga  of  the  Self-  born  Lord.  It 
exudes  nectar.  Immediately  on  being  seen,  the  man  becomes 
free  from  indebtedness. 

Formerly  the  twelve  Adityas  propitiated  Paramesvara  for  more 
than  a  hundred  years  and  acquired  the  greatest  Siddhi.  Hence 
the  deity  is  called  Siddhesvara.  He  is  the  bestower  of  Siddhis 
on  those  who  yearn  for  them. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

O  excellent  Brahmana,  I  have  become  excessively  surprised 
on  hearing  that  the  Adityas  have  attained  Siddhi.  How  did  they 
attain  it  in  the  Siddhesvara  Tirtha?  What  was  the  purpose  for 
which  the  Adityas  were  engaged  in  the  severe  penance?  O 
excellent  Brahmana,  they  attained  their  desired  Siddhi.  I  have 
put  the  question  briefly,  O  Brahmana.  Do  recount  it  in  detail. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

7-17.  The  twelve  Adityas  beginning  with  Sakra  were  born  of 
Aditi.  They  were  Indra,  Dhatr,  Bhaga,  Tvastr,  Mitra,  Varuna., 
Aryaman,  Vivasvan,  Savitr,  Pusan,  Arhsuman  and  Visnu.  All  these 
twelve  Adityas  desired  the  position  of  Bhaskara  (the  illumina¬ 
tor).  So  they  came  to  the  banks  of  Narmada  and  established 
themselves  in  severe  penance.  O  great  king,  the  noble-souled 
sons  of  Kasyapa  collectively  known  as  Dvadasaditya  attained 
great  Siddhi  at  Siddhesvara  Ksetra.  Divakara,  the  supporter  of 
the  universe,  was  installed  with  their  respective  parts  in  that 
Tirtha  by  them. 

Ever  since  then,  O  king,  that  Tirtha  became  renowned  in 
the  world.  At  the  end  of  the  (four)  Yugas  when  dissolution 
becomes  imminent,  twelve  suns  issue  from  Dvadasaditya. 

Indra  blazes  in  the  eastern  part,  Dhatr  in  the  south-east, 
Gabhastipati  (i.e.  Bhaga)  in  the  south,  Tvastr  in  the  face  (di- 


V.iii.191.18 — V.iii.192.7 


541 


rection)  of  the  south-west,  Varuna  in  the  western  part,  Mitra 
in  the  north-west,  (Visnu)  in  the  north  and  Vivasvan  in  the 


north-east. 

Savitr  blazes  above  and  Pusan  below,  drying  (everything). 
Amsuman  and  Visnu  burn  the  universe  issued  forth  from  the 
mouth.  They  all  wandered  here  and  there  so  that  they  burn 


the  entire  universe,  O  great  king. 

So  also  the  twelve  Adityas  facilitate  the  fulfilment  of  the 
desires  of  devotees.  Listen  to  the  benefit  of  that  person  who 
gets  up  early  in  the  morning,  takes  his  holy  bath  and  visits  the 
Lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  named  Dvadasaditya. 

18-24.  All  the  sins  committed  earlier,  whether  verbal,  menta 
or  physical,  perish  instantly,  as  soon  as  Dvadasaditya  is  seen. 

O  descendant  of  Bharata,  if  a  devotee  circumambulates  that 
Lord,  then  undoubtedly  the  whole  earth  is  circumambulated 


h^Tlve  benefit  one  derive,  through  a  fast  on  the  seventh  lunar 
day  in  that  TIrtha  may  or  may  not  be  obtained  through 
same  for  seven  SaptamI  days  elsewhere. 

If  a  devotee,  after  visiting  Dvadasaditya  on  a  Sunday  com- 
ciding  withTe  Sixth  lunar  day,  circunan, bula.es  tb=  deny  h,s 
sin  Derishes.  He  will  be  free  from  ailments  for  seven  bir  . 

One  who  circumambulates  devoutly  a  hundred  times  evety 
dav  all  scabs  white  patches,  tumours,  nay  all  skin  diseases, 
perish  like  secerns  «  the  sigh,  of  Garuda.  He  will  beget  a  son 
by  resorting  to  the  TIrtha  for  sixty  days. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETYTWO 
The  Birth  of  Sripati 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1  7  Thereafter,  O  dear  one,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent 
,  After  seeing  Sripati,  the  man  on  the  earth  is  rid 
ofluTins^Lord  Janardana  was  the  son-in-law  of  the  great  sage 

Bhrgu. 


542 


Skanda  Parana 


Yudhisthira  said: 

Who  is  this  Lord,  the  Consort  of  Sri,  the  overlord  of  Devas? 
How  did  he  come  into  being?  O  sage,  is  he  one  of  the  three 
deities  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Siva?  How  did  Kesava  become  a 
relative  of  Bhrgu?  O  Brahmana,  O  descendant  of  Bhrgu,  it 
behoves  you  to  recount  this  in  detail. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

I  shall  succinctly  narrate  the  great  story  of  Sadhya.  All  the 
great  sages  are  incapable  of  recounting  it  in  detail. 

The  Four-faced  Lord  was  born  of  the  lotus  arising  from  the 
navel  of  Narayana.  O  king,  Daksa  was  his  son,  having  been 
born  from  his  right  thumb. 

Dharma  was  born  from  the  tip  of  his  breast.  Hence  he  became 
his  son.  Even  Aja  (Brahma),  O  bull  among  the  descendants  of 
Bharata,  had  the  assistance  of  Narayana. 

8-17.  The  following  ten  daughters  of  Daksa  became  the  wives 
of  Dharma.  They  were  highly  lustrous.  They  were:  Marutvati, 
Vasu,  Jnana,  Lamba,  Bhanumatl,  Satl,  Samkalpa,  Muhurta,  Sadhya, 
Visvavat!  and  Kakup. 

Among  them  the  blessed  Sadhya  gave  birth  to  sons,  O  king, 
namely  Nara,  Narayana,  Hari  and  Krsna.  These  four  sons  of 
Dharma  were  the  parts  of  the  parts  of  Visnu. 

Narayana  and  Nara  identified  their  Atman  with  the  Supreme 
Atman  and  performed  a  great  penance  on  the  Gandhamadana 
mountain. 

They  meditated  on  that  which  has  nothing  comparable  to 
it,  which  was  their  cause  and  which  has  no  other  cause.  They 
meditated  on  Vasudeva  who  cannot  be  pointed  out,  who  is 
beyond  comprehension  and  is  undifferentiated. 

The  two  noble  souls  were  fully  engaged  in  Yogic  exercise. 
They  maintained  themselves  as  great  ascetics.  On  account  of 
the  power  of  their  penance,  the  Sun  stopped  blazing. 

The  wind  blew  hesitatingly.  Undoubtedly  it  was  pleasing  to 
the  touch.  Even  burning  fire  became  very  cool.  Lions,  tigers 
and  other  wild  animals  moved  about  mildly  on  the  mountain 
along  with  deer.  O  Lord  of  the  Earth,  the  Earth  distressed  by 
their  weight  appeared  like  a  cow.  Mountains  shook  and  the 
great  ocean  became  agitated.  The  Devas  lost  their  lustre  in 


V.iii.192.18-29 


543 


their  own  lustreless  abode  in  the  sky.  O  king,  they  became 
much  agitated. 

Sakra,  the  king  of  Devas,  became  scorched  and  furious  by 
their  penance.  With  a  desire  to  cause  obstacles  to  them,  he 
engaged  the  celestial  damsels  there. 

In  dr  a  said: 

18-29.  O  Rarhbha,  O  Tilottama,  O  Kubja,  GhrtacI,  Lalita, 
O  splendid  Pramloca,  O  Sumloca  of  excellent  eyebrows,  O 
haughty  Saurabheyl,  O  Alarhbusa,  O  MisrakesI,  O  Pundarlka, 
O  VaruthinI,  assume  very  charming  personality  that  awakens 
Manmatha  (erotic  urge)  and  go  to  Gandhamadana.  There  act 
according  to  my  instructions. 

The  two  Brahmanas,  Nara  and  Narayana,  are  performing 
penance  with  the  requisite  initiation.  The  sons  of  Dharma  are 
performing  penance  which  is  extremely  difficult  for  others  to 
practise.  O  beautiful  women,  if  they  continue  to  perform  the 
great  penance,  they  are  likely  to  give  us  great  misery  and  agony 
through  their  all-surpassing  activities.  They  may  destroy  out 

future  prospects.  ,  ,  . 

Hence  go.  Do  not  be  afraid.  All  of  you  should  carry  out  this 

instruction.  O  excellent  ladies,  Smara  and  Vasanta  shall  be 

your  associates.  .  ,  .  . 

At  the  sight  of  beauty  and  youth  that  excessively  excite  love, 

which  submissive  man  does  not  come  under  the  influence  of 

Kandarpa  (god  of  Love)? 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

On  being  told  thus  by  the  king  of  Devas,  O  king,  all  those 
celestial  damsels  and  Vasanta  went  off  along  with  Madana 

Thev  reached  Gandhamadana  which  Madhava  (Spring)  turned 
into  a  beautiful  park  with  blossoming  trees  and  parks  agitated 
,  v  the  cooing  male  cuckoos. 

The  wind  from  Malaya  mountain  blew  from  the  southern 
a-  tion  The  whole  forest  became  excessively  charming  on 
dU  ount  of  the  humming  sounds  of  the  swarms  of  bees. 

The  fragrant  scent  arising  from  the  groves  of  trees  delighted 
,  noses  of  Kinnaras,  Uragas  and  Yaksas. 

All  those  ladies  of  exquisite  bodily  features  set  about  in 


544 


Skanda  Purana 


their  task  of  tempting  the  sages,  Nara  and  Narayana,  through 
their  words,  graceful  movements  of  their  limbs  and  smiles. 

One  of  them  sang  sweetly;  another  celestial  damsel  danced; 
O  king,  another  played  on  the  musical  instruments  in  a  fas¬ 
cinating  manner. 

30-39.  For  the  purpose  of  agitating  them  mentally  the  slen- 
der-limbed  ladies  made  various  efforts  through  their  coquetish 
manners,  emotional  displays  and  sweet  words. 

Still,  O  Lord  of  the  earth,  they  were  the  least  affected  men¬ 
tally  as  they  had  reached  the  climax  of  their  spiritual  practice 
and  mental  discipline. 

O  king,  they  stood  without  any  excitement  or  movement 
like  a  lamp  in  a  windless  spot.  Their  minds  maintained  steady 
equilibrium  as  it  was  dedicated  to  Vasudeva. 

Just  as  the  great  ocean  on  being  filled  with  waters  does  not 
get  excited,  nor  does  it  overflow  into  another  world,  so  also 
their  minds  remained  steady. 

Meditating  on  the  great  Brahman  in  the  form  of  Vasudeva, 
conducive  to  the  welfare  of  all  living  beings,  they  did  not  be¬ 
come  the  victims  of  either  Raga  (attachment)  or  Dvesa  (ha¬ 
tred)  . 

Smara  too  did  not  find  it  possible  to  enter  their  heart  illu¬ 
minated  by  perfect  knowledge  like  darkness  that  does  not  gain 
entry  into  an  apartment  illuminated  with  lamps. 

O  bull  among  men,  those  great  sages  saw  as  an  aspect  of 
Brahman,  everything  such  as  the  excellent  trees  shining  well 
in  their  full  bloom,  the  spring  season,  the  southern  breeze,  all 
those  celestial  damsels,  Kandarpa  (god  of  Love),  the  penance 
begun  by  themselves,  their  own  selves  and  Gandhamadana. 

Fire  does  not  burn  fire  nor  does  water  wet  water.  It  is  so 
because  the  self-same  object  does  not  cause  any  aberration  in 
itself. 

After  realizing  again  and  again  Brahman  in  its  essential  form, 
no  effect  or  adverse  influence  of  the  spring  season,  Kandarpa 
and  his  women  occurred  to  them. 

40-48.  Thereafter,  O  king,  Vasanta,  Madana  and  those 
slender-limbed  ladies  made  further  and  stronger  efforts  to  excite 
them  both. 

Then  Narayana  of  exalted  mind  took  up  courage  and  cre¬ 
ated  a  woman  of  excellent  limbs  from  his  thighs. 


V.iii.192.49-58 


545 


O  Lord  of  the  earth,  the  jewels  of  beautiful  ladies  of  all  the 
three  worlds  will  become  insignificant  in  their  qualities  verily 
at  her  very  sight. 

On  seeing  her,  O  Lord  of  the  earth,  the  Wind  became  men¬ 
tally  shaken,  Vasanta  became  dismayed  and  Smara  could  not 
remember  anything. 

The  celestial  young  women  beginning  with  Rambha  and 
Tilottama  became  embarrassed  as  their  hearts  and  eyes  becom¬ 
ing  the  target  of  her  sight  ceased  to  shine. 

Thereupon,  O  king,  Kama,  Vasanta  and  the  celestial  dam¬ 
sels  bowed  down  to  the  excellent  holy  sages  and  eulogized 
them. 

Vasanta ,  Kama  and  the  celestial  damsels  said: 

May  the  creator  and  supporter  of  the  universe  be  pleased.  We 
have  been  deluded  by  the  Maya  of  that  Lord  and  so  do  not 
know  the  difference  between  the  two. 

May  that  Lord  be  pleased  with  us,  the  Lord  whose  form  is 
twofold.  He  is  the  abode  of  all  the  worlds;  he  is  beginningless; 
and  he  is  without  an  end. 

May  the  two  Lords  Nara  and  Narayana  wielding  weapons 
like  the  conch  and  the  discus  be  favourable  with  a  benign  face, 
to  us  all,  though  we  are  guilty. 

49-58.  He  is  the  storehouse  of  all  lores.  He  is  like  fire 
unto  the  forests  of  all  sins.  Hence  may  Lord  Narayana  with  the 
Sarriga  (bow)  as  his  weapon  dispel  all  sins. 

May  the  glorious,  sinless  Nara,  the  knower  of  self,  dispel  all 
the  sins.  He  is  the  Atman  unto  all  embodied  beings. 

He  has  tucked  up  the  clusters  of  matted  hair.  May  the  gentle 
face  and  sight  of  these  two,  who  will  pardon  us,  dispel  all  the 
sins  incurred  in  the  whole  of  this  life. 

Further  a  great  crime  has  been  committed  by  us,  due  to  the 
defect  in  the  learning  we  had.  That  is  why  we  came  here  to 
tempt  the  Lords  worthy  of  being  respected  by  all  the  three 
worlds. 

O  Lord,  O  one  full  of  pure  knowledge,  be  pleased  with  us 
of  deluded  visions.  Good  people  always  keep  up  their  righ¬ 
teousness. 

Just  as  this  excellent  jewel  of  a  lady  came  into  being  on 


546 


Skanda  Purdna 


seeing  us,  so  also,  O  Narayana,  the  excellent  intellect  has  origi¬ 
nated  in  you,  the  intellect  that  facilitates  getting  across  to  the 
other  shore  of  Samsara.  Hence,  O  eternal  Lord,  of  a  great 
soul,  of  a  truthful  soul,  O  Narayana,  be  pleased.  You  are  the 
greatest  ultimate  resort  of  all  people  by  means  of  that  truth. 

O  Nara,  of  clear  intellect,  of  quiescent  soul,  O  Lord  having 
pleasant  face  and  eyes,  be  pleased,  O  Lord  of  Yogins.  O  Lord, 
O  omnipresent  and  unswerving  one! 

We  bow  down  to  Lord  Nara;  and  also  to  Hari  Narayana. 
Obeisance  to  Nara  worthy  of  being  bowed  to!  Obeisance  to 
Narayana  too! 

O  Lord,  we  were  helpless  before.  But  we  have  a  Lord  who 
helps  us.  We  are  pleased.  May  Nara  bring  about  our  welfare. 
O  Narayana,  grant  us  welfare. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

59-68.  On  being  adored  thus  by  means  of  the  eulogy  in 
the  presence  of  all  living  beings,  O  king,  Lord  Narayana  de¬ 
void  of  Raga,  Dvesa  (attachment  and  hatred)  said: 

Narayana  said: 

Welcome  unto  Madhava,  Kama  and  the  celestial  damsels. 
May  this  be  said  as  to  what  is  to  be  done  by  us  unto  you  who 
have  come  here. 

Certainly  you  have  been  deputed  by  the  enemy  of  Bala  for 
overpowering  us.  Hence  this  display  of  the  combination  of 
dance  etc. 

We  are  not  allured  by  songs,  dances,  movements  of  the 
limbs,  utterances  etc.,  nor  by  sensual  objects.  I  consider  these 
sensual  objects  terrible. 

O  splendid  ones,  when  our  senses  are  not  defiled  by  contact 
with  sounds  etc.,  how  can  then  things  like  dances  etc.,  offer 
temptation  to  us? 

We  are  Siddhas  and  not  Sadhyas  (conquerable)  by  you  all, 
Smara  and  Madhava.  Let  Sakra  be  free  from  suspicions,  com- 
posed  and  at  ease. 

The  supreme  being,  the  greatest  Purusa,  Paramesvara,  the 
Supreme  Atman,  is  the  cause  of  the  origin  of  mobile  and  im¬ 
mobile  beings.  It  is  in  him  that  everything  gets  dissolved.  In 


V.iii.  192.69-88 


547 


view  of  his  being  the  immanent  Lord,  he  is  termed  Sarvavdsi 
(the  abode  of  all)  and  Vasudeva. 

We  are  the  parts  of  the  parts  of  that  honourable  Lord  having 
four  Vyuhas.  (emanations). 

We  follow  the  path  indicated  by  him  for  the  enlightenment 
of  embodied  beings.  We  see  the  Lord  of  all  abiding  in  all 
beings.  We  see  all  impartially  everywhere.  How  can  we  having 
discrimination  entertain  attachment  ( Raga )  and  hatred? 

69-75.  That  same  Bhulatman  (the  Atman)  is  present  in 
me,  Vasanta,  Indra,  in  you  all  the  celestial  damsels  and  in 
Smara.  How  can  there  be  hatred  etc.? 

Visnu  is  the  Lord  of  the  Lords  of  all.  All  creatures  are  iden¬ 
tical  with  him.  That  being  the  case,  how  can  there  be  Raga 
etc.? 

All  the  things  and  beings  of  the  universe  are  born  from  that 
single  Supreme  Atman— beings  such  as  Brahma,  Indra,  Isana, 
Aditya,  Maruts,  Visvedevas,  sages,  Sadhyas,  Vasus,  Pitrs,  Yaksas, 
Raksasas,  spirits  etc.,  Nagas,  serpents,  reptiles,  men,  birds,  cows, 
elephants,  lions,  aquatic  beings,  flies,  mosquitoes,  bees,  butter¬ 
flies,  water-worms,  hedges,  trees,  creepers,  bamboos,  grasses, 
whatever  can  be  seen  or  cannot  be  seen.  Know  that  this  is  so, 
O  celestial  damsels. 


Born  thus,  O  celestial  damsels,  who  can  have  attachment, 
hatred  and  greed,  because  Visnu  is  his  own  greatest  Atman? 

76.  Visnu  is  identical  with  all  living  beings,  omnipresent 
and  supporter  of  all.  How  can  there  arise  the  qualities  of  Raga 
etc.,  after  belittling  that  Visnu  who  is  different  from  ordinary 

77.  Thus,  O  women,  when  we  all,  you  all  and  all  the  living 
beings  have  become  identical  with  him,  where  is  the  occasion 


fr»r  Dorra  pfr  P 


Skanda  Purdna 
548 

grey  in  colour  but  are  not  different  from  Fire,  so  also  the 

universe  is  not  different  from  Brahman. 

That  Purandara  (Indra)  makes  you  all  cause  excitement  in 
us  is  improper  as  our  minds  are  inclined  towards  good  conduct 

and  true  knowledge.  . 

You  all,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  all  the  people  including  Suras 

and  Asuras,  along  with  oceans,  mountains  and  forests  all  these 

are  within  my  body.  . 

Just  as  this  lady  exquisitely  beautiful  in  all  the  limbs  is  shown 
to  you  all,  I  shall  show  the  entire  universe  too  in  a  similar 

manner.  , 

Let  not  Indra  be  arrogant.  Whose  Indra-hood  is  permanent? 
You  too  do  not  become  proud.  There  are  many  women  with 
extraordinary  beauty. 

When  the  difference  itself  does  not  exist,  what  is  beautiful. 
What  is  ugly?  If  there  is  comparison  in  regard  to  beauty  of 
form,  it  is  always  due  to  the  view  of  discrimination. 

I  correctly  conjectured  that  your  pride  originated  from  such 
qualities  as  exalted  physical  beauty.  Hence  this  slim  lady  was 
shown  to  you.  Therefore,  you  are  likely  to  be  quiescent. 

Since  this  lady  of  excellent  limbs  and  blue  lily-like  eyes  has 
come  out  of  my  thighs  (Oru),  she  will  become  an  excellent 
Apsara  named  Urvasi. 

89-95.  Just  as  you  have  been  sent  by  him  to  us  with  a 
desire  for  our  pleasure,  so  may  this  lady  of  exquisite  complex¬ 
ion  be  taken  to  Devaraja. 

That  thousand-eyed  Indra  should  be  told  thus:  “Our  austeri¬ 
ties  are  not  motivated  by  a  desire  for  enjoyment  or  of  getting 
some  benefit  not  yet  acquired. 

I  Shall  point  out  the  righteous  path  to  the  wide  world.  I 
along  with  Nara  shall  carry  out  the  protection  of  the  universe. 
I  am  bent  upon  it. 

O  Lord  of  Tridasas  (Devas),  if  anyone  is  to  harass  you,  I 
shall  restrain  him.  O  Vasava,  you  abstain  from  (such  attempts) . 

If  you  fail  to  chastise  any  wicked  one,  I  shall  surely  chastise 
him.  This  I  shall  bring  about  undoubtedly. 

Being  aware  of  all  these,  you  need  not  experience  any  dis¬ 
tress  on  my  account.  O  Vasava,  I  have  taken  the  incarnation 
to  render  help  unto  the  worlds. 

O  Purandara,  this  lady  Urvasi  who  originated  from  me  shall 
be  the  cause  of  Tretagni  (three  sacrificial  fires).” 


V.iii.193.1-15 


549 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETYTHREE 
The  Greatness  of  Sripati  Tirtha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  When  this  was  spoken  (by  Narayana),  all  the  Apsaras 
bowed  down  to  Narayana  repeatedly  with  a  desire  to  have  his 
vision  and  said: 


Vasanta,  Kama  and  Apsaras  said: 

O  holy  Sir,  this  advice  tendered  by  Your  Holiness  with  a  desire 
for  our  welfare  has  been  understood  and  your  greatness  is 
comprehended. 

You  were  kind  enough  to  say  with  a  delighted  mind,  This 
wide-eyed  beauty  has  been  shown;  I  shall  show  you  the  uni¬ 
verse  too.”  Now,  O  Lord  of  the  universe,  we  have  surrendered 
to  you  in  all  respects.  Hence  reveal  yourself  in  the  same  manner 
as  UrvasT  has  been  shown. 

If  you  have  no  anger  towards  us  despite  our  guilt,  do  reveal 
your  own  self  directly.  O  Lord  of  the  worlds,  we  offer  obei- 

sance  to  you! 


Narayana  said: 

O  ladies  of  Suras,  see  here  in  my  person  all  the  worlds,  Vasanta, 
Madana  and  yourselves,  as  also  whatever  besides  you  wish  to 


see. 


Sn  Markandeya  said: 

7  15  After  saying  this,  the  holy  Lord  Narayana  laughed 
7-15.  Alter  y  8  _  jnto  being  there,  viz.  Brahma, 

loudly  and  the  entire  u  iarch)>  Sakra,  all  Rudras,  the 

the  lord  of  the  subje  I  P  Vasus>  Sgdhyas>  Visvedevas,  the 

Pinaka-bearmg  Dasra,  Wind-god,  the  Fire-gods  everywhere, 
great  sages,  Nas  y  ,  pi5acaS)  Serpents,  Kinnaras,  all 

Yaksas  Gandha  .  the  lores>  the  Vedas  with  their  ancillaries, 
the  celestial  dams  scriptural  texts),  human  beings, 

expressions  (utte  subtle  beings,  au  other 

beings  ■  aU  th'  mOUn“ir,S’ 


550 


Skanda  Purana 


rivers,  forests,  all  the  islands  and  continents,  all  the  lakes,  the 
entire  earth  full  of  cities  and  villages.  All  these  were  seen  by 
the  celestial  ladies  in  the  body  of  the  great  Soul. 

Within  the  Cosmic-formed  Lord  those  ladies  of  beautiful 
limbs  saw  the  entire  firmament  Filled  with  stars,  planets  and 
constellations. 

No  limit  or  end  was  seen  above,  below,  or  at  the  sides  of 
that  being.  Hence  they  eulogized  the  Lord,  the  infinite  and 
beginningless  Being. 

All  the  excellent  ladies  became  terrified  along  with  Madana 
and  Madhu  became  dismayed  and  praised  the  lord  devoutly. 

Vasanta,  Kama  and  the  Apsaras  said: 

16-25.  O  Lord,  we  do  not  perceive  your  beginning,  end 
or  middle.  Your  enormous  physical  form  is  Avyakta  (unexpounded, 
not  comprehended).  We  bow  down  to  you,  O  Narayana,  O 
ultimate  resort  of  the  worlds,  O  infinite  one,  O  immanent 
Soul. 

O  supreme  Soul,  not  inferior  to  anyone  else!  You  are  iden¬ 
tical  with  Sabda  (sound)  and  other  sense  objects. 

The  Mahdbhutas  (great  elements):  earth,  firmament,  wind, 
water  and  fire  constitute  your  form. 

All  these  originate  from  you,  O  imperishable  one.  O  Lord, 
O  (great)  Soul,  difference  too  constitutes  your  form. 

O  Hari,  you  alone  are  the  seer  of  colour  or  form,  the  knower 
of  the  greatest;  (you  alone  are)  the  hearer  of  sound.  You  are 
omnipresent  and  the  creator  of  all,  the  enjoyer  of  fragrance, 
and  a  separate  individual  soul. 

There  is  no  one  among  all  the  Suras,  there  is  no  one  in  the 
human  world,  there  is  no  one  among  beasts  and  other  classes 
of  beings  who  does  not  form  a  part  of  yours,  O  Lord  of  Devas. 

O  gentle  one,  Brahma,  ocean,  the  Moon,  Sakra  and  others 
are  your  excellent  forms.  Among  those  possessing  courage  your 
form  is  the  sea.  Among  the  refulgent  forms,  you  are  the  Sun 
as  well  as  fire. 

Among  those  with  forbearance  as  their  asset  (i.e.  virtue)  the 
most  excellent  form  is  Ksiti  (Earth).  Among  the  quickest  and 
the  most  powerful  ones  (your  form)  is  the  rapid-moving  wind. 
The  human  form  is  the  royal  guise.  O  Lord  of  all,  among  the 
deluded  ones  you  are  the  tree. 


V.iii.193.26-35 


551 


O  imperishable  one,  you  are  Danava  among  all  those  who 
are  unjust.  Among  those  with  great  discrimination  you  are 
Sanatsujata.  You  abide  in  water  in  the  form  of  taste.  Fragrance 
is  your  form.  You  are  Hutasana  (fire)  in  the  form  of  the  visible. 

You  are  of  the  form  of  touch  in  the  wind.  Sound  etc.  of 
thine  is  the  form  in  the  firmament.  O  Lord,  in  mind  you  are 
of  the  form  of  thought. 

In  intellect,  you  are  of  the  form  of  knowledge  and  under¬ 
standing.  You  are  the  only  one  everywhere,  O  Lord  of  all, 
immanent  in  all. 

In  the  middle  of  the  lotus  in  your  navel  I  see  Lord  Brahma 
and  in  your  eyebrows  I  see  Hara.  The  Asvins  are  in  your  ears. 
All  the  Guardians  of  the  world  are  stationed  in  your  arms.  Your 
nose  is  Anila  (wind  or  breath)  and  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  are 
in  your  eyes.  Your  tongue  is  SarasvatT,  O  Lord. 

26-35  O  Hrslkesa,  we  see  the  earth  as  your  feet  and  all 
the  worlds  in  your  belly.  We  constitute  your  calves  and  the 
multitudes  of  Pisacas,  Yaksas,  Uragas  and  Siddhas  are  in  the 


toes  of  your  feet. 

The  Lord  of  all  subjects  (Patriarchs)  is  established  in  your 
manliness.  All  the  Kratus  are  established  in  the  pair  of  your 
lips.  O  Lord,  all  of  us  are  in  your  teeth  and  curved  fangs.  The 

Devas  have  become  your  teeth.  ViHvadharas 

the  Ahgas  (ancillaries),  O  Lord,  are  stationed  tn  the  joints  of 

y°TheTrm  of  the  Boar  holds  up  the  Earth;  the  form  of  the 
Manhon  Always  high.y  terrih.e.  Your  lofty, equestrian  head  we 

find  in  Trivikrama.  It  IS  ^C^P  These  mountains  constitute 
These  als„  these  rivers  with  Gattga 

Is'tKief  one,  and  also  all  the  continents  and  the  regions 
of  forests  etc  SBtio„ed  in  your  body  eulogize  your 

4^-oTr  r  inS  "  "orsh,p  you' 

Lord  of  all  *e  here  in  the  worid  originates  from  you 

(one  whose  form  is  constituted  of  every 
thing)  thSe  is  nothing  more  hideous  than  you.  O  Kesava, 


552 


Skanda  Purana 


there  is  nothing  colder  or  hotter  than  you.  You  alone  surpass 
all  the  other  forms. 

Be  pleased,  O  Lord  of  all.  O  Lord  identical  with  all  beings, 
O  eternal  Atman,  O  great  isvara,  O  Isa,  pardon  our  offence 
because  our  minds  are  deluded  by  your  Maya. 

Or,  what  offence  has  been  committed  by  us,  O  Lord  of 
Devas,  because  our  hearts  (as  well  as  yours)  have  originated 
from  your  Maya?  O  destroyer  of  the  distress  of  those  who  bow 
down,  our  mind,  suspicious  of  your  Maya,  has  become  con¬ 
fused. 

We  have  not  committed  any  offence  against  you.  If  at  all, 
any  offence  has  been  committed  by  us  traversing  the  wrong 
path,  let  that  be  pardoned.  O  Lord,  the  offence  is  thine  be¬ 
cause  as  a  creator  you  created  our  indiscretion  too. 

36-47.  Obeisance,  obeisance  to  you,  O  Govinda,  O  Narayana, 
O  Janardana!  May  all  our  sins  perish  by  the  recitation  of  your 
names. 

Obeisance,  O  infinite  one,  obeisance  to  you,  O  Soul  of  the 
universe,  O  conceiver  of  the  universe!  May  all  our  sins  perish 
by  the  recitation  of  your  names. 

O  most  excellent  one,  O  Yajnapurusa,  O  protector  of  the 
subjects,  O  Vamana!  May  all  our  sins  perish  by  the  recitation 
of  your  names. 

Obeisance  to  you,  to  the  Lotus-navelled  one,  to  the  patri¬ 
arch!  O  Hara,  may  all  our  sins  perish  by  the  recitation  of  your 
names. 

O  Adhoksaja  (Visnu),  we  offer  obeisance  to  you,  the  boat 
for  crossing  the  ocean  of  worldly  existence.  May  all  our  sins 
perish  by  the  recitation  of  your  names.  Obeisance  to  the  su¬ 
preme  Lord  of  Sri,  to  Vasudeva  the  creator,  who  voluntarily 
combines  himself  with  the  Gunas,  to  the  cause  of  creation, 
sustenance  and  dissolution  (of  the  world)! 

O  immanent  Soul  of  the  universe,  withdraw  this  eternal 
form  of  yours.  O  Isvara,  our  eyes  are  incapable  of  looking  at 
this  ever  increasing  form  (of  yours).  O  imperishable  one,  this 
dazzling  lustre  of  yours  is  on  a  par  with  that  of  thousands  of 
fires  at  the  time  of  ultimate  annihilation,  ^^ith  its  enormous 
extent,  the  quarters,  the  earth  and  the  firmament  have  been 
enveloped. 

We  do  not  know  where  we  are  stationed.  O  Lord,  you  alone 


V.iii.193.48-63 


553 


t 

i 


o 


are  seen.  We  see  the  entire  world  dumped  here,  heaped  into 
a  lump. 

Can  we  extol  adequately  your  form?  O  Hari,  what  is  the 
extent  of  this  form?  What  is  your  greatness,  O  Lord?  How  can 
we  describe  it  when  it  does  not  fall  within  the  ken  of  the 
tongue? 

A  clear  description  of  your  exquisite  features  and  your  ex¬ 
tent,  cannot  be  effectively  carried  out,  O  Lord,  even  by  ten 
thousand  propounders  and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand 
intellects.  Well,  the  form  has  been  displayed.  Great  favour  has 
been  shown.  O  Lord  of  the  worlds,  withdraw  this  at  your  will 
(when  it  pleases  you). 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

48-56.  On  being  eulogized  thus  by  those  celestial  damsels, 
Lord  Janardana,  the  conceiver  of  all  living  beings  entered  all 
those  beings  through  his  own  partial  aspects  in  the  full  view 
of  those  ladies  now  endowed  with  divine  knowledge. 

On  seeing  Lord  Adhoksaja  getting  merged  into  those  be¬ 
ings,  all  those  celestial  damsels  were  surprised  much. 

The  Lord  of  all  entered  the  mountains,  trees,  oceans,  earth, 
water,  fire,  wind  and  firmament.  The  Atman  of  all  entered  the 
Kala  and  Diks  (quarters)  by  himself  as  well  as  otherwise. 

He  revealed  the  universe  stationed  in  the  form  of  himselt 
by  his  own  greatness.  With  regard  to  the  Devas,  Danavas,  Raksasas, 
Yaksas,  Vidyadharas,  Uragas,  human  beings,  animals,  insects 
etc.!  beasts,  the  beings  in  the  space  above,  on  the  earth,  m 
heaven  and  those  having  water  as  their  abode  or  the  Atman 
of  the  universe  entered  all  these  by  assuming  their  forms.  He 

merged  thus  along  with  Nara. 

O  suppressor  of  enemies,  all  those  ladies  of  the  Devas  be¬ 
came  surprised  much  with  what  had  been  seen  by  them  befo.^ 
On  account  of  awe  and  fright,  their  faces  became  pallid,  O 

excellent  king,  and  they  bowed  down 

Lord  Narayana  spoke  to  those  celestial  ladies. 


Idrayana  said: 

,7  fio  May  the  fair  lady  Urvasi  be  taken  to  the  place  where 
Lord  of  DeC  lives.  For  the  sake  of  *.  wo, fare  of  ye  a, l, 


554 


Skanda  Parana 


the  knowledge  that  this  being  is  within  all  living  beings  has 
been  imparted  by  me  who  have  merged  myself  again  into  all 
those  living  beings.  Hence  do  go  now,  you  all.  The  entire 
group  of  Bhutas  (living  entities)  is  a  part  of  mine.  I  am  a  part 
of  Vasudeva,  the  Yogin,  whose  existence  is  within  the  Atman. 
There  is  nothing  other  than  this  which  is  cited  as  Ananta 
(Infinite).  Know  ye  all  that  he  is  unborn,  Lord  of  all  living 
beings  and  the  greatest  region.  I  myself,  you  the  ladies,  Devas, 
human  beings,  beasts — all  these  are  the  creations  of  Vasudeva, 
the  infinite  one.  After  realizing  this,  O  ladies  of  Devas,  Asuras 
and  human  beings  along  with  the  flocks  and  herds  of  cattle 
should  be  seen  impartially  as  equals. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

On  being  told  thus  by  that  Lord,  all  those  Sura-damsels 
bowed  down  to  them  both.  O  king,  accompanied  by  Madana 
and  Vasanta,  they  took  Urvasi  with  them  and  went  back  to  the 
king  of  Devas.  To  the  king  of  Devas  they  recounted  everything 
in  the  manner  it  had  happened. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

64-71.  Similarly,  O  great  king,  you  too,  comprehending 
Kesava  within  all  the  Bhutas  achieve  equanimity  and  impartial¬ 
ity  which  alone  is  conducive  to  salvation. 

Realizing  this  in  particular,  i.e.  that  Vasudeva  the  great  Isvara 
is  immanent  in  all  the  Bhutas,  how  can  you  not  eschew  cov¬ 
etousness  and  other  defects? 

When  all  the  Bhutas  have  come  out  from  Govinda,  O  king, 
and  when  they  are  not  different,  the  emotions  of  enmity  etc. 
too  are  likewise,  O  dear  son.  They  should  not  be  entertained. 

Thus,  O  king,  see  the  entire  universe  as  having  Vasudeva  for 
its  Atman.  This  form  alone  has  been  exhibited  by  Krsna.  The 
form  that  is  Paramesvara  has  been  recounted  to  you.  It  is  the 
greatest  form  of  Visnu  devoid  of  all  states  such  as  birth  etc. 

O  king,  what  I  mention  succinctly  may  be  listened  to.  By 
knowing  this,  a  person  attains  the  greatest  salvation  Every¬ 
thing  is  on  a  par  with  Visnu.  Bhava  (existence)  and  Abhava 
(non-existence)  are  identical  with  him. 

This  Isa  is  both  Sat  (manifest)  and  Asal  (unmanifest);  Mahadeva 
is  the  highest  state. 


V.iii. 194.1-15 


555 


Visnu  alone  is  the  refuge  and  raft  unto  men  immersed  in 
the  ocean  of  worldly  existence,  who  are  assailed  by  the  squall 
of  Dvandvas  (like  pleasure-  pain),  who  are  burdened  with  the 
succour  of  sons,  daughters  and  wives,  who  get  drowned  in  the 
dangerous  waters  of  sensual  pleasures  without  a  boat. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETYFOUR 
The  Marriage  of  Sripati 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  On  hearing  that  the  Cosmic  Form  was  revealed  by  the 
Infinite  Being,  the  Lord,  Devas  and  their  king  became  exces¬ 
sively  surprised. 

On  seeing  UrvasI,  the  splendid  Apsara  with  lotus-like  coun¬ 
tenance,  Indra  surrounded  by  royal  glory  became  surprised 
and  dismayed. 

He  kept  quiet  without  saying  anything  in  reply.  Thus  the 
activities  of  Narayana  became  the  current  news. 

On  hearing  about  the  great  form,  the  Cosmic  Form  (of 
Narayana),  LaksmI  born  from  the  Khati  (abyss)  of  Bhrgu,  O 
king,  became  surprised  and  thought  thus: 

‘By  what  means  shall  this  Lord  Narayana  be  my  husband? 
Is  it  through  Vrata,  penance,  Dana  or  some  restraints?  Can  it 
be  through  attending  upon  the  old  people  or  by  propitiating 
Devatas?’  O  Yudhisthira,  Satl  (Siva’s  consort)  knew  that  the 
girl  was  thinking  thus  and  she  said:  “It  is  through  austerities 
that  Sankara  was  obtained  by  me  as  my  husband.  So  also  PrajapaU 
(Brahma)  was  obtained  by  Gayatn.  Desired [husbands  were  obumed 
like  that  by  other  women  too.  O  lady  of  good  Vratas,  it  ts  only 
through  penance  that  the  husband  should  be  obtamed  by  you. 
Hence  perform  penance,  great  and  fierce,  whtch  wtll  give  you 

all  that  you  desire.” 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

9-1 5  O  conqueror  of  the  cities  of  enemies,  LaksmI  went 

to  *e  outer  limit*  the  oceans  and  performed  an  elaborate 


556 


Skanda  Purana 


penance  extremely  difficult  (for  others)  to  perform,  for  a  long 
duration. 

She  stationed  herself  steadily  like  a  lamp-post  for  a  period 
of  one  thousand  divine  years.  Thereupon  Indra  and  other  Devas 
holding  conch,  discus  and  the  club  (like  Visnu)  went  there  for 
her  sake.  She  asked  the  Suras,  “Be  quick,  manifest  the  Cosmic 
Form  of  Visnu.” 

Abashed  and  perturbed  thereby  the  Devas  went  to  Narayana 
and  said,  “We  were  not  able  to  reveal  the  Cosmic  Form.” 

Thereafter  they  went  away  as  they  pleased.  Visnu  thought, 
‘The  fair  lady  stays  there  in  a  dreadful  form.  This  Bhargavl  is 
burning  her  body.  Hence  I  shall  go  there  to  her.  After  grant¬ 
ing  her  the  desired  boon  I  shall  perform  penance  once  again 
or  display  once  again  the  Cosmic  Form  belonging  to  Visnu, 
which  ordinarily  cannot  be  seen  by  either  Devas  or  Danavas.’ 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Then  Hrslkesa  went  to  Sri  staying  at  the  outer  limit  (shore) 
of  the  ocean.  He  said,  “O  fair  lady,  I  am  pleased  with  you. 
Choose  a  boon  as  desired  by  you.” 

Sri  said: 

16-25.  O  Lord  Janardana,  if  you  are  pleased  with  me  who 
have  dedicated  myself  to  and  sought  refuge  in  you,  O  sinless 
one,  show  me  what  was  seen  by  the  celestial  damsels. 

O  Kesava,  O  conceiver  of  the  living  beings,  your  Cosmic 
Form  is  infinite.  O  Lord  Visnu,  do  recount  to  me  the  details 
of  the  penance  performed  by  you  on  Gandhamadana,  if  it  is 
not  false.  I  am  not  convinced  with  this  form  at  all,  the  form 
I  see  before  me. 

Even  though  they  have  come  to  know  my  mental  attachment 
to  Hari,  I  have  been  freely  wooed  by  many  Yaksas  and  Raksasas 
moving  about  employing  their  magical  tricks. 

They  had  assumed  the  form  of  Visnu  adopting  four  arms 
and  wielding  the  discus.  But  all  of  them  went  away  fully  abashed 
and  chagrined  since  they  were  unable  to  display  the  Cosmic  Form. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

On  being  told  thus  by  her,  Lord  Narayana  gave  up  that  form 


V.iii.194.26-37 


557 


holding  the  conch,  discus  End  club,  the  form  adored  by  Surss, 
and  displayed  the  great  Cosmic  Form  as  mentioned  before. 

After  showing  it,  he  spoke  these  words  in  accordance  with 
the  injunctions  in  the  Pancaratra  text:  “He  who  adores  me 
always  is  worthy  of  adoration.  After  being  adored,  he  will  become 
possessor  of  wealth  and  foodgrain  and  all  means  of  pleasurable 
enjoyment. 

Brahmacarya  (celibacy)  is  the  very  root  of  all  pious  activi¬ 
ties.  Therefore  I  will  stay  there  with  the  title  Mulasripati  (Con¬ 
sort  of  original  Sri).  Mulasr!  is  called  BrahmI.  She  is  in  the 
form  of  Brahmacarya.  She  is  meritorious,  Yoga  incarnate,  aus¬ 
picious,  and  destructive  of  all  sins. 

26-37.  I  am  her  Lord  and  consort,  O  my  beloved,  the  best- 
ower  of  boons  on  living  beings.  A  man  who  bathes  in  the 
waters  of  Reva  and  adores  me  named  Mulasripati  with  due 
performance  of  Vratas  and  maintenance  of  restraints,  shall 
attain  the  desired  benefit.  If  he  offers  Dana  and  Mahadana 
there,  O  my  beloved,  he  obtains  the  merit  thousand  times 
more  than  elsewhere. 


It  was  seen  by  you  there  in  that  region  and  perfectly  com¬ 
prehended.  Adoring  it,  you  will  undoubtedly  obtain  great  desires. 

O  goddess  of  Devas,  choose  a  boon  desired  by  you  (even  if 
it  be)  inaccessible  to  the  Suras  who  have  fallen  into  the  im¬ 
passable  forest  of  worldly  existence,  O  great  goddess. 


welfare. 


Ndrayana  said: 


O  fair  lady,  since  you  a 
the  word  Narayana,  my 


558 


Skanda  Purana 


At  the  recollection  of  Narayana  the  sins  incurred  in  the 
course  of  crores  of  births  vanish.  It  is  termed  Giri  because  it 
swallows  (sins).  The  'Gin1  (mountain),  the  supporter  of  all, 
shall  be  the  king  of  all  mountains!  O  fair  lady,  just  as  I  am  the 
supporter  of  Suras,  Asuras  and  human  beings. 

Those  who  adore  this  divine  form  of  mine  named  Narayanagiri, 
O  lady  of  splendid  eyes,  after  placing  it  in  the  mystic  Mandala 
(diagram)  become  richly  endowed  with  divine  knowledge  and 
divine  physical  form  as  well  as  divine  activities.  (They)  will 
attain  the  divine  Loka  enjoying  divine  pleasures. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

38-43.  Even  as  they  were  having  the  dialogue  thus,  Devas 
with  Indra  as  their  leader  and  great  sages  came  to  that  forest 
region  at  the  outskirts  of  the  ocean. 

After  knowing  that  she  was  Bhrgu’s  daughter,  the  king  of 
Devas  requested  him  for  what  Narayana  had  been  thinking  of. 
He,  the  righteous  soul,  gave  her  readily.  Dharma  performed 
the  rites  of  marriage  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions.  O 
sage-king,  he  performed  the  rites  of  marriage  of  the  Lord  of 
Devas  with  due  consideration  for  the  sake  of  the  Devas. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

It  has  been  told  by  you  that  Dharma  performed  the  rites  of 
marriage  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions.  What  was  the 
Vidhi  (Procedure)?  What  Daksina  was  offered  by  Bhrgu  in  the 
Yajna  of  that  Vivaha  (marriage)?  Who  became  the  holder  of 
the  Sruk  and  Sruva  (sacrificial  ladles  and  vessels)?  Who  were 
the  Rtviks  and  who  were  the  members  of  the  sacrificial  assem¬ 
bly,  O  excellent  Brahmana?  Was  there  an  Avabhrtha  (the  vale¬ 
dictory  bath  thereof)?  Mention  everything  in  detail.  I  am  not 
fully  satiated  by  imbibing  the  nectar  of  your  words. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

44-52.  Neither  Brahma  nor  Paramesvara  is  capable  of  de¬ 
scribing  the  good  features  of  the  marriage  of  Narayana,  the 
Yajna  and  the  Tapas  of  that  Lord  and  his  perfect  conduct.  O 
Yudhisthira,  yet  I  shall  recount  in  a  general  way.  Listen  with 
careful  attention. 


V.iii.  194.53-61 


559 


Brahma  and  the  Seven  Sages  were  engaged  in  holding  the 
Stuk  and  Siitva  there.  They  performed  the  Horoa  in  the  sacrificial 
fires,  O  king.  The  entire  earth  along  with  the  oceans  was  the 
altar. 

The  oceans  gave  jewels  to  the  Brahmarsis,  O  excellent  king. 
Dhanada  (Kubera)  too  gave  the  monetary  gift  as  desired  by  all 
the  Brahmanas. 

Visvakarma  built  houses  of  wonderful  varieties  fully  embed¬ 
ded  with  all  jewels  and  showed  them  to  the  glorious  Lord  of 
Devas. 

Then,  O  great  king,  Satakratu  asked  the  various  Brahmanas 
assembled  there  to  choose  whatever  they  desired.  They  were 
the  Brahmanas  including  Saunakas  etc.,  Baskalas,  Chagalas  and 
Atreyas  with  Kapisthala  as  their  leader. 

On  seeing  those  wonderfully  variegated  jewels,  they  said  to 
the  Lord  of  all  chieftains:  “This  (joint)  assembly  of  Devas  and 
sages  is  highly  meritorious.  O  Lord  of  Suras,  we  wish  to  stay 
forever  in  this  meritorious  assembly.” 

Satakratu  said  again,  “Your  residence  shall  be  here  as  long 
as  you  please,  while  all  of  you  are  engaged  in  true  Dharma.” 


Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

53-61 .  O  tiger  among  kings,  in  answer  to  your  question  as 
to  who  were  the  priests  offering  sacrificial  oblations  in  the 
sacrifice,  I  shall  describe  it.  Listen  to  it  with  co^entratiom 
Those  with  Sanatkumara  as  their  chief  were  t  > 

(member,  of  the  sacrificial  trembly).  Mr',  ^as  ^ 
officiated  as  Udedlrs.  Dharma  and  Vastsfha  did  the  jo  • 

(Presiding  priest  in  the  sacrifice).  Satakratu  (Indra)  gave  them 

thirty-six  thousand  vaHages.  united  with  her 

The  Lord  did  everything  and  so  Lak?m  hi  r 

husband.  Even  as  Brahma  was  performing  t^e  ^  ^ 

head  was  visible  to  the  ^Ued  Laldtadesa  and  that  spot 

where  such  view  was  possibl  d  was  resorted  to  by 

became  the  meritorious  spot  ol  bnpa 

Devas  and  sages.  offirnrious  Then  LaksmI 

“  “  ?f  miri^hth"«  of  f  ^Hmahas.  She  spoke 
endeavoured  to  establish  tne 
these  words  to  the  Lord  named  Snpati. 


560 


Skanda  Purdna 


Sri  said: 

I  wish  to  duly  establish  these  Brahmanas  of  excellent  Vratas 
and  restraints.  They  are  the  disciples  of  Bhrgu  and  others.  O 
Adhoksaja,  with  your  favour  I  wish  to  establish  them.  O  Garuda- 
emblemed  One,  Marlci  and  others  have  been  established  by 
the  Lord  of  Suras. 

There  are  many  Brahmanas  here  of  steadfast  Vratas  and 
restraints.  Some  of  them  are  engaged  in  the  Prajapatya  Vrata 
of  Brahma.  O  Adhoksaja,  I  shall  establish  them  with  your  favour. 

Sn  Markandeya  said: 

62-71.  Thereupon  the  enthusiastic  Bull-emblemed  Lord 
asked  the  Vratins  who  were  all  allotted  different  avocations. 

Narada  approached  Mahadeva,  the  consort  of  Sail,  and  said, 
“These  Brahmanas  of  steadfast  Vratas  wore  deer  hides.  These 
excellent  Brahmanas  should  be  made  to  cover  their  nakedness 
by  means  of  excellent  clothes.  O  Lord  of  Suras,  there  are 
twenty-four  thousand  Prajapatyas.  O  Bull-  emblemed  One,  there 
are  twelve  thousand  members  of  those  who  follow  Brahmacarya 
Vrata  and  propound  those  Vratas.” 

On  hearing  the  words  of  Narada,  Devas  and  celestial  sages 
considered  the  suggestion  good  but  none  of  them  said  any¬ 
thing. 

Thereupon,  LaksmI  devoutly  called  those  Brahmanas,  touched 
their  feet  and  said:  “Favour  may  be  done  to  me.  There  are 
thirty-six  thousand  houses  constructed  by  Visvakarman.  All  of 
you,  do  stay  there.” 

They  were  delighted  in  their  minds.  They  promised,  “So  will 
it  be”.  They  became  rich  owners  of  money  and  food-grain,  the 
fulfilment  of  their  desire.  There  being  no  necessity  to  begin 
their  activities,  they  were  fully  satisfied  with  their  desires  ful¬ 
filled. 

After  establishing  those  Brahmanas  thus,  Loksmi  stood  there 
and  protected  them.  Visnu,  interested  in  doing  what  pleased 
Goddess  Sri,  stood  there  in  four  forms. 

Thus,  the  Yajna  of  the  marriage  rites  was  concluded  and  the 
sages  asked,  “O  Janardana,  where  will  we  take  the  Avabhrtha 
(valedictory)  bath?” 


V.iii.194. 72-80 


561 


72-80^  On  hearing  these  words,  Srlpati  released  the  wa¬ 
ters  of  Jahnavi  from  his  lotus-like  feet.  The  pure  waters  flowed 
into  the  middle  of  Reva. 

On  seeing  the  waters  issuing  forth  from  the  feet  of  Hari 
and  being  fully  aware  of  its  worth  and  weightiness,  those  sages 
who  knew  its  greatness,  became  wonder-struck. 

All  the  Devas  along  with  Rudra  and  the  sages  too  began  to 
shake  their  heads.  They  were  surprised  and  talked  about  it  in 
their  dialogues. 

The  sages  said : 

Do  tell  us,  O  Sambhu,  what  is  this  sudden  outflow  of  water 
arising  from  the  lotus-like  feet  of  Visnu.  It  is  greatly  fascinat¬ 
ing. 

Isvara  said: 

O  Suras,  I  know  fully  well  that  this  is  the  water  from  the  feel 
of  Visnu.  Bath  in  this  water  surpasses  the  valedictory  bath  to 
be  taken  after  ten  horse-sacrifices.  Sripati  (Lord  of  Sri)  is  ador¬ 
able  to  you.  Whence  can  you  have  the  Avabhrtha  bath?  Hence 
he  has  quickly  created  the  (Ganga)  water  for  your  sake. 

No  one  is  competent  to  explain  fully,  O  Lord  of  Devas,  the 
benefit  that  can  be  attained  by  taking  the  holy  ablution  here. 
Hence  why  talk  more? 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

O  eminent  one,  O  Bull  among  the  descendants  of  Bharata, 
after  saying  thus  and  taking  their  holy  ablution,  the  Devas  with 
Mahesana  as  their  leader  went  away  in  the  manner  they  had 
come. 

Thereupon,  all  the  Brahmanas  resorted  to  their  own  houses, 
O  great  king,  in  the  DevatTrtha  destructive  of  all  sins. 


562 


Skanda  Purana 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETYFIVE 
The  Gloiy  of  Sripati 


Yudhisthira  said : 

1-7.  O  sage,  what  is  said  to  be  the  greatness  of  DevatTrtha? 
What  is  the  benefit  acquired  by  those  who  perform  holy  ab¬ 
lution,  Dana  etc.  there? 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

O  mighty-armed  one,  all  the  Tirthas  on  the  entire  earth, 
resorted  to  by  Devas  and  groups  of  sages,  were  thought  about 
by  Visnu  and  they  arrived  there  together,  O  Yudhisthira.  That 
TIrtha  is  the  well-known  DevatTrtha,  a  meritorious  Vaisnava 
holy  place. 

Kuruksetra  is  the  greatest  TIrtha  on  the  earth,  and  Tripuskara 
in  the  firmament.  Purusottama  is  the  greatest  TIrtha  in  heaven. 
DevatTrtha  is  greater  than  the  greatest. 

O  Yudhisthira,  there  is  no  TIrtha  on  a  par  with  Devatlrtha 
in  this  world  as  well  as  in  the  next  one.  On  attaining  it ,  a  man 
ceases  to  become  distressed. 

All  the  Tirthas  were  told  by  Devas:  “If  a  man  takes  his  holy 
bath  here  in  Devatlrtha,  it  is  as  good  as  though  he  has  taken 
his  holy  bath  everywhere.” 

“So  be  it”,  the  Tirthas  told  the  Devas  and  the  groups  of 
sages.  They  adored  Srlsa  and  went  to  their  respective  places 
fully  contented. 

8-19.  O  king,  if  one  takes  his  holy  bath  here  (in  Deva 
TIrtha),  adores  Srlsa  and  observes  holy  fast  in  accordance  with 
the  injunctions,  and  gifts  gold  pieces  duly  at  the  time  of  a  solar 
eclipse,  he  will  obtain  the  benefit  of  the  holy  bath  here. 

Satakratu  has  said:  “Gifts  of  plots  of  land,  cows  and  gold 
have  endless  benefit.  So  also  gift  of  diamond  gives  infinite 
benefit.  Soma  attained  endless  benefit,  due  to  gift  of  clothes, 
Bhargava  due  to  gift  of  pearls;  the  Sun  and  Dharmaraja  made 
a  gift  of  gold  and  attained  endless  benefit.  Brhaspati  of  a  gen¬ 
erous  mind  says:  ‘Whatever  Dana  is  offered  in  Devatlrtha  by 
one  with  full  faith  has  infinite  benefit.” 

Devatlrtha  in  Bhrguksetra  is  superior  to  all  the  other  Tirthas. 


V.iii.l95.20-30a 


563 


A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Devatirtha  and  visits  Srlpati 
at  the  time  of  a  lunar  eclipse,  redeems  a  hundred  members 
of  his  family  and  enjoys  heavenly  pleasures. 

Those  men  by  whom  gifts  were  made  to  eminent  Brahmanas 
in  Devatirtha,  O  Lord  of  men,  will  enjoy  great  pleasures  after 
death. 

With  Hari  in  view,  if  a  person  feeds  out  Brahmanas,  O 
Yudhisthira,  he  enjoys  all  types  of  pleasures  in  Svarga  Loka. 

A  man  or  a  woman  should  take  a  holy  bath  in  Devatirtha 
with  mind  in  full  control.  He  or  she  shall  observe  fast  on  the 
eleventh  day  with  complete  devotion  and  adore  the  Consort 
of  Sri  devoutly.  He  should  light  a  lamp  with  ghee  and  keep 
awake  during  the  night.  He  should  get  up  early  in  the  morning 
on  the  twelfth  day,  take  bath  in  the  waters  of  Narmada  and 
duly  propitiate  a  Brahmana  couple  (or  couples)  with  clothes, 
ornaments,  betel  leaves,  flowers,  incense  and  unguents.  He  or 
she  will  rejoice  in  Visnuloka  as  a  result  of  the  satisfactory  completion 
of  the  Vrata. 

20-30a.  One  who  takes  holy  bath  on  the  eleventh  lunar 
day,  observes  fast,  worships  Hari  and  keeps  awake  at  night  in 
accordance  with  the  injunctions  in  the  Veda  and  scriptural 
texts,  never  faces  the  torturous  and  accursed  harassment  meted 
out  by  Dharmaraja. 

One  who  adores  Srlpati  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions 
in  the  Pancaratra  system,  after  duly  receiving  the  Vaisnava 
initiation  that  annihilates  sins,  bestows  heavenly  pleasures  and 
salvation,  also  accords  worldly  delight  and  wealth,  kingdom, 
sons,  good  fortune,  excellent  wife,  devotion  to  Visnu,  will  cross 
the  ocean  of  worldly  existence,  O  highly  esteemed  scion  of  the 
family  of  Kuru. 

One  who  worships  the  Consort  of  Sri  there  in  Devatli  tha, 
or  Visvarupa,  or  Mulasripati,  or  Narayanagiri  in  the  house  with 
devotion  and  faith,  on  the  eleventh  lunar  day  gets  great  ben¬ 
efit.  He  should  make  use  of  the  following  material  in  the  course 
of  the  worship:  milk,  water,  unwashed  cloth  of  fine  texture,  silk 
cloth  of  various  colours,  woven  silk  garments,  incense,  agallochum, 
sandalpaste,  Guggulu  mixed  with  ghee  and  various  kinds  of 
food  offerings  like  milk  pudding  etc.,  O  Yudhisthira,  O  Lord 
of  men. 


564 


Sltanda  Purana 


A  man  who  adores  the  Lord  with  lamps  made  of  Pista  (flour- 
cakes  with  wicks  fitted  in)  that  charm  the  mind  and  glow  in¬ 
creasingly,  goes  to  Visnuloka.  On  how  he  goes  listen,  O  de¬ 
scendant  of  Bharata.  He  will  be  equipped  with  conch,  discus, 
club  and  lotus  and  will  have  the  form  of  the  Garuda-emblemed 
Lord.  He  passes  through  Devalokas  and  reaches  Visnuloka. 

30b-41.  One  who  devoutly,  sees  the  lotus-like  feet  of  Srlpati 
established  in  four  forms  as  well  as  Sri,  the  mother  of  the  three 
worlds,  while  offering  entertainment  by  dances  and  songs  is 
certainly  rid  of  sins. 

One  who  is  always  engaged  in  waving  lamp  as  Nirajana  lights 
to  the  Lord  at  dawn,  mid-day  and  evening  and  adores  and 
worships  Hari,  shall  cross  impassable  dangers.  He  will  never 
get  distress  and  misery. 

The  rite  called  Nirajana  (showing  of  lights)  of  Hari  is  con¬ 
ducive  to  the  lengthening  of  life  expectation  and  enhance¬ 
ment  of  glory.  It  is  highly  pleasing  to  the  eyes  and  destroys 
minor  sins.  He  is  blessed  who  recites  the  prayer  to  the  Lord 
of  Devas  at  the  time  of  Hari’s  Nirajana. 

One  who  waves  his  inverted  palms  over  the  remnant  of  Hari’s 
Nirajana  and  wipes  his  eyes  and  face  therewith,  becomes  free 
from  Timira  (blindness)  and  other  eye  diseases.  His  face  be¬ 
comes  bright.  Lighting  of  lamps  in  front  of  Srlpati  is  effica¬ 
cious  in  destroying  all  defects,  O  best  of  men.  A  devotee  en¬ 
gaged  in  Vratas  should  take  his  holy  bath  in  the  meritorious 
Reva  water  and  offer  the  same  ritualistically  (i.e.  water  is  held 
in  the  joined  palms  cupped  together,  Mantra  is  recited  and  the 
water  is  thrown  up).  It  is  as  good  as  the  entire  earth  with  seven 
continents,  oceans  and  rivers  circumambulated.  So  said  Sankara. 

One  who  listens  to  this  narrative  or  reads  this  shall  at  the 
time  of  death  recollect  Hari  and  become  sinless  to  Hari. 

It  is  conducive  to  renown,  longevity,  heavenly  pleasure  and 
delight  of  the  groups  of  Pitrs. 

One  who  reads  the  greatness  of  Srlpati  before  Brahmanas 
at  the  time  of  a  Sraddha,  has  the  same  benefit  as  though  he 
has  propitiated  the  Pitamahas  (ancestors  or  grandfathers)  with 
ghee  and  honey. 


V.iii. 196.1 — V.iii. 197.11 


565 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETY5IX 
The  Greatness  of  Hamsatirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said : 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  devotee  should  go  to  the  excel¬ 
lent  Hamsatirtha  where  a  swan  performed  penance  and  at¬ 
tained  the  status  of  the  vehicle  of  Brahma. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Hamsatirtha  and  makes 
gift  of  gold  becomes  rid  of  all  sins  and  goes  to  Brahmaloka  by 
means  of  a  vehicle  fitted  with  swans  and  having  the  lustre  of 
the  sun  and  richly  endowed  with  all  desirable  things.  He  will 
be  attended  upon  by  groups  of  celestial  damsels. 

After  enjoying  all  pleasures  as  he  pleases,  he  will  be  reborn 
as  a  human  being  where  he  will  be  able  to  remember  previous 
births. 

He  then  renounces  and  casts  off  his  body  when,  O  descen¬ 
dant  of  Bharata,  he  will  attain  salvation.  Thus,  O  son  of  KuntI, 
has  been  recounted  to  you,  what  the  merit  of  visiting  Hamsati¬ 
rtha  is.  It  is  meritorious,  destructive  of  all  sins  and  capable  of 
destroying  all  miseries. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETYSEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Mulasthana  Tiftha 


Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-11.  Next  to  that,  one  should  go  to  the  excellent  Surya 
Tirtha  which  is  well  known  as  Mulasthana  (the  original  holy 


PIt  is  a  splendid  shrine  established  by  the  Lotus-born  Deity, 
'he  goddess  was  told  by  Mulasripati,  “Instal  Bhaskara.  On 
earing  what  was  told  by  the  Lord,  the  goddess  installed  Bhaskai  a. 
It  is^mentioned  as  ‘Bhaskara  designated  Mulasthana  on  the 

“a  man  whTcontrol,  hi,  mind,  cakes  his  holy  bach  ch.ro  in 
he  Tircha,  offers  libacions  of  waeer  and  rice-balls  Co  Peers  and 


566 


Sltanda  Parana 


deities  and  thereafter  visits  Mulasthana  attains  the  greatest 
goal.  A  special  feature  there  has  been  heard  by  me. 

It  is  a  greater  than  the  greatest  secret.  I  heard  it  in  the 
assembly  of  sages  from  the  Moon-crested  Lord  Sankara. 

On  the  seventh  lunar  day,  the  Mula  constellation  or  Sunday, 
a  devotee  should  go  to  the  river  Reva,  take  the  holy  bath  in 
the  waters,  propitiate  Devas  and  Pitrs  and  offer  Dana  in  accor¬ 
dance  with  his  capacity,  O  most  excellent  one  among  the 
descendants  of  Bharata. 

He  should  cany  on  the  adoration  with  Karavira  flowers  and 
the  water  of  red  sandalpaste.  He  should  instal  Bhaskara  de¬ 
voutly  and  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions. 

Then  he  should  fumigate  with  incense  along  with  Aguru 
(agallochum)  and  Kundara  grass  in  particular.  The  Lord  of  the 
chiefs  of  Devas  is  adored  with  incenses  and  lights  should  be 
kindled  illuminating  the  ten  quarters. 

He  should  observe  fast  and  keep  awake  at  night,  and  there 
should  be  a  special  arrangement  for  vocal  and  instrumental 
music.  If  this  is  performed,  O  Lord  of  the  earth,  he  shall  never 
be  a  victim  of  acute  misery. 

O  excellent  king,  he  will  stay  in  Suryaloka  for  a  period  of 
three  hundred  Kalpas  and  he  will  be  served  and  attended  upon 
by  Gandharvas  and  celestial  damsels  there. 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETYEIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Sulesvara  Tvrtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-9.  Thereafter,  O  Lord  of  the  earth,  one  should  go  to  the 
Bhadrakali  Sangama  well  known  as  Sulatlrtha.  It  was  created 
by  the  Lord  himself. 

The  Trident-armed  great  Lord  Paramesvara  who  is  adored 
by  all  Devas,  stands  in  the  middle  of  Pancayatana  (five  shrines). 

That  Sangama  (confluence)  is  always  resorted  to  by  Devas, 
O  excellent  king. 

By  visiting  that  Tirtha,  and  more  particularly  by  taking  the 
holy  bath  and  offering  gifts  evils  like  ill-luck,  bad  omens,  curses, 
imprisonment  by  king  etc.  are  destroyed.  So  said  Sankara. 


V.iii.198.10-21 


567 


Yudhisthira  said: 

How  did  Goddess  Sulesvarl  and  Hara  Sulesvara  come  to  be 
well  established  and  well  reputed  on  the  banks  of  Narmada? 
Do  recount  this  in  details. 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

There  was  a  certain  Brahmana  well  known  by  the  name 
Mandavya.  He  was  conversant  with  all  types  of  pious  rites  and 
pursued  his  avocation  while  engaged  in  truthfulness  and  penance. 

The  radiant  sage  of  arduous  penance  observed  the  vow  of 
silence.  He  stood  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  in  the  middle  of  a  grove 
of  Asoka  trees  with  hands  lifted  up. 

For  a  long  period  he  thus  engaged  himself  in  the  severe 
penance  when  some  thieves  carrying  a  great  deal  of  booty 
reached  that  hermitage,  closely  pursued  by  a  number  of  king  s 
officers  of  law.  O  scion  of  the  family  of  Kuru,  they  deposited 

the  stolen  goods  in  his  abode. 

10-21.  After  depositing  the  stolen  goods,  the  thieves  re- 
mained  hidden  in  the  hermitage  itself.  Even  as  they  remained 
hidden,  a  posse  of  police  officers  came  there  immediately, 
closely  following  the  thieves.  The  pursuers  of  the  thieves  spoke 
to  the  sage  and  asked  him  the  details. 

“O  excellent  Brahmana,  do  tell  us  which  way  did  the  thieves 
go?  If  we  know  it,  we  can  quickly  follow  them.” 

Despite  their  repeated  queries  in  these  words,  O  king,  the 
ascetic  did  not  say  anything  good  or  bad. 

The  royal  officers  made  a  search  of  the  hermitage,  found 
the  goods  lost  and  bound  him  and  the  thieves.  They  produced 

them  before  the  king.  .  .  , 

The  pious  sage  was  impaled  on  a  stake  and  remained  there 

for  a  long  time  meditating  on  Sankara,  the  consort  of  Uma  and 
the  Lord  of  the  three  worlds.  He  meditated  on  Mahesana  mentally 
for  a  very  long  time.  The  Brahmana-sage  did  not  take  in  food. 

Yet  he  did  not  die.  .  . 

A  bull  among  Brahmanas,  he  meditated  on  Han  in  his  heart. 

A  penance  was  performed  by  him  though  he  suffered  much  at 

^On  hearing6 thisl'all  the  sages  became  excessively  distressed. 
O  descendant  of  Bharata,  they  took  the  form  of  birds  and 
came  to  him  at  night. 


568 


Skanda  Purana 


After  noticing  the  power  of  the  sage  they  asked  the  excel¬ 
lent  Brahmana:  “O  Brahmana,  we  wish  to  hear.  What  sin  was 
committed  by  you?” 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

22-31.  Thereupon,  the  tiger  among  sages  said  to  those  ascet¬ 
ics:  “Can  I  escape  from  my  own  faults?  No  one  else  has  com¬ 
mitted  any  offence  against  me.” 

After  saying  thus  (to  himself),  the  sage  said  so  to  all  of 
them.  Thereupon,  the  sages  submitted  this  to  the  king  the 
next  day. 

On  hearing  that  it  was  a  sage  (who  had  been  impaled)  the 
king  came  out  along  with  his  kinsmen.  He  craved  the  indul¬ 
gence  of  the  excellent  sage  impaled  on  the  stake. 

The  king  said: 

O  dear  one,  it  was  due  to  ignorance  that  a  great  offence  has 
been  committed  by  me.  I  request  you  to  become  pleased.  It 
does  not  behove  you  to  be  angry  with  me. 

On  being  requested  thus,  the  sage  became  pleased.  The 
king  got  him  brought  down  from  the  stake.  The  sage  had 
become  pleased. 

On  being  brought  down  the  flesh  of  the  sage  got  entangled 
on  the  stake.  The  Brahmana  became  highly  distressed.  He 
meditated  on  Sankara  mentally. 

Sankara  had  been  meditated  upon  by  him  after  a  long  period 
of  fast.  Mahadeva  appeared  before  him  and  cut  off  the  stake. 

Standing  at  the  foot  of  the  stake,  the  delighted  Sambhu  said 
again  and  again:  What  should  be  done,  O  Brahmana  who  are 
abiding  by  your  Sattvika  nature?  I  am  pleased  and  so  also  is 
Uma.  I  shall  grant  you  something  that  cannot  be  (ordinarily) 
granted.  But  (one  thing  kindly  note)  the  achievement  of  truth¬ 
ful  persons  in  the  world  may  not  be  (necessarily)  much.  Crea¬ 
tures  enjoy  the  benefit  only  in  accordance  with  their  own  actions. 
Prosperity  results  from  good  actions  and  misery  from  evil  acts.” 

32-43.  (Past)  Actions  bear  fruit  in  diverse  forms  for  hu¬ 
man  beings.  To  some  it  gives  poverty;  to  others  it  gives  suffer- 


V.iii.  198.44-56 


569 


ing  due  to  loss  of  wealth.  To  some  the  suffering  may  arise  from 
absence  of  piogeny.  To  some  it  is  due  to  the  contrary.  They 
may  be  distressed  due  to  misbehaviour  of  children.  To  some 
persons  the  distiess  may  be  due  to  the  death  of  sons  or  sepa¬ 
ration  of  dear  friends.  To  some  misery  may  be  due  to  tyranny 
of  a  king,  to  a  thief  or  to  a  fire  accident  brought  about  by 
adverse  fate. 

The  distress  due  to  evil  action  may  manifest  in  the  bodies 
of  certain  persons.  Old  age  sets  in  at  various  stages  of  life. 
Ailments  are  also  to  be  seen. 

One  is  subjected  to  slander  and  calumny  through  sins  in¬ 
curred  in  the  course  of  the  actions  of  previous  births.  Some  (ap¬ 
parently)  sinless  now,  fall  into  the  most  miserable  situations. 

In  the  same  way,  as  a  result  of  the  previous  Karmas  some 
continue  to  be  pious  and  abiding  in  performing  austerity.  Many 
are  self-controlled,  devoted  to  their  own  wedded  wives,  munifi¬ 
cent  and  ready  to  give  liberally  and  eager  to  worship  (deities). 
Others  are  endowed  with  many  good  qualities  such  as  bashful 
modesty,  tactfulness  etc. 

There  are  some  men  who  do  not  get  excited  or  distressed 
due  to  insuperable  calamities  as  a  result  of  their  own  Karmas. 
They  do  not  censure  pious  behaviour  and  religious  activity. 
They  consider  this  as  a  form  of  penance.  On  the  other  hand, 
some  stupid  persons  censure  it  as  torture.  Good  men  do  not 
lament  during  sufferings  saying,  “Alas,  my  brother  !  Mother  . 

s  or  the  lotus-eyed  Lord  Visnu. 
lit  of  evil  actions.  Theieat,  cei- 

iditate  on  Lord  Isa  and  endure 
5  become  milder,  O  Brahmana. 
Brahmana,  this  is  since  I  have 
1  worshipped  by  you  in  the  midst 
come  here  in  the  company  of 
what  should  be  done  by  me.” 


Son  !  etc.”  They  remember  me 
rhey  get  ready  to  reap  the  fru 
tainly  it  gets  subdued. 

If  good  men  continue  to  me 
the  sufferings,  their  (past)  act* 
It  is  emphasized  by  Srutis.  O 
been  mentally  remembered  anc 
of  your  sufferings,  that  I  have 
Gaurl.  Tell  me,  O  Brahmana, 


andavyci  said: 

4«e.  o 

you  are  going  to  giant  me  a  > 

lich  occurred  while  I  was  on  1  e  *  *  ’  ,ake  I  did  not  have 

When  all  my  limbs  were  impaled  on  the  stake. 


Skcinda  Parana 

any  pain  at  all.  That  Sula  (Stake)  appeared  to  exude  nectar. 
Do  tell  me  to  what  power  it  was  due. 

Siilapdni  said: 

It  was  due  to  the  fact  that  I  have  been  mentally  remembered 
by  you,  O  Brahmana.  I  am  the  destroyer  of  injustice  and  evil 
actions.  I  dispel  miseries. 

As  soon  as  I  was  meditated  upon,  O  Brahmana,  when  I  was 
stationed  in  the  nether  worlds,  I,  Sambhu  came  to  the  foot  of 
the  Sula  and  the  Goddess  herself  stationed  herself  on  the  top. 
Goddess  Ambika,  the  mother  of  the  universe,  flooded  you  with 
nectar. 

Mandavya  said: 

Since  you  along  with  Uma  had  already  pervaded  the  Sula 
and  stationed  yourself  there,  even  now  you  in  her  company  are 
inclined  to  do  me  favour. 

Merely  by  remembering  her  all  Daurbliagya  (ill-luck)  will  get 
dissolved.  There  is  nothing  more  miserable  than  the  greatest 
misery  of  ill-luck. 

O  excellent  one  among  Suras,  this  traditional  verse  is  being 
sung  in  the  Puranas:  While  you  were  burning  the  three  worlds, 
all  Saubhagya  (conjugal  felicity)  gathered  into  one  unit  and 
getting  to  the  chest  of  Visnu  settled  down  there.  This  is  already 
heard  by  us. 

As  it  dripped  down  from  his  chest  it  was  imbibed  by  Daksa 
the  Paramesthin  (Patriarch).  Therefrom  was  born  this  lady 
with  eyes  like  blue  lotus  in  the  form  of  Satl. 

O  Lord  of  Devas,  when  he  performed  a  Yajha  he  insulted 
you.  Hence,  that  goddess  consigned  herself,  her  Pranas,  into 
the  fire.  After  reducing  herself  to  ashes,  O  Lord,  she  was  born 
of  Menaka  (Mena)  as  the  daughter  of  the  Himalaya  Mountain. 
She  is  now  named  Uma. 

O  Lord  of  Suras,  that  Goddess  has  neither  beginning  nor 
end.  She  is  beyond  comprehension  and  guess,  O  Lord  of  Devas, 
if  you  are  pleased  and  if  Uma  is  pleased  to  grant  me  a  boon, 
both  of  you  shall  become  stationed  in  this  spot,  i.e.  the  foot 
and  the  top  of  the  Sula.  Your  incarnation  may  be  here  and 
there  but  the  permanent  stay  shall  be  here. 


V.iii.  198.57-75 


571 


:.v 

r 


</. 


A\ 


5?7  Mdrkandeya  said: 

57-63.  When  this  was  requested  by  him,  the  ground  was 
suddenly  split  into  two  and  from  the  foot  and  the  top  of  the 
Sula  they  came  out  in  the  form  of  replicas  of  Linga  and  idol. 

The  Liiiga  was  seen  at  the  foot  illuminating  all  the  quarters. 
To  the  left  was  the  Goddess  Suiesvarl  stationed  as  the  idol. 

She  shone  filling  up  all  the  quarters  and  fascinating  the 
entire  universe.  On  seeing  her,  the  excellent  Brahmana  joined 
the  palms  in  reverence  and  began  to  eulogize. 

Mdndavya  said : 

You  are  the  mother  of  this  world;  the  deity  presiding  over 
the  fortune  of  the  universe.  O  lady  of  excellent  countenance, 
there  is  nothing  without  your  presence  in  the  whole  of  the 
Cosmic  Egg. 

O  goddess  expert  in  the  knowledge  of  Dharma,  do  favour 

me.  It  behoves  you  to  command  me. 

Where  are  the  different  spots  where  you  are  stationed  in  the 
forms  similar  to  this?  O  great  goddess,  be  favourable  to  me  and 
mention  them. 


Sri  Devi  said: 

I  should  be  seen  as  present  everywhere  in  all  living  beings, 
everywhere  on  the  earth.  In  all  the  worlds  there  is  nothing  that 

19  I^half  however,  'truthfully  recount  to  you  the  places  where 
I  should  be  visited  by  people  desirous  of  Siddhi  and  remem- 

hered  bv  those  desirous  of  prosperity. 

64-75  The  deities  in  various  shrines  are:  Visalaksi  in  Varanasi, 

LihSadharinl  in  Naimisa,  Goddess  Lalita  in  Prayaga,  Kamuka 
Lingaana  Kumuda  in  Manasa,  Visvakaya 

“  SJSSSh £23. r**™**  ^  Mandara,  Mado*a« 

in  Caitr’aratha  HayantI  in  Hastinapura,  Gaun  stationed  in 
in  Caitraratn  ,  y  Amalaoarvata,  KIrtimatl  m  Ekamraka, 
I^nyaku  ja.g^am  in  pu?kara,  Margadayini  in  Kedara, 

Visva  in  ^  ’l  d  f Himalaya,  Bhadrakarnika  in  Gokarna, 


572 


Skanda  Purana 


Kapila  in  Mahalinga,  Mukutesvari  in  Makota,  MahadevT  in  Saligrama, 
Jalapriya  in  Sivalihga,  Kuman  in  Mayapurl,  Lalita  in  Santana, 
UtpalaksI  in  Sahasraksa,  Mahotpala  in  Hiranyaksa,  the  deity 
named  Vimala  in  Gaya,  Mangala  in  Puiusottama,  Amoghaksi 
in  Vipasa,  Patala  in  Pundravardhana,  NarayanI  in  Suparsva, 
Bhadrasundari  in  Trikuta,  Vipula  in  Vipula,  KalyanI  on  Malayacala, 
Kotavl  in  Kotitlrtha,  Sugandha  in  Gandhamadana1,  Trisandhya 
in  Godvasrama,  Ratipriya  in  Garigadvara,  Sabhananda  in  Sivacanda 
and  NandinT  in  Devikatata. 

76-85.  RukminT  in  Dvaravatl,  Radha  in  Vrndavana  forest, 
DevakI  in  Mathura,  Paramesvarl  in  Patala  (nether  world),  Slta 
in  Citrakuta,  VindhyanivasinI  on  Vindhya,  Ekavlra  on  the  Sahya 
Mountain,  Candika  in  Hariscandra,  Ramana  in  RamaUrtha,  Mrgavati 
on  Yamuna,  MahalaksmI  in  Karavlra,  RupadevI  in  Vinayaka, 
Arogya  in  Vaidyanatha,  Mahesvaii  in  Mahakala,  Abhaya  in  Usna 
Tirtha,  MrgI  in  Vindhya  caves,  the  deity  named  Manduki  in 
Mandavya,  Svaha  in  the  city  of  Mahesvara,  Pracanda  in  Chagalinga, 
Candika  on  Amarakantaka,  Vararoha  in  Somesvara,  Puskaravatl 
in  Prabhasa,  Vedamata  on  SarasvatT,  Para  on  the  banks  of  Para, 
O  Sage,  Mahabhaga  in  Mahalaya,  Pingalesvarl  on  Payosnl,  Simhika 
in  Krtasauca,  Sahkari  in  Karttika,  Lola  in  Utpalavartaka,  Subhadra 
in  the  Sona  confluence,  LaksmI  considered  (the  deity)  in 
Siddhavata,  Taranga  in  Bharatasrama,  VisvamukhI  in  Jalandhara, 
Tara  on  Kiskindha  mountain,  Pusti  in  Devadaruvana  forest, 
Medha  in  Kasmlra  Mandala,  BhlmadevT2  on  the  Himalaya  mountain, 
Pusti  in  Vastresvara  (but  in  verse  84  Devadaruvana  is  named), 
Suddhi  in  Kapalamocana  and  Mata  in  Kayavarohana. 

86-98.  The  deity  named  Dhvani  in  Sankhoddhara,  Dhrti 
in  Pindaraka,  Kala  on  Candrabhaga,  SaktidharinI  in  Acchoda, 
the  deity  named  Amrta  on  Vena,  UrvasI  in  Badarl,  OsadhI  in 
Uttarakuru,  Kusodaka  in  Kusadvlpa,  Manmatha  on  Hemakuta, 
SatyavadinI  in  Kumuda,  Vandinlka  in  Asvattha,  Nidhi  in 
Vaisravanalaya,  Gayatrl  in  Vedavadana,  ParvatT  in  the  vicinity 
of  Siva,  IndranI  in  Devaloka,  SarasvatT  in  Brahmasya  (face  of 
Brahma),  the  deity  named  Prabha  in  Suryabimba  (Solar  disc), 
(I  am)  considered  Vaisnavl  among  the  Mothers,  ArundhatT 
among  Satis  (chaste  ladies),  Tilottama  among  Ramas  (beauti¬ 
ful  ladies),  the  deity  named  Brahmakala  in  Citra,  Sakti  of  all 


1 .  Also  Kiimuka  in  v  64. 

2.  In  v  68  Nanda  is  associated  with  Himalaya. 


V.iii.  198.99-1 10 


573 


r 


if 


the  embodied  beings,  Sulesvari  in  Bhrguksetra,  Saubhagyasundari 
in  Bhrgu. 

Thus  the  excellent  one  hundred  eight  names  (of  the  dei¬ 
ties)  as  well  as  the  holy  spots  have  been  cited  on  the  whole. 

O  Brahmana,  this  alone  shall  be  the  greatest  (resort)  of 
everyone.  A  man  who  reads  the  one  hundred  eight  names  in 
the  presence  of  Siva,  shall  be  liberated  from  all  sins.  He  will 
get  the  covetable  and  coveted  woman. 

A  woman  who  takes  her  holy  bath  on  the  third  lunar  day 
and  worships  me  devoutly  shall  never  meet  with  misery,  O 

excellent  Brahmana,  by  my  power. 

A  woman  who  invariably  comes  and  visits  me  will  never  have 
misery  brought  about  by  her  sons  or  husband. 

In  my  shrine,  a  woman  devotee  shall  adore  the  Tulapurusa. 
She  should  then  worship  and  decorate  the  Devas  and  the  Guardians 
of  the  worlds,  along  with  Fire-god.  Thereafter  she  should  honour 
Brahmanas  along  with  their  wives  by  giving  them  garments  and 


ornaments.  „ 

Then  oblations  are  offered  to  the  spirits.  She  should  then 

circumambulate  the  Tula  and  the  Rtviks  and  the  preceptor 

repeating  this  Mantra:  , ,  ,  , 

99-1 1 0.  (She  shall  be  pure  and  wear  red  garments  and  hold 
a  palmful  of  flowers.)  “Obeisance  to  you.  You  are  the  Saku  o 
all  the  Devas  stationed  supreme  as  witness.  You  arJ  t  ,e  ™  iei 
of  the  universe  created  by  the  source  of  origin  of  the  uniie.se, 
O  Tula  you  are  glorified  as  the  authority  unto  all  living  beings. 
The  devotee  Then  closes  both  the  fists  end  looks  at  the  face 

<S  One  oftese  should  be  used  in  accordance  with  the  money 
One  oi  tne  other  things  may  be  more 

that  one  can  c  j  qual  o  Brahmana,  and  the  woman 

than  one  s  weight  or  ex,  y  q  i  hing  is  over.  Then  the 

or  man  obeisance  to  you,  O 

following  is  t°  be  .  P  Q  Uma  redeem  us  from  this  mire 

of  wor Idly™ existence.^Then  the  devotee  gets  off  the  weighing 


574 


Skanda  Purana 


machine.  One  half  is  gifted  to  the  preceptor  and  the  other  half 
to  the  Rtviks  while  water  is  ritualistically  poured.  After  taking 
the  formal  leave  from  them,  the  devotee  should  gift  other 
things  to  other  suppliants.  The  preceptor  and  his  wife  should 
be  given  red  clothes  to  wear.  So  also  to  other  Rtviks  according 
to  capacity.  The  preceptor  is  adorned  with  armlets  and  brace¬ 
lets.  Saying  “May  Lalita  be  pleased”;  a  white  milch  cow  too 
should  be  gifted. 

A  woman  who  performs  this  rite  thus  in  my  temple,  shall  be 
on  a  par  with  me.  With  royal  glory  she  will  shine.  She  will  be 
like  Savitrl  in  beauty  for  another  fifteen  births. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

111-117.  On  hearing  these  words  of  Gaurl,  the  most  ex¬ 
cellent  Brahmana  bowed  down  and  quickly  went  to  (his)  abode, 
O  Dharmaraja. 

Ever  since  then  that  TIrtha  became  well-known  as  Sulesvarl. 
A  devotee  should  take  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  TIrtha  and 
offer  libations  to  Pitrs  and  Devatas. 

Brahmanas  should  be  propitiated  through  food  and  cloth¬ 
ing  and  the  Pitrs  and  Pitamahas  through  balls  of  rice.  Sankara, 
the  Lord  of  Devas,  should  be  propitiated  along  with  Uma  through 
the  usual  offerings  of  a  devotee  such  as  incense,  Guggulu  and 
bright  lights. 

Rid  of  all  sins,  he  will  go  to  the  presence  of  Siva.  An  indicted 
and  cursed  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  for  three  days, 
becomes  liberated,  O  Lord  of  men. 

The  man  who  has  become  pure  (by  taking  bath)  and  who 
has  observed  fast  shall  keep  awake  in  the  night  on  the  four¬ 
teenth  lunar  day  in  the  dark  half.  He  shall  then  worship  Siva. 
Dispelling  the  delusion  caused  by  sins,  he  goes  to  Rudraloka. 
He  will  acquire  the  form  of  Rudra  with  three  eyes  and  four 
arms.  He  will  sport  about  with  celestial  girls  as  long  as  the 
moon,  sun  and  stars  shine. 


V.iii.199.1-14 


575 


CHAPTER  ONE  HUNDRED  NINETYNINE 
The  Greatness  of  Asvina  Tirlha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Next  to  it  is  the  excellent  Asvina  Tlrtha,  O  king.  It 
is  the  most  desirable  among  all  the  Tlrthas.  It  is  the  bestower 
of  Siddhis  on  all  living  beings. 

It  was  at  this  Tirtha  that  the  Asvina  Devas,  the  most  excellent 
ones  among  physicians,  the  very  handsome  ones  performed  an 
elaborate  penance  and  became  sharers  in  the  offerings  of  Yajnas. 

They  became  the  most  honoured  ones  to  all  the  Devas. 
These  two  sons  of  Aditya,  called  Nasatyas,  were  fully  endowed 
with  inherent  power.  They  are  the  most  excellent  ones  among 
the  destroyers  of  all  miseries. 

Sri  Yudhisthira  said: 

For  what  reason  did  the  sons  of  Aditya  become  Nasatyas.  O 
dear  Brahmana,  I  wish  to  hear  your  best  assessment. 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

In  the  Bhaskara  (i.e.  Aditya  or  Saura)  Purana,  the  behaviour 
and  action  of  the  noble-souled  Martanda,  the  Lord  of  Devas, 

has  been  heard  in  detail  by  me. 

Though  I  have  become  emaciated  on  account  of  old  age,  O 
descendant  of  Bharata,  I  shall  undoubtedly  recount  this  to  you 
in  brief,  since  you  are  endowed  w.th  <i=vo“d  f''^c 

On  observing  , he  excessive  form 

— — s in  the  forcst 

""a  H™'  After  many  days,  the  venerable  Lord  Ravi  saw  her 
galloping  ablt  h«  here  and  them  — g  ^er  phy, 

SS  off  Ids  supremely  refulgent  form  and  high  spien- 
dor.  He  became  a  "^^^^in  copulation  with  the 
NeigTheSUghtfooted goddess  (mare)  turned  towards  him 
£«  -JEe !  So  th°e  excellent  semen  penetrated  her  nostril. 


576 


Skanda  Parana 


From  the  seed  (semen)  that  entered  the  nostrils,  an  excellent 
foetus  developed.  O  son  of  Kuntl,  the  sons  born  thereof  be¬ 
came  well  known  as  Nasatyas.  Their  limbs  were  symmetrical 
and  well-formed  like  a  duplicate  drawn  from  an  image. 

They  excelled  all  the  Devas  in  their  handsome  features  and 
masterliness.  They  came  to  the  banks  of  Narmada.  They  per¬ 
formed  very  difficult  penance  at  Bhrgukaccha  and  attained 
great  Siddhis. 

He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha  and  offers 
libation  to  Pitrs  and  Devas  becomes  fortunate  and  handsome, 
O  son  of  Kuntl. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED 
The  Greatness  of  Savitrl  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Next  to  it,  O  son  of  Kuntl,  is  the  excellent  Savitrl 
tirtha  where  the  highly  esteemed  Savitrl,  the  mother  of  the 
Vedas,  attained  Siddhi. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

Who  is  this  Savitrl,  O  excellent  Brahmana?  How  is  she  pro¬ 
pitiated  by  the  learned?  On  being  pleased,  what  boon  does  she 
grant?  Do  tell  me. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Padma,  the  YoginI  of  lotus,  presided  over  by  the  Lotus-seated 
One,  resembles  the  Sun-god  in  her  splendour.  Hence  she  is 
called  Savitrl. 

The  lotus-complexioned,  lotus-faced  Savitrl  with  the  eyes 
resembling  lotus-petals  should  be  always  meditated  upon  duly 
by  Brahmanas,  Ksatriyas  and  Vaisyas. 

She  should  never  be  meditated  upon  by  Sudras  for  fear  of 
incurring  the  sin  of  Brahman a-slaugh ter.  If  it  is  uttered  or 
retained  in  the  mind  by  a  Sudra  he  certainly  falls  in  Naraka. 
It  has  been  decided  that  for  merely  pronouncing  the  Veda 


V.iii.200.7-18 


577 


(Vedic  text  by  a  Sudra)  the  tongue  of  that  Sudra  should  be 
cut  off  by  Ksatriyas  who  are  the  protectors  of  Dharma. 

7-18.  In  the  course  of  the  excellent  Sandhya  meditation 
early  in  the  morning,  Savitrl  is  to  be  imagined  and  meditated 
upon  in  the  form  of  a  girl  resembling  the  crescent  moon,  with 
red  garments  and  red  unguents. 


At  midday  Savitri  should  be  imagined  and  meditated  upon 
as  a  sweet-faced,  auspicious-looking,  young  woman  with  large 
and  protruding  breasts,  richly  adorned  with  all  ornaments  and 
wearing  white  garlands  and  unguents.  She  is  wearing  white 
clothes  and  has  white  Yajnopavlta  (sacred  thread).  She  bestows 
worldly  pleasures  and  salvation. 

At  dusk,  O  son  of  KuntT,  she  should  be  remembered  as 
white-complexioned  with  grey  hair.  She  protects  like  a  mother 
in  a  forest  of  impassable  tracts. 

O  great  king,  the  excellent  Savitrl  Tirtha  is  of  special  excel¬ 
lence  and  efficacy.  After  holy  bath,  a  devotee  should  duly  per¬ 
form  the  Acamana  (ritualistic  sipping  of  water).  By  means  of 
Pranayama  he  will  destroy  many  of  his  sins  incurred  in  the 
course  of  seven  births  mentally,  verbally  and  physically.  He 
should  thereby  burn  all  defects. 

A  person  should  sprinkle  his  body  with  water  while  uttering 
the  Mantra  apohisthd,  nine,  six  or  three  times  in  that  Tirtha, 
O  excellent  king.  If  the  Mantra  apohistha  etc.  is  repeated  thrice, 
one  is  not  defiled  by  the  sin  of  Pratigraha  (acceptance  of  gift 
from  undeserving  persons). 

If  the  Mantra  of  Aghamarsana  consisting  of  three  Rks  or  one 
from  one’s  Veda  of  special  study  is  repeated,  one  is  not  defiled 
by  minor  sins,  like  a  lotus  leaf  which  is  not  wetted  by  water. 

Usually  the  Acamana  is  performed  three  times  by  a  Brahmana. 
He  shall  perform  three  Ullekhas  (scrubbing).  He  who  performs 
the  fourth  one  dispels  the  sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter. 

The  Mantra  called  Drupada  from  the  Vajasaneyaka  Veda  (i.e. 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  Sukla  Yajurveda)  should  be  repeated  while 

in  water.  It  destroys  all  sins.  . 

One  should  adore  Divakara  (the  Sun-god)  with  the  Mantra 
beginning  with  udutyamznA  then  perform  thejapa  of  the  holy 
Gayatrl,  the  mother  of  the  Vedas.  A  Brahmana  who  performs 
the  Tana  of  Goddess  Gayatrl  uninterruptedly  after  the  Sandhya 
prayers  shall  be  rid  of  all  sins.  He  goes  to  Brahmaloka. 


578 


Skanda  Purana 


19-27.  Gayatrl  quells  a  sin  incurred  in  the  course  of  ten 
births  if  repeated  a  hundred  times.  If  it  is  repeated  a  thousand 
times,  it  quells  the  sins  committed  befoie  in  the  course  of 
three  Yugas. 

A  Brahmana  who  has  only  repeated  the  Gayatrl  and  exer¬ 
cises  self-control  is  far  superior  to  a  Brahmana  who  has  learnt 
all  the  four  Vedas  but  has  no  self-control,  who  eats  everything 
indiscriminately  and  sells  everything  indiscriminately. 

A  man  bereft  of  Sandhya  prayers  is  always  impure.  He  is 
disqualified  in  all  sacred  rites.  If  at  all  he  does  anything  (re¬ 
ligious),  he  does  not  derive  the  benefit  thereof. 

A  Brahmana  who  does  not  perform  the  Upasti  (adoration) 
of  the  Sandhya  (twilight)  is  dull-witted.  In  this  very  life,  he  is 
on  a  par  with  a  Sudra.  On  death  he  is  reborn  as  a  dog. 

A  Brahmana,  after  reaching  the  Savitrl  Tirtha  should  per¬ 
form  the  Japa  of  Savitrl.  Undoubtedly  he  gets  the  benefit  of 
studying  the  three  Vedas. 

If  the  devotee  takes  his  holy  bath  with  the  Pitrs  in  view  and 
offers  balls  of  rice,  O  king,  his  grandfathers  become  satisfied 
for  twelve  years. 

If  after  reaching  Savitrl  Tirtha  a  person  castes  off  his  life, 
he  shall  stay  in  Brahmaloka  until  the  annihilation  of  all  living 
beings.  On  the  completion  of  that  period  he  is  reborn  as  a 
human  being.  O  king,  he  is  reborn  in  a  pure  family  of  a  Brahmana 
learned  in  all  the  four  Vedas. 

He  will  be  endowed  with  plenty  of  money  and  heaps  of  grain 
and  have  sons  and  grandsons.  Free  from  ailments  and  grief, 
he  shall  live  for  a  hundred  years. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  ONE 
The  Greatness  of  Deva  Tirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-4.  Thereafter  one  should  go  to  the  excellent  Deva  Tirtha, 
O  king.  O  Yudhisthira,  it  was  there  that  the  highly  esteemed 
Devas  including  Indra  attained  Siddhi. 


V.iii.202.1-7 


579 


Holy  bath,  Dana,  Japa,  Homa  and  study  of  the  Vedas  as  well 
as  adoiation  of  deities  performed  there  become  everlasting  in 
their  benefit  by  the  power  of  the  Tlrtha. 

Especially  the  thirteenth  day  in  the  dark  half  of  Bhadrapada 
is  of  great  importance  because  the  deities  of  all  the  Tirthas 
gather  together  there. 

A  person  should  take  his  holy  bath  on  the  thirteenth  day, 
perform  Sraddha  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  and  wor¬ 
ship  the  Bull-emblemed  Lord  established  there  by  Devas.  He 
shall  be  free  from  all  sins  and  go  to  Rudraloka. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWO 


The  Greatness  of  Sikhitirtha 
Sii  Markandeya  said: 

1-7.  Next  to  it  a  person  should  go  to  another  excellent  holy 
spot  called  Sikhitirtha.  It  is  the  most  important  of  all  the  Tirthas. 
It  has  five  excellent  shrines. 

For  the  sake  of  his  flames  (and  sparks)  Havyavahana  (Fire- 
god)  performed  a  penance  and  got  it.  Thereby  he  came  to  be 
called  Sikhin  (‘one  having  flame’).  He  installed  Siva  named 
Sikha. 

On  the  first  lunar  day  in  the  bright  half  of  Asvayuja,  O  king, 
a  person  should  go  to  the  excellent  Tlrtha  and  bathe  in  the 
waters  of  Narmada.  With  gingelly  seeds  and  water,  he  should 
offer  libation  to  Devas,  sages  and  Pitre  as  well  as  others. 

After  propitiating  Hulasana  (Fire-god),  he  should  make  a 
gift  of  gold  to  a  Brahmana.  Thereafter,  he  should  adore  Siva 

with  scented  garlands  and  incense.  .  , 

After  worshipping  Mahesvara  with  this  procedure  in  le 
Sikhitirtha,  the  devotee  becomes  eligible  to  go  to  Rudra  o  a. 
Surrounded  by  groups  of  celestial  women  and  sung  about  by 
Gandharvas,  he  travels  by  an  aerial  chariot  having  the ^lustre 
of  the  Sun.  His  enemies  get  destroyed  and  he  becomes  bril¬ 
liant,  if  he  is  reborn  on  the  earth. 


580 


Skanda  Purana 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  THREE 
The  Greatness  of  Koti  Tirlha 


Sn  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  Lord  of  the  earth,  a  person  should  go 
to  the  excellent  Kotitlrtha  where  great  and  highly  esteemed 
sages,  a  crore  in  number,  became  Siddhas. 

After  performing  an  elaborated  penance,  the  sages  installed 
Siva  as  well  as  goddess  Kotlsvarl,  Camunda  who  killed  the  demon 
called  Mahisa. 

O  king,  it  was  on  the  fourteenth  lunar  day  in  the  dark  half 
of  the  month  of  Bhadrapada  that  the  sages  invited  crores  of 
TIrthas  and  installed  Siva.  If  the  constellation  Hasta  coincides 
with  that  lunar  day,  it  is  destructive  of  all  sins.  One  should  go 
there  at  that  time  and  take  his  holy  bath  with  mental  concen¬ 
tration  and  purity.  Thereby  he  redeems  twenty-one  genera¬ 
tions  of  members  of  his  family  from  Naraka.  Merely  by  offering 
libations  with  gingelly  seeds  and  water,  this  is  achieved.  All  the 
more  so  if  the  man  performs  Sraddha.  Holy  bath,  Dana,  Japa, 
Homa,  study  of  the  Vedas  and  worship  of  deities  performed, 
become  a  crore  times  more  effective  through  the  contact  of 
that  Tirtha. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  FOUR 
The  Greatness  of  Paitdmaha  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-9.  Thereafter  a  person  should  go  to  the  excellent  Bhrgu 
Tirtha,  the  king  of  all  the  TIrthas.  It  is  highly  meritorious  and 
destructive  of  all  sins.  It  pertains  to  Pitamaha  (Creator). 

For  some  reason,  formerly,  the  propitiation  of  Sambhu  was 
carried  out  by  Brahma,  there  at  that  Tirtha  for  three  hundred 
years. 


V.iii.204.10-16 


581 


Yudhisthira  said: 

O  tiger  among  sages,  why  did  Brahma,  the  grandfather  of 
the  worlds,  propitiate  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of  Devas,  with  great 
devotion? 

He  himself  is  worthy  of  being  propitiated  by  all  living  be¬ 
ings.  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  universe.  I  wish  to  listen  about  this 
great  and  excellent  miracle  worthy  of  being  heard. 


On  hearing  the  words  of  Dharmaputra,  Markandeya,  the 
leader  of  sages,  recounted  the  old  legendary  story. 

5?i  Markandeya  said: 

Formerly,  the  Grandfather  wished  to  approach  carnally  his 
own  mental  daughter,  O  excellent  one.  He  was  then  cursed  by 
the  angry  Lord  of  Devas:  “O  Lotus-seated  One,  the  Vedas  will 
cease  to  be  with  you  and  you,r  knowledge  will  come  to  an  end. 
Undoubtedly  you  will  never  be  worthy  of  the  adoration  of  all 
the  worlds.” 

When  this  curse  was  uttered,  Brahma  became  overwhelmed 
with  sorrow.  He  went  to  the  northern  bank  of  Reva.  Taking 
regular  baths,  he  propitiated  the  Lord  of  Devas  for  three  hundred 
years.  Sankara  was  ultimately  pleased  and  said:  “During  Pawns 
(days  of  religious  festivity)  you  shall  become  worthy  of  being 
worshipped.  I  too  shall  stay  here  along  with  the  Devas  and 

Pitrs.” 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

10-16.  Ever  since  then,  thanks  to  Pitamaha,  that  Tlrtha 
became  famous.  It  is  meritorious  and  destructive  of  a 
is  the  most  excellent  one ^  among  all  hjdf  of  the 

On  a  new-moon  day  (or)  an)  a  /  ,  ,  ,  nff>r 

month  of  Bhadrapada,  on*  should  take  holy  bath  and  offer 

libations  to  Pitrs  and  Devas.  ,  ««  c  *rp  or  -water  mixed 


582 


Skanda  Purana 


single  Sraddha  performed  on  a  new-moon  day  that  benefit 
which  accrues  by  performing  Sraddha  in  all  the  Pitrtirthas. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  Paitamaha  Tirtha  and 
worships  the  Consort  of  Parvati  becomes  rid  of  major  and 
minor  sins.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it. 

Men  who  die  there  in  that  Tirtha  become  purified  in  their 
souls,  O  king.  They  undoubtedly  go  to  Rudraloka  from  which 
they  never  return. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  FIVE 
The  Greatness  of  Kurkari  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  O  king,  a  person  should  go  to  the  highly 
splendid  Tirtha  well  known  by  the  name  Kurkuri.  It  is  destruc¬ 
tive  of  all  sins. 

The  goddess  of  Devas,  Kurkuri,  is  the  presiding  deity  of  the 
Tirtha.  She  grants  whatever  one  prays  for  such  as  cattle,  sons, 
wealth  etc. 

The  Ksetrapala  (guardian  of  the  holy  spot)  residing  there 
is  named  Dhaundhesa.  A  devotee,  man  or  woman,  who  propi¬ 
tiates  him  and  then  bows  down  (to  the  deity),  O  great  king, 
gets  his  ill-luck  destroyed  thereby.  One  without  a  son  gets  a 
son.  One  without  wealth  gets  excellent  wealth.  Men  and  wom¬ 
en  realise  the  excellent  wishes  cherished  by  visiting  and  taking 
bath  in  that  Tirtha  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions. 


V.iii.206.1-10 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  SIX 
The  Greatness  of  Dasakanya  Tirtha 


583 


Sri  Marhayideya  said: 


1-5.  Thereafter,  O  king,  one  should  go  to  the  highly  splen¬ 
did  and  meritorious  Tirtha  that  destroys  all  sins.  It  is  well- 
known  as  Dasakanya  Tirtha.  It  was  created  by  Mahadeva  and 
gives  all  desired  things. 

It  was  there  at  that  Tirtha  that  Mahadeva  celebrated  the 
marriages  of  the  ten  daughters  of  Brahma  endowed  with  all 
good  qualities.  Ever  since  then  that  became  well-known  as  Dasakanya 
Tirtha.  It  is  meritorious  and  destructive  of  all  sins.  The  benefit 
thereof  is  glorified  as  everlasting. 

A  person  should  make  a  gift  of  his  daughter  fully  adorned 
in  accordance  with  his  capacity.  O  king,  the  devotees  become 
meritorious-souled  due  to  the  Punya  arising  from  the  gift.  They 
stay  in  the  proximity  of  Siva  for  as  many  years  as  there  are  hair 
(on  the  body). 

6-10.  After  a  long  time,  O  Lord  of  men,  they  attain  human 
birth  usually  very  difficult  to  get.  They  shall  be  possessors  of 


crores  of  coins.  .  __  . 

One  who  devoutly  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha 

and  offers  to  a  quiescent  Brahmana  a  piece  of  gold  attains 

"OSS  of  Bharaca,  doe  Co  Che  gifc  of  gold  af,  Che  £ 
incurred  earlier  such  as  verbal,  mental,  and  physical  pensh 

enOn!ywh„  offer,  gold  even  a,  licUe  a,  *e  cip  of  a  "air,  goe, 
to  heaven  on  death.  There  is  no  doubt  ^  ^  wQr. 

There  he  occupies  an  excellent  aena 
shipped  by  Siddhas  and  Vidyadharas.  He  shall  stay  there 

the  annihilation  of  all  living  beings. 


584 


Skanda  Parana 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  SEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Suvarnabindu  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-9.  In  front  of  it  is  the  sacred  Tirtha  well  known  as  Svarnabindu. 
People  who  take  their  holy  bath  there  go  to  heaven.  On  death 
they  do  not  get  a  rebirth. 

O  Lord  of  the  earth,  listen  to  the  benefit  that  is  cited  as 
arising  from  the  gift  of  a  piece  of  gold  to  a  Brahmana  after 
taking  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tirtha. 

Of  all  jewels,  gold  is  the  excellent  jewel.  It  is  born  of  the 
fiery  brilliance  of  Agni.  Hence  it  is  the  greatest  on  the  earth. 

If  a  person,  therefore,  gives  a  piece  of  gold,  it  is  as  though 
the  entire  earth  including  the  cities  and  towns,  mountains, 
forests  and  parks  has  been  given. 

O  descendant  of  Bharata,  by  the  gift  of  gold  all  the  sins 
incurred  earlier,  whether  mental,  verbal  or  physical,  perish 
entirely. 

Even  if  the  devotee  gives  only  a  piece  of  gold  as  little  as  the 
tip  of  a  hair,  there  in  the  Tirtha,  he  goes  to  heaven  on  death. 
There  is  no  doubt  about  it. 

There  he  occupies  an  excellent  aerial  chariot  and  is  wor¬ 
shipped  by  Vidyadharas  and  Siddhas.  He  should  stay  there 
until  the  annihilation  of  all  living  beings. 

When  his  period  (of  stay  in  heaven)  comes  to  an  end,  he 
attains  human  birth.  He  is  reborn  as  a  Brahmana  in  a  family 
possessing  crores  of  gold  pieces. 

He  shall  be  free  from  all  the  ailments.  He  shall  be  honoured 
in  all  the  worlds.  He  shall  live  for  more  than  a  hundred  years 
and  be  well  known  in  royal  assemblies. 


V.iii.208.1-9 


585 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  EIGHT 
The  Greatness  of  Rnamocana  Tirlha 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-9.  O  protector  of  the  earth,  thereafter  one  should  go  to 
the  highly  splendid  TIrtha  well  known  in  all  the  three  worlds 
as  ‘that  which  discharges  the  debts  due  to  the  manes.’ 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  in  accordance  with  the  in¬ 
junctions,  offers  libation  to  Pitrs  and  Devas  and  gives  gifts,  O 
excellent  king,  becomes  free  from  indebtedness. 

All  the  Pitrs  (ancestors)  wish  for  a  son  for  their  own  pur¬ 
pose,  because  they  say  “This  son  shall  redeem  us  from  the  hell 
named  Put." 

Offer  of  balls  of  rice  and  water  libation  is  called  the  first 
indebtedness.  It  is  mentioned  as  the  debt  of  the  Pitrs. 

Hereafter  I  shall  mention  the  Daiva  Rna  (‘indebtedness  to 
Devas’).  Agnihotra,  Yajnas,  tying  (for  sacrifice)  a  sacrificial 
animal  and  the  Istis  should  be  performed.  Thus  the  indebted¬ 
ness  to  the  Devas  has  been  mentioned. 

Thereafter  listen  to  the  human  indebtedness.  What  is  prom¬ 
ised  and  then  given  to  Brahmanas  during  the  rites  perfoimed 
at  TIrthas  and  shrines  is  the  human  indebte  "es*- 

O  son  of  Dharma,  these  three  together  are  ca Red  ft cU ray™ 
(•threefold  indebtedness)  of  the  ^ 

—  «  -d“mcd  rrom  lhr"fold  in' 

debtedness.  controlled  self  should  go  to  this  ex- 

Hence,  a  son  of  fully  con  to  tj,e  pitrs. 

cellent  TIrtha  and  offer  libations  an  ^  ^  is  Qf  everlasting 

What  is  given  and  consign  devotee  derives  ben- 

benefit.  If  the  preceptors  are  please  , 

efit  for  seven  births. 


586 


Shandci  Purdna 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  NINE 
The  Greatness  of  Bharabhuti  Tirtha 
Sri  Marhandeya  said: 

1-9.  Next  to  it,  O  son  of  KuntI,  is  the  excellent  Puskall 
Tirtha.  A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha 
shall  get  the  benefit  of  a  horse-sacrifice. 

O  Lord  of  the  earth,  thereafter  a  person  should  go  to  the 
Tirtha  well-  known  in  all  the  three  worlds.  It  is  resorted  to  by 
Devas,  Danavas,  Gandharvas  and  celestial  damsels. 

There  stays  directly  Rudra,  the  great  Lord  of  Devas.  He  is 
remembered  as  Bharabhuti  because  he  manifested  himself  with 
a  great  burden. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

I  wish  to  hear  about  the  Tirtha  well  -known  as  Bharabhuti. 
It  is  endowed  with  all  good  features.  O  leading  Brahmana,  my 
eagerness  is  very  great. 

Sri  Marhandeya  said: 

O  most  excellent  one  among  the  sons  of  Pandu,  listen  to 
the  origin  of  (the  name)  Bharabhuti  the  way  it  was  explained 
earlier  by  Lord  Sambhu  in  detail. 

In  Krtayuga,  there  was  a  Brahmana  who  had  mastered  the 
Vedas  and  Vedarigas.  He  was  well  -  known  by  the  name  Visnusarman. 
He  was  perfectly  conversant  with  the  topics  of  all  the  scriptural 
texts. 

He  had  the  full  complement  of  all  good  qualities  such  as 
forbearance,  self-control,  compassion,  munificence,  truthful¬ 
ness,  cleanliness,  fortitude,  learning,  perfect  knowledge  and 
piousness. 

O  excellent  king,  only  those  Brahmanas  who  have  qualities 
of  this  type  redeem  the  Pitrs  fallen  into  terrible  Narakas. 

Those  Brahmanas  who  ardently  long  for  the  pleasures  of 
senses  are  deluded  through  sins,  O  excellent  king.  They  fall 
into  terrible  Raurava  Naraka. 

10-15.  Those  Brahmanas  who  have  forbearance  and  self- 
control,  whose  ears  are  filled  with  Sruti  sounds,  who  have  con- 


V.iii.209. 16-26 


587 


quered  the  sense-organs,  who  desist  from  killing  living  beings 
and  the  Finger  ends  of  whose  hands  shrink  from  accepting 
gifts,  are  capable  of  redeeming  (others). 

A  Brahmana,  endowed  with  such  sterling  qualities  stayed  on 
the  banks  of  Narmada  along  with  other  Brahmanas.  The  means 
of  his  sustenance  was  gleaning  of  the  ears  of  corns. 

On  coming  to  know  of  such  a  Brahmana,  Mahesvara,  the 
Lord  of  Devas,  assumed  the  form  of  a  Brahmana  and  person¬ 
ally  went  direct  to  his  hermitage. 

On  meeting  the  Brahmana  reciting  the  Vedic  Mantras  in 
the  Patha  called  Pada  and  Krama  along  with  the  other  Brahmanas, 
he  made  obeisance  to  the  Brahmana.  He  was  also  honoured 


with  due  formalities  of  reception. 

After  a  short  while,  the  Brahmana  who  was  taken  by  surprise 
asked:  “O  Brahmana  boy,  what  is  it  you  desire  that  I  can  do 

For  ou?” 

The  Batu  (Brahmana  boy)  said:  “O  excellent  Brahmapa,  take 
me  to  be  a  disciple  having  come  to  you.  If  you  impart  instruc¬ 
tion,  I  shall  stay  in  your  house.” 


The  Brahmana  said: 

16  26  O  Batu,  you  hail  from  the  most  excellent  Gotra  of 
a„  Brahmanas.  The  greatest  of 

(in  return)? 

The  Batu  replied:  , 

Just  as  other  hoys  -her  ly, 

night,  similarly  I  too  shall  serv  yo 

;  j  «So  it  shall  be  ’  and  began 
The  eminent  Brahmana  said,  ^  disciples.  He  too 

teaching  him  everyday  a  ong  '  gleanings  of  the  ears  o 

(i.e.  the  Batu)  regularly  brought  the  g 

corn.  -a  /the  Lord  in  the  form  of  the  Bapr) 

After  a  few  days  Isvara  (th  is  yollr  turn  now.  Do 

was  told  by  the  other  pupils:  O  Ba. 

the  work  of  cooking  etc.  Lord  of  DeVas  went  oil  to 

After  saying  “So  it  shall  be  the 


588  Skanda  Purana 

I 

Bharagrama  village.  Meditating  on  all  vegetables  (and  their 
presiding  deities)  he  spoke  these  words: 

“By  the  time  the  Brahmana  returns  to  the  abode  along  with 
the  disciples,  the  cooked  food  should  be  kept  ready  by  you  all 
remaining  invisible.” 

After  saying  thus  to  all  of  them,  the  Cosmic-formed  Mahesvara 
took  the  guise  of  the  Batu  separately  and  went  there  to  play. 

On  seeing  him  come  in  the  guise  of  a  Batu  separately,  they 
censured  him  in  harsh  words  in  the  presence  of  the  Giri  (Guru: 
probable  reading): 

“Fie  upon  you!  The  throats  of  all  of  us  are  parched  with 
hunger.  We  thought  that  going  to  our  abode  we  shall  get  sat¬ 
isfaction  by  the  food  cooked  by  you.  O  Brahmana,  by  your 
coming  here  (to  play)  you  have  frustrated  our  expectations.  O 
Brahmana,  you  have  come  away  after  making  a  false  promise. 

You  have  committed  a  foul  act.” 

The  Batu  said: 

27-39.  O  bulls  among  Brahmanas,  you  need  not  have  any 
exasperation  or  regret  in  the  matter  of  food.  You  will  be  going 
back  to  the  abode  where  you  will  find  the  food  ready. 

The  other  Batus  said : 

Everyday  while  we  cook  food,  it  does  or  does  not  become  ^ 

ready  in  the  remaining  part  of  the  day.  Here  it  is  completely 
uncooked  (you  have  not  cooked  at  all) .  But  what  is  not  ready 
is  being  cited  by  you  as  ready.  After  going  there  and  proving 
your  lie,  we  will  bind  you  and  cast  you  into  the  waters. 

The  Batu  said: 

O  excellent  Brahmanas  including  the  preceptor,  listen  ye  all 
to  my  solemn,  irrefutable  declaration.  On  hearing  it  you  may 
perhaps  be  dismayed.  If  every  item  of  food  you  find  ready  and 
cooked  in  the  hermitage  of  our  preceptor,  all  of  you  will  be  f 

bound  and  should  be  hurled  by  me  into  the  waters  of  Narmada. 

Or  if  the  food  is  not  ready  I  should  be  bound  firmly  by  you 
all  and  hurled  into  the  whirlpool  of  Narmada  even  as  the 
preceptor  is  watching  us. 


1 


V.iii.209.40-52 


589 


They  all  assented  to  this  stipulation  in  the  presence  of  the 
preceptor.  They  concluded  their  holy  bath,  Japa  etc.,  in  accor¬ 
dance  with  the  injunctions  and  went  back  to  the  Bhutagrama 
village. 

On  seeing  an  elaborate  presentation  of  the  articles  of  food, 
they  were  surprised  agreeably.  O  excellent  king,  they  ate  all 
the  items  with  six  tastes  severally.  Then  the  delighted  and  well- 
nourished  excellent  Brahmana  spoke  these  words:  “O  dear 
child,  I  am  ready  to  grant  you  any  boon  whatever  may  appeal 
to  you.  All  the  Vedas  with  their  Ahgas  and  Upangas  and  the 
different  scriptural  texts  will  manifest  themselves  to  you.  They 
will  manifest  of  their  own  accord  to  you.  Let  this  be  my  boon 
unto  you.”  The  boy  bowed  down  and  went  about  playing  hap¬ 
pily  with  the  other  Batus. 

The  next  day,  O  Yudhisthira,  all  of  them  went  to  the  waters 
of  Narmada  for  sporting  about.  Then  recollecting  the  wager 
and  cautioning  all  of  them  the  Lord  (in  the  form  of  the  Batu) 
bowed  down  to  the  preceptor  and  said  with  palms  joined  in 
reverence:  “O  holy  Lord,  I  shall  hurl  into  water  all  the  Batus 
who  have  lost  the  wager.” 

40-52.  On  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord,  O  king,  even 
as  the  preceptor  was  watching  the  other  Batus  dispersed  run¬ 
ning  in  all  the  directions. 

The  Lord  rushed  at  them  with  the  speed  of  wind  all  round 
and  caught  hold  of  them.  Tying  them  up  into  a  weighty  bundle 
the  Lord  who  both  curses  and  blesses,  hurled  them  into  the 


water  as  though  within  the  house. 

The  preceptor  saw  them  in  the  waters  of  Narmada  and  told 
the  Batu:  “Why  did  you  commit  this  rash  deed?  If  their  parents 
or  the  other  women  in  the  houses  of  these  boys  were  to  ask 
me,  shall  what  I  tell  them?  Where  have  they  gone?  This  being 
the  case,  O  fair  Sir,  if  any  one  dies,  you  will  have  to  make  it 
up  with  your  own  life.  If  those  Brahmana  children  die,  it  is 
certain  that  I  too  will  die.  When  I  die,  many  sins  of  Brahmana- 
slaughter  will  assail  you.  Even  if  a  single  Brahmana  is  bound, 
the  assailant  will  certainly  fall  into  Naraka.  O  base  Brahmana, 
I  do  not  know  what  you  will  face  after  death. 

On  being  told  thus,  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of  Devas  smiled 
and  raised  up  the  Brahmanas  from  the  Bharabhutesvara  Tirtha. 

The  weights  attached  were  taken  away.  A  Linga  called  Bharabhuta 
was  installed  there. 


590 


Skanda  Parana 


Seeing  the  dead  ones  coming  back  as  the  former  Brahmanas, 
the  sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter  was  removed.  All  the  five  hun¬ 
dred  Brahmahatyas  disappeared. 

On  seeing  those  boys,  the  preceptor  became  amazed.  He 
came  to  know  that  except  for  the  great  Lord  Isvara,  no  one 
else  can  have  such  a  power. 

Realizing  that  it  was  the  Lord  of  chiefs  of  Devas,  the  Brahmana 
bowed  down  to  him  and  said:  "O  Paramesvara,  whatever  has 
been  said  by  me  displeasing  you,  was  due  to  my  ignorance  and 
whatever  has  been  done  by  me  which  was  not  to  your  liking 
should  be  forgiven,  O  Lord.” 

The  Deva  said: 

53-57.  O  holy  Sir,  you  are  my  preceptor.  You  are  my  Lord. 
You  are  my  grandfather,  O  Vedagarbha  (‘one  who  has  mas¬ 
tered  the  Vedas  by  heart’),  obeisance  to  you.  There  is  nothing 
out  of  the  way. 

The  progenitor,  the  priest  who  invests  with  ihe  sacred  thread, 
the  preceptor  who  imparts  learning,  he  who  gives  food  and  he 
who  provides  succour  from  fear  —  these  five  are  remembered 
as  Fathers  (Protectors). 

After  saying  thus  to  Visnusarman,  the  Lord  of  the  universe 
bowed  down  to  him  there  in  that  Tlrtha  and  quickly  went  away 
to  the  Kailasa  mountain. 

Ever  since  then,  that  Tirtha  is  famous  as  Bharabhuti.  It  is 
reputed  in  all  the  worlds  as  destructive  of  great  sins. 

I  shall  tell  you  another  event  that  happened  there  in  the 
Tlrtha.  It  is  a  great  legendary  event  that  is  divine  and  destruc¬ 
tive  of  all  sins.  Listen  to  it  with  an  attentive  mind. 

58-68.  Formerly,  at  the  beginning  of  Krta  Yuga,  there  was 
a  high-minded  Vaisya  well  known  as  Sukesa.  That  large-eyed 
Vaisya  passed  away.  His  son  well-  known  as  Somasarma  was 
highly  pious  and  righteous.  He  formed  friendship  with  one 
poverty-stricken  son  of  a  Vaisya  known  as  Sahadeva.  He  was 
very  efficient  in  all  activities. 

Once  he  thought  of  a  partnership  deal  with  him.  “Friend, 
with  my  money  as  the  capital  we  shall  buy  and  take  with  us 
much  merchandise.  Wfe  shall  go  on  voyage  in  a  ship  with  aus- 


V.iii.209.69-79 


591 


picious  embarkation.  We  shall  go  to  the  other  shore  (country). 
The  profit  will  be  equal  between  us.” 

Thus  they  took  counsel  together  in  regard  to  what  they 
planned.  Taking  all  the  requisites  for  the  voyage,  they  rode 
(set  sail)  on  the  salt  sea. 

They  went  to  the  other  shore  and  sold  their  wares  in  a  city 
there.  Much  gold  and  different  kinds  of  jewels  were  acquired 


by  them. 

The  boat  was  made  fit  for  the  voyage  and  they  got  into  it. 

It  was  midnight.  Sahadeva  observed  that  the  boat  fully  laden 
with  gold  was  sailing  on  the  high  sea  and  that  Somasarma,  with 
full  trust  in  him  was  sleeping  with  his  head  placed  on  his  lap. 
He  thought  thus:  ‘This  fellow  has  gone  to  sleep  with  his  very 
life  in  my  hand.  The  entire  proceeds  (gold  etc.)  are  in  his 
possession.  It  is  not  sure  that  he  will  give  me  half  the  profit 
after  going  there.  He  may  or  he  may  not. 

On  coming  to  this  conclusion,  the  sinful  wretch  hurled 

Somasarma  into  the  salt  sea. 

69-79.  Taking  the  entire  wealth,  he  crossed  the  ocean  by 
means  of  that  boat.  After  a  few  days,  he  met  with  his  death. 

He  was  seized  by  the  servants  of  Yama  and  taken  to  the 
terrible  city  of  Yama.  He  was  taken  along  that  path  where  the 
Sun  had  grown  twelve-fold  and  was  blazing  as  though  at  the 
time  of  the  ultimate  dissolution  of  the  universe.  There  were 
many  extremely  sharp  thorns,  hideous  dogs,  great  serpents 
with  sharp  fangs,  tigers,  and  huge  wolves.  There  the  sands 
were  excessively  hot.  There  was  hunger,  thirst  and  pitch  dark¬ 
ness.  There  was  no  talk  (i.e.  trace,  or  drop)  of  water,  no  shade 
or  hermitage  anywhere.  Any  food  along  with  water,  turns  into 

P°if°people  request  for  shade,  the  fire  burned  all  the  more 
hot.  The  wretched  inhabitants  who  were  burned  lamented  again 
Sind  sicrziin* 

They  cried,  “Alas,  mother!  Alas,  brother!  Alas,  son!”  and  fell 
into  swoon  on  the  way.  That  (Sahadeva)  was  led  through  the 
path  of  such  nature  by  the  servants  of  Yama. 

The  servants  of  Yama  left  (produced)  him  at  the  door  of  the 
palace  where  Lord  Yama,  the  controller  of  the  subjects,  was 
staying.  After  tying  tightly  a  rope  round  the  neck  of  the  be¬ 
trayer  of  his  friend  they  reported:  “Listen,  O  Lord  of  Devas. 
You  know  what  should  be  done  thereafter. 


592 


Skandci  Parana 


Yama  said: 

The  face  of  those  who  commit  breach  of  trust  has  never 
been  seen  by  me.  There  are  clever  and  efficient  sages  ap¬ 
pointed  here  for  the  purpose  of  deliberating  and  deciding 
what  punishment  should  be  meted  out  to  the  sinners  perpe¬ 
trating  breach  of  trust  to  their  friends.  Cast  this  fellow  over 
there  where  they  order  you  to  cast  him.  You  need  not  think 
about  it  further. 

80-92.  Ordered  thus  the  servants  of  Yama  hastened  to  the 
great  sages  along  with  him.  Producing  him  before  them  as  per 
order  of  Yama,  they  reported  with  reference  to  him: 

"By  this  fellow,  out  of  greed  for  wealth,  his  own  friend  who 
trusted  him  and  was  asleep  at  night  was  murdered.  What  should 
be  the  punishment  for  this  crime?” 

The  sages  said: 

The  face  of  the  murderer  of  friends  has  never  been  seen 
by  us  before.  Keep  him  hooded  with  a  screen.  You  can  hear 
later  what  his  punishment  shall  be. 

Those  sages  pored  over  the  scriptural  texts  and  discussed 
mutually.  The  leading  Brahmanas  then  summoned  the  mes¬ 
sengers  of  Yama  and  told  them: 

"The  scriptural  texts  were  gone  through;  the  Vedas  with 
their  Arigas,  the  Smrti  texts,  the  Puranas,  and  Mlmarhsa  texts 
have  been  consulted  by  us. 

Means  of  expiation  have  been  laid  down  in  the  scriptures 
in  regard  to  Brahmana-slaughter,  imbibing  liquor,  theft  and 
carnal  approach  to  the  wife  of  preceptor  but  there  is  no  way 
of  atonement  for  the  ungrateful  (one  who  kills  his  friend). 

Means  of  expiation  have  been  prescribed  in  regard  to  those 
who  kill  women,  preceptors,  Brahmanas  and  children.  But  there 
is  nothing  by  way  of  expiation  for  the  ungrateful.  Means  of 
expiation  have  been  enjoined  in  regard  to  those  sinners  who 
demolish  tanks,  wells  and  lakes,  to  those  wicked  people  who 
cut  off  and  demolish  gardens  and  parks,  to  those  who  burn 
forests,  to  those  who  injure  lives,  to  those  who  administer  poison, 


V.iii.209.93-103 


593 


who  deceive  their  masters,  who  forsake  parents  and  precep¬ 
tors,  who  find  fault  with  others,  to  a  woman  who  is  disloyal  to 
her  husband,  to  a  woman  who  destroys  foetus,  to  a  woman 
bereft  of  discrimination,  who  takes  food  without  taking  bath, 
who  takes  two  meals  on  the  Vaisnavavasara  (on  the  eleventh 
lunar  day)  etc.  A  way  of  acquittal  by  expiation  is  seen  in  regard 
to  all  those  women  but  not  to  those  who  betray  trust  and  to 
men  who  are  inimical  to  their  friends.  They  have  no  salvation 
(expiation)  according  to  the  Vedas.  What  need  one  say  of  the 
Puranas!  In  the  case  of  such  sinners  there  is  no  way  of  expi¬ 
ation. 

93-103.  No  other  way  of  salvation  has  been  heard  by  us  for 
killers  of  friends  and  of  those  who  have  trusted. 

O  messengers  of  Yama,  take  this  betrayer  of  trust  from  this  place. 
Let  him  be  cast  into  all  the  Narakas  numbering  thirty  crores  severally 
and  by  turns,  for  a  period  of  hundred  crores  of  Kalpas.  You  need  not 
hesitate  in  this  respect. 

On  hearing  these  words,  the  servants  bound  him  and  took 
him  to  cast  him  into  the  terrible  Narakas.  At  the  outset  they 
took  him  to  the  terrible  hell  named  Raurava. 

They  hurled  the  great  sinner  there.  As  soon  as  he  was  put 
there,  a  great  uproar  of  protest  was  heard  from  the  creatures 
suffering  in  that  Naraka:  “This  sinner  should  not  be  left  here. 
Merely  by  touching  him,  our  pain  increases  hundred-fold  as 
though  we  are  cut  with  swords  or  burned  with  well-kindled 
fuel.  What  dirty  thing  did  he  commit?  Just  as  a  good  man  is 
reduced  to  a  low  status  due  to  association  with  an  evil  one,  so 
is  the  case  with  the  proximity  of  this  fellow.  It  is  like  sprinkling 
acid  on  a  wound.  May  this  favour  be  done.  Let  him  be  taken 
to  another  Naraka.” 

On  being  requested  thus  by  them,  they  went  towards  Asuci, 
The  residents  of  that  hell  shouted  like  those  in  the  previous 
ones.  All  those  servants  wandered  from  hell  to  hell.  Thus  that 
evil-minded  sinner  had  no  place  of  rest  even  in  Naraka.  The 
situation  being  such,  all  of  them  took  him  to  the  presence  of 
Yama.  They  told  him  whatever  was  voiced  by  the  residents  of 
those  hells  and  asked  him:  “Tell  us.  What  should  be  done  with 
that  fellow  who  has  no  place  even  in  hell?” 


594 


Skanda  Purana 


Yama  said: 

104-109.  Let  this  foulest  sinner  fall  into  brutish  wombs  for 
periods  of  time  as  mentioned  by  the  sages.  Let  him  be  forced 
into  the  wombs  of  brutish  creatures. 

When  these  words  were  uttered  by  the  Controller  of  subjects 
(i.e.  Yama),  the  fellow  attained  birth  successively  as  worms 
living  in  feces.  Thereafter  he  became  a  fly,  mosquito,  ant, 
louse,  bug  etc.,  by  turns  and  then  a  bird. 

Thereafter,  he  became  an  immobile  being  (like  a  tree)  and 
then  he  attained  the  slate  of  a  rock.  Then  he  became  a  reptile, 
python,  boar,  deer,  elephant,  wolf,  dog,  mule,  camel,  pig,  do¬ 
mestic  animals,  ass  and  buffalo  and  other  similar  wombs  of 
brutish  creatures  successively.  At  the  end  he  became  a  beast 
of  burden  in  the  abode  of  a  righteous  king  of  great  fame. 

110-117.  Once  that  excellent  king  noted  that  Karttiki 
(the  full-moon  day  in  the  month  of  Karttika)  was  imminent. 
He  summoned  his  priest  and  many  other  Brahmanas  and  said: 
“This  I  have  heard  often  that  Karttiki  festival  should  not  be 
celebrated  at  home.  Tell  me,  O  excellent  Brahmanas,  where 
we  all  shall  go  in  a  body.  It  is  the  injunction  of  the  Sruli.  ‘He 
who  spends  the  Karttiki  day  without  holy  bath,  Dana  and  other 
rites  loses  the  Punya  performed  in  the  course  of  a  year.’ 
Hence  we  shall  assiduously  go  in  a  body  to  a  TIrtha  with  all 
good  features  in  order  to  take  the  holy  bath  and  make  gifts 
in  accordance  with  our  capacity.” 

When  these  words  were  uttered  by  the  king,  the  excellent 
Brahmanas  said:  “O  excellent  king,  on  the  northern  bank  of 
Reva,  there  is  a  TIrtha  yielding  salvation,  well-known  as  Bharesvara 
TIrtha.  We  shall  all  go  there.  It  is  capable  of  wiping  off  all 
sins.” 

On  being  told  so,  the  king  took  with  him  plenty  of  money  and 
filled  a  cart  with  all  this.  That  beast  of  burden  was  Sahadevawho  after 
committing  the  murder  of  his  friend,  had  now  reached  the  species 
of  a  bull.  He  was  yoked  to  the  cart. 

118-127.  Thus  he  reached  the  excellent  TIrtha  on  the 
banks  of  Narmada.  After  going  there,  he  waited  patiently  for 
the  fast  on  the  fourteenth  lunar  day. 


V-iii-209. 128-1 38 


595 


The  procedure  of  worship  (w  119-145) 

On  that  day,  he  went  to  the  banks  of  Narmada  uttering  the 
name  of  Rudra  many  times  attentively.  Thereafter,  uttering 
the  following  Mantra  he  took  some  mud  from  a  clean  place: 
“You  were  lifted  up  by  the  Boar  and  the  hundred-armed  Rudra. 

I  shall  also  lift  (you)  up  along  with  the  progeny  and  the  bind¬ 
ing/ 

After  taking  the  mud  and  casting  it  down  on  the  northern 
bank,  he  looked  at  the  Sun.  Then  with  the  following  Mantra 
he  applied  the  mud  over  the  body:  “O  Earth  trodden  over  by 
horses,  traversed  over  by  chariot,  walked  over  by  Visnu,  O 
Earth,  dispel  my  sin  acquired  in  the  course  of  hundred  crores 
of  births.” 

Afterwards  entering  into  the  water  he  uttered  the  following 
Mantra:  “O  Narmada  of  meritorious  waters,  your  water  has 
originated  from  Sankara.  May  it  dispel  the  sins  incurred  by  me 
even  as  I  take  my  holy  bath.” 

After  performing  the  holy  ablution  as  per  this  procedure, 
he  offered  libations  to  Pitrs  and  Devas,  went  to  the  shrine 
taking  with  him  the  requisite  offerings. 

In  his  presence  he  devoutly  meditated  upon  Sankara,  the 
benefactor  of  the  world. 

In  accordance  with  the  injunctions  laid  down  in  the  Puranas, 
he  began  the  worship.  Fourfold  worship  of  the  Lord  during. 
Sivaratri  is  being  prescribed. 

In  the  first  Yama  (Watch)  (a  period  of  3  hours)  the  king 
bathed  Sankara  with  Pancagavya.  The  filling-up  was  afterwards 
performed  with  ghee  by  the  excellent  king. 

128-138.  At  the  outset  incense  and  lights  were  offered 
with  due  Sankalpa  (ritualistic  utterance  of  what  is  proposed  to 
be  done).  Arghya  was  offered  to  the  Lord  of  Devas,  Sankara, 
with  the  Mantra  recited  as: 

“Obeisance  to  you,  O  Lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas,  O  Sarhbhu 
the  ultimate  cause.  O  Lord,  accept  this  Arghya  and  remove  the 
sin  in  the  form  of  Samsara  (mundane  existence).  Gold  conse¬ 
crated  with  Mantras  has  been  given  according  to  the  financial 
capacity.  Agni  alone  represents  all  the  Devas  and  gold  is  (ob¬ 
tained)  from  fire. 'Hence  all  Devas  may  become  pleased  by  the 
gift  of  gold.  May  Sankara  be  always  pleased  with  the  person 
offering  Arghya .” 


596  Skanda  Purdna 

According  to  this  procedure  Siva  was  worshipped  by  him  in 
the  first  Yama. 

The  procedure  at  the  outset  is  the  same  for  the  second 
Yama. 

(The  king)  bathed  the  Slayer  of  Tripuras  with  cow’s  milk. 
The  filling-up  of  the  Linga  of  the  Trident-bearing  Lord  was 
later  performed  with  raw  rice  grains. 

Following  the  procedure  mentioned  earlier  a  pair  of  white 
cloth  was  given  because  a  pair  of  white  cloth  is  very  dear  to 
Sankara.  Sarhbhu  becomes  pleased  when  white  cloth  is  offered. 

On  observing  that  the  third  Yama  had  arrived,  the  excellent  king 
bathed  the  Lord  with  honey  and  filling-up  was  done  by  means  of 
gingelly  seeds. 

Uttering  the  following  Mantra,  a  Drona  (a  measure)  of  gingelly 
seeds  should  be  offered:  “Whether  the  gingelly  seeds  are  white 
or  black,  they  dispel  all  sins.  May  my  bond  be  cut  off  by  this 
gift  of  a  Drona  of  gingelly  seeds.” 

According  to  this  procedure  the  king  concluded  the  worship 
of  that  Yama  of  the  night.  Then  he  performed  the  rite  of 
Jagarana  along  with  entertainments  and  the  chanting  of  the 
Vedic  passages.  The  adoration  of  Sambhu,  which  is  a  source 
of  acquiring  much  merit,  was  done. 

139-147.  O  son  of  KuntI,  even  Yajvins  (those  who  per¬ 
form  Yajnas)  do  not  get  the  goal  which  those  persons  get,  the 
persons  who  auspiciously  abide  by  the  Jagarana  (keeping  awake) 
rite  of  the  Three-eyed  Lord,  during  Sivaratri  in  a  shrine  of 
Bhava  (Siva).  Whatever  may  be  the  sins,  sins  acquired  in  the 
course  of  crores  of  births,  if  Jagarana  of  Hara  and  Kesava  is 
performed  and  the  devotees  take  holy  bath,  those  sins  perish. 

O  king,  the  devotees  derive  the  benefit  of  an  Asvamedha  for 
each  of  the  moments  spent  during  the  night  in  the  rite  of 
Jagarana.  No  one  shall  obtain  the  same  goal  even  if  people  are 
engaged  in  the  observance  of  fasts,  staying  in  the  shrines,  listening 
to  pious  narratives,  meditating  on  Hara  and  Kesava  or  in  performing 
Kratu  (sacrifice)  with  much  gold  (given  as  gift).  The  Tithi 
(lunar  day)  of  Sivaratri  is  meritorious  and  KarttikI  is  specially 
so,  the  northern  bank  of  Reva  and  Bharesvara  Tirtha  too  are 
so. 

How  can  then  the  sin  of  one  who  keeps  awake  not  perish? 
Thus  that  Lord  of  men  kept  awake  during  Sivaratri.  When  it 


V.iii.209.148-159 


597 


dawned  bright,  he  went  to  the  excellent  banks  of  Narmada  and 
thought:  ‘It  was  through  the  help  of  these  animals  that  pulled 
the  carts  etc.,  that  I  could  come  to  the  Tirtha  and  have  my  holy 
bath.  I  shall,  therefore,  make  them  also  have  the  (benefit  of) 
the  bath.’ 

Then  all  the  vehicles,  elephants  etc.,  were  thus  bathed  by 
him.  The  merchant  who  passed  through  the  various  births  of 
creatures  etc.  and  was  standing  in  the  middle  was  also  bathed. 

148-159.  With  these  in  view,  he  made  some  gifts  in  ac¬ 

cordance  with  his  capacity.  By  means  of  this  rite,  a  man  be¬ 
comes  rid  of  the  defects  (sins)  brought  about  through  (riding) 
the  vehicles.  Otherwise  the  profit  (benefit)  acquired  solely 
goes  to  them. 

After  bathing  them,  the  king  himself  took  his  holy  bath  in 
accordance  with  the  injunctions;  offered  libations  to  Pitrs  and 
Devas,  performed  the  Sraddha  rite  duly,  offered  balls  of  rice 
to  Pitrs,  ritualistically  released  a  bull  endowed  with  all  good 
characteristics,  went  to  the  holy  shrine,  bathed  Lord  Sankara 
successively  with  the  waters  of  the  Tirtha,  Pancagavya,  Pancamrta, 
waters  containing  all  medicinal  herbs  and  finally  with  pure 
water. 

Then  Sankara  was  smeared  with  sweet-smelling  sandalpaste. 
The  fourth  filling-up  of  the  Linga  was  performed  with  saffron, 
camphor,  diverse  kinds  of  scents  and  clusters  of  fragrant  flow¬ 
ers  by  the  excellent  king  who  followed  the  previous  procedure. 

Afterwards  gift  of  a  cow  was  made  in  accordance  with  the 
rites  laid  down  in  the  scriptural  injunctions  (uttering  the  fol¬ 
lowing  Mantra):  “O  cow,  you  are  of  the  form  of  Rudra.  You 
have  been  created  by  Rudra.  Redeem  me  from  falling  into 
unfathomable  ocean  of  mundane  existence.” 

A  well-adorned  cow  should  be  gifted  with  this  procedure. 
Aiter  requesting  the  Lord  of  the  chiefs  of  Devas  for  pardon, 
the  devotee  should  feed  many  Brahmanas  with  six  types  of 
foodstuff.  They  should  be  honoured  with  clothes.  After  adoring 
them  with  diverse  kinds  of  monetary  gifts,  the  devotee  requests 
them  for  forgiveness. 

The  Lord  of  the  Earth  did  everything  and  took  food  himself 
later  along  with  his  attendants.  He  stayed  there  for  that  night. 
Even  as  he  spent  the  night  there  thus,  he  heard  the  utterance 
of  a  divine  voice  in  the  sky  at  mid-night. 


598 


Skanda  Purana 


The  Voice  said: 

160-168.  O  king,  ihe  benefit  will  accrue  to  the  world  all 
round  now.  Wicked  souls  that  had  fallen  into  the  ocean  of 
mundane  existence  derive  benefit  merely  by  their  being  present 
(in  the  TIrtha).  How  it  is  so  is  being  described,  if  it  can  be 
cause  of  elation  to  one  born  in  the  family  of  Santanu 
(Dharmaputra) . 

Now  in  your  house  there  is  a  beast  of  burden.  By  this  fellow 
the  sin  of  killing  a  friend  and  committing  breach  of  trust  was 
incurred  in  a  previous  birth,  with  more  than  a  thousand  other 
rebirths  intervening.  He  was  stationed  in  Narakas  due  to  the 
sin.  Then  he  was  born  and  reborn  into  thousands  of  wombs 
of  creatures.  That  wicked  fellow  finally  was  born  as  a  bull  in 
your  abode.  In  the  course  of  the  present  religious  festival,  he 
was  bathed  in  the  TIrtha  by  you.  He  witnessed  the  worship 
performed  by  you  and  also  kept  awake.  Thereby  he  has  be¬ 
come  rid  of  sins.  In  front  of  you,  O  king,  he  will  cast  off  his 
body  and  go  to  heaven  seated  in  an  aerial  chariot. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

As  soon  as  this  was  uttered,  the  bull,  the  beast  of  burden, 
fell  dead.  Instantly  he  was  seen  seated  in  an  aerial  chariot.  He 
bowed  down  to  the  leading  king  and  said  smilingly: 

The  Vrsa  (Bull)  said: 

169-179.  O  most  excellent  one  among  eminent  kings, 
indeed  the  efficacy  of  the  TIrtha  is  very  great,  since  a  man  like 
me  is  rid  of  all  sins.  I  have  realized  completely.  There  is  no 
other  sinner  like  me,  on  a  par  with  me. 

Henceforth  what  more  shall  I  do  except  glorifying  the  TIrtha? 
You  aie  my  mother.  You  are  my  brother.  You  are  also  my 
grandfather.  I  should  be  excused.  I  am  bowing  down  to  you. 
It  is  such  a  splendid  TIrtha  where  people  like  me  attain  a 
bright  status.  I  do  not  know  what  your  fate  would  be. 

You  have  propitiated  Mahesana  after  adoring  him  duly.  What 
would  be  the  fate  in  your  case!  O  Lord,  grant  me  permission 
to  go.  These  groups  of  divine  beings  stationed  in  heaven  are 
prompting  me  to  hurry  up.  Hail  unto  you!  I  shall  go. 


V.iii.209.180-186 


599 


After  saying  this,  he  vanished  in  a  moment. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

When  the  bull  vanished  there  the  king  was  amazed.  He  went 
to  his  city  extolling  the  incomparable  greatness  of  the  TIrtha. 

Such  is  that  TIrtha  situated  on  Narmada,  destructive  of  all 
sins,  excellent,  dispelling  all  miseries. 

Minor  sins  perish  merely  on  account  of  holy  bath,  O  descen¬ 
dant  of  Bharata.  On  the  fourteenth  lunar  day  in  the  month 
of  Karttika,  a  devotee  should  observe  fast  and  fill  the  Linga  in 
four  ways.  Listen  to  the  benefit  of  that  merit. 

By  the  power  of  these  four  the  great  sins  perish,  viz.  those 
of  Brahmana-slaughter,  imbibing  liquor,  stealing  and  carnally 
approaching  the  wife  of  preceptor.  He  gets  the  excellent  benefit 
of  an  Asvamedha  Yajha. 

One  who  has  observed  fast  on  the  fourteenth  lunar  day  in 
the  bright  half  of  the  month  of  Karttika  should  make  the  gift 
of  gold  in  that  TIrtha.  He  gets  the  benefit  of  Yajna. 

180-186.  On  the  eighth  and  fourteenth  days  of  the  month 
of  Vaisakha  too  (observe)  as  before.  By  making  a  lamp  of 
flourcake  the  devotee  causes  salvation  to  Pitrs. 

Whatever  is  given  as  Dana  there,  even  if  it  be  as  little  as  the 
tip  of  a  hair,  shall  have  everlasting  benefit.  So  says  Mahesvara. 

O  king,  men  who  die  in  Bharabhuti  become  purified  in 
their  souls.  They  will  reach  the  goal  of  Sivaloka  from  where 
there  is  no  return. 

Or  for  the  sake  of  the  growth  in  avocation  of  the  world,  he 
will  desire  to  conquer  the  mortal  world.  He  is  reborn  in  a  pure 
family  of  Brahmanas  who  have  mastered  the  Vedas  with  their 
Angas.  He  will  live  for  a  hundred  years  rich  with  wealth  and 
foodgrain  and  possessing  Vedic  lore.  He  will  be  free  from  all 

ailments.  . 

Again  he  will  come  to  that  TIrtha  and  attain  the  eternal 
region.  Thus,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  O  excellent  king,  the 
meritorious  story  destructive  of  sins  has  been  recounted  to 
you.  Next  to  it  listen  to  another  great  narrative. 


600 


Skanda  Parana 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TEN 
The  Greatness  of  Punkhila  Tlrtha 
Sri  Marhandeya  said: 

1-8.  Next,  O  dear  one,  is  the  excellent  Punkhila  Tlrtha.  O 
son  of  Kunti,  it  was  there  in  that  Tlrtha  that  Puhkha  attained 
Siddhi. 

A  holy  sage,  the  son  ofjamadagni,  the  highly  refulgent  destroyer 
of  Ksatriyas,  performed  an  elaborate  penance  there  on  the  northern 
bank  of  Narmada. 

Ever  since  then,  O  Lord  of  men,  the  Puhkha  Tlrtha  became 
well-known.  He  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tlrtha 
and  propitiates  Paramesvara,  becomes  endowed  with  extraor¬ 
dinary  strength  in  this  world  and  attains  salvation  in  the  other 
world.  He  who  adores  Devas  and  Pitrs  becomes  free  from 
indebtedness  to  Pitrs. 

If  a  man  casts  off  his  life  there  in  the  Tlrt  ha,  he  will  undoubtedly 
proceed  to  Rudraloka  from  where  he  will  have  no  return. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tlrtha,  shall 
obtain  the  merit  of  a  horse-sacrifice.  If  a  man  feeds  a  single 
Brahmana  there  in  that  Tlrtha,  it  is  as  good  as  a  crore  of 
Brahmanas  are  fed. 

Whoever  worships  the  Bull-emblemed  Lord  there  in  the  Tlrtha 
undoubtedly  obtains  the  merit  of  a  Vajapeya  Yajha. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  ELEVEN 
The  Greatness  of  Mundi  'Tlrtha 
Sri  Marhandeya  said: 

1-9.  What  was  done  by  the  Lord  of  Devas  in  regard  to  those 
residing  on  the  banks  of  Narmada,  was  something  very  surpris¬ 
ing  to  the  entire  world.  I  shall  recount  it  to  you  fully.  The  Lord 
assumed  the  form  of  a  leper  and  begged  of  some  miserly  Brahmanas 
at  the  time  of  Sraddha.  He  had  smeared  himself  with  red 
sandalpaste  as  unguent. 


V.iii.211.10-17 


601 


There  were  bubbles  of  exudation  from  his  limbs.  He  was 
fully  covered  with  worms  and  flies.  He  had  a  foul  face  and  his 
skin  was  sorely  infested.  He  was  stinking  and  he  faltered  at 
every  step. 

He  went  to  the  abode  of  a  Brahmana  and  stumbling  at  the 
door  said  thus:  “O  householder,  I  wish  to  take  well-cooked  and 
consecrated  food  today  at  your  house  along  with  these  Brahmanas.” 

On  seeing  the  Brahmana  with  foul  effusions  all  over  the 
body,  the  Brahmanas  in  the  company  of  the  householder  said: 
"Fie  upon  you!  Fie  upon  you!  O  stinking  fellow,  get  out.  O  base 
Brahmana,  get  away  from  this  house  quickly.  Since  you  looked 
at  it,  this  consecrated  foodstuff  has  become  unworthy  of  being 
eaten  by  everyone. 

“That  is  so”,  said  Mahesvara,  the  Lord  of  Devas.  Even  as  he 
was  being  watched  by  the  excellent  Brahmanas,  he  rose  into 
the  clear  sky.  When  the  Lord  later  vanished,  the  Brahmanas 
took  bath  and  sprinkled  themselves  with  water  all  around. 

When  they  were  about  to  take  their  food  separately  in  the 
different  platters,  they  saw  worms  and  worms  wherever  they 
looked. 

10-17.  On  seeing  it,  all  of  them  were  amazed  and  said: 
“What  is  this?”  Then  one  of  them  said:  “This  Brahmana  is 
Brahma  himself;  he  has  many  good  qualities.” 

Another  said:  “He  had  come  here  before  in  the  assembly  of 
many  Brahmanas  somewhat  hesitatingly.  He  is  Paramesvaia, 
the  great  Yogin. 

This  transformation  of  foods  is  his  playful  practical  joke,  the 
result  of  our  rebuking  him,  not  of  anybody  else.  It  is  declared 
by  the  scriptures  that  a  guest  should  be  honoured.  If  not,  the 
result  would  be  unpleasant.  He  is  worthy  of  adoration,  being 
the  supreme  Soul  and  a  guest  in  particular.  If  anyone  does  not 
honour  a  guest  who  comes  at  the  time  of  Sraddha,  Pisacas  and 

Raksasas  spoil  it  undoubtedly. 

In  regard  to  a  guest,  we  should  not  considered  whether  he 
is  handsome  or  ugly,  dirty  or  wearing  dirty  clothes,  Yoglndra 

or  a  Candala.”  ....  ,  , , 

On  hearing  these  words,  the  Brahmanas  with  the  householder 

as  their  leader,  rushed  to  all  the  directions  in  search  of  the 
Brahmana  guest. 


602 


Skanda  Parana 


Somehow  someone  saw  him  hidden  in  a  thick  forest  and 
shouted:  “He  is  seen."  All  of  them  came  there  and  saw  the 
Brahmana  standing  steady  like  a  post. 

18-22.  He  did  not  flicker  or  move,  shout  or  see.  Some  of 
them  lamented  piteously;  others  began  to  pray  with  pleasing 
words.  Thus  the  Three-eyed  Lord  was  eulogized.  Then  they 
requested:  “O  Lord  of  Devas,  the  cooked  food  of  the  hungry 
Brahmanas  is  utterly  spoiled.  It  behoves  you  to  make  it  good.” 

O  Yudhisthira,  on  hearing  the  words  of  those  Brahmanas, 
the  Lord  became  pleased  and  said  to  them  with  great  compas¬ 
sion: 

“O  highly  esteemed  ones,  I  have  become  pleased.  So  I  have 
made  that  same  food  of  yours  pure  like  nectar.  May  the  Brahmanas 
eat  it  along  with  their  kinsmen  and  servants.  Let  them  worship 
my  Mandala  (mystical  circle)  everyday. 

Thereat,  O  son  of  KuntI,  that  shrine  became  famous  by  the 
name  Mundi.  On  the  day  of  the  KarttikI  festival  it  is  particu¬ 
larly  on  a  par  with  Gayatirtha. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWELVE 
The  Greatness  of  Ekasala  Dindimesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-10.  Henceforth  I  shall  recount  another  superb  act  of 
the  Lord.  Merely  on  hearing  it,  one  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

Assuming  the  exact  disguise  of  a  begging  mendicant,  Mahesvara, 
the  Lord  of  Devas,  went  to  village  Ekasala  seeking  alms.  He  was 
hungry  and  thirsty. 

He  had  smeared  himself  with  holy  ash  and  had  a  rosary 
displayed  in  his  hand.  The  Lord  of  the  universe  had  his  matted 

hair  and  earrings  for  his  ornaments.  The  trident  shone  in  his 
hand. 

Clad  in  elephant  hide,  the  Lord  of  huge  physical  form  was 
embellished  with  the  great  serpents.  He  was  playing  on  his 
splendid  Damaruka  (hand-drum)  resembling  a  Dindima 

The  Lord  had  a  skull  in  his  hand.  He  was  surrounded  by 


V.iii.213.1-6 


603 


many  boys.  Dancing  and  singing,  laughing  and  playing  at  times, 
he  moved  on. 

The  Lord  sportingly  placed  down  the  Dindima  on  some 
houses.  Wherever  he  placed  it  down,  the  house  collapsed  by 
its  weight. 

Moving  thus  the  Lord  was  surrounded  by  many  men.  The 
Lord  was  sometimes  visible  and  sometimes  not  visible.  Thus 
the  Lord  came  out  of  the  crowd.  He  began  to  run  about  here 
and  there.  Whenever  he  became  invisible,  the  men  stood 
perplexed.  They  thought  that  it  should  be  Sambhu  himself. 
Then  they  eulogized  him. 

Even  as  they  devoutly  eulogized  Sankara,  the  Lord  of  the 
worlds  was  seen  stationed  in  the  form  of  Dindi  (ma).  Ever 
since  then,  the  Lord  of  Devas  is  called  Dindimesvara.  By  seeing 
and  touching  him,  one  is  rid  of  all  sins. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  THIRTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Amalesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Further  I  shall  recount  another  superb  (miraculous) 
act  of  the  Lord.  Merely  by  listening  to  it,  one  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

Though  not  a  boy,  Sambhu  himself  in  the  form  of  a  boy  was 
playing  along  with  rustic  boys.  He  was  playing  with  the  fruits 
of  embylic  myrobalan.  I  shall  narrate  it  to  you,  O  descendant 
of  Bharata. 

The  fruits,  O  son  of  Pandu,  thrown  by  the  Lord  were  brought  back 
immediately  by  them  and  Hara  threw  them  thereafter. 

By  the  time  the  Amalaka  fruits  went  to  the  various  quarters 
and  came  back  therefrom,  they  saw  the  fruits  in  the  form  of 
a  Bhuta  (ghost)  of  huge  size. 

The  third  act  of  the  Lord  took  place  in  the  greatest  of  the 

I  holy  spots,  the  excellent  Amalesvara.  Merely  by  adoring  it,  one 

attains  the  greatest  region  (Moksa). 

J 

i 


604 


Skanda  Parana 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  FOURTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Sri  Kapala  Tirlha 
Sri  Mdrkandcya  said: 

1-11.  I  shall  recount  the  fourth  great  act  of  the  Lord.  Merely 
by  listening  to  it,  one  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

The  lord  wandered  over  the  earth  as  a  Kapalin  (holder  of 
a  skull)  wearing  patched  garments.  He  was  surrounded  by  Pisacas, 
Raksasas,  Dakinis,  and  YoginTs. 

He  assumed  the  form  of  a  Bhairava  and  resorted  to  a  cre¬ 
mation  ground  where  he  performed  an  elaborate  penance  causing 
freedom  from  fear  to  all  the  three  worlds.  He  spent  the  Asadha 
month  there.  Hence  his  name  AsadhI  became  well-known. 

In  another  place,  the  Kanthd  (patched  garment)  was  left  by 
Lord  Paramesthin.  Ever  since  then,  O  great  king,  he  is  called 
Kanlhesvara.  By  visiting  him,  one  obtains  the  merit  of  a  horse- 
sacrifice. 

Then  the  Deva  continued  his  spontaneous  wanderings.  He 
met  a  Balakara  (vendor  of  gum  myrrh  or  the  shoot  of  the 
plant).  He  was  told  by  Hara:  "O  fair  one,  if  you  do  not  become 
angry  with  me  now  (I  have  a  request).  Fill  (cover  up)  the  Liiiga 
with  Bala.  I  shall  give  you  plenty  of  money.” 

On  being  told  thus  by  the  Lord,  the  pedlar  was  deluded  by 
covetousness.  He  fitted  Bala  to  the  Lingas.  They  were  of  high 
and  medium  quality.  He  went  on  filling  till  his  stock  was  ex¬ 
hausted.  On  seeing  the  Liiiga  still  standing  erect,  he  became 
worried. 

On  seeing  him  thus  agitated,  Paramesvara  broke  it  into  pieces 
and  said  laughingly:  “My  Liiiga  was  not  filled.  I  shall  go  away 
if  you  consider  it  to  be  necessary  (if  you  allow  me).  I  shall  give 
you  the  money  if  the  Liiiga  is  filled-up.” 

The  Vanik  ( Pedlar )  said: 

12-18.  I  have  not  performed  meritorious  deeds.  I  am  not 
blessed.  O  Paramesvara,  I  have  to  be  bound  over.  Unable  to 
do  something  pleasing  to  you,  1  will  regret  it  for  a  long  time. 

On  hearing  these  words  of  the  son  of  a  Vanik,  O  descendant  of 
Bharata,  Mahesvara  gave  him  inexhaustible  wealth  and  stationed 
himself  there. 


V.iii.215.1— 216.3 


605 


Ever  since  then,  O  great  king,  the  Liiiga  stood  there  with 
a  desire  to  bless  the  worlds.  It  appeared  as  though  adorned 
with  Balakas  (Cranes)  in  order  to  give  credence. 

The  path  made  by  the  Lord  and  well-established  sportingly 
became  well-known  in  all  the  three  worlds  as  “Devamarga”.  He 
who  views  this  and  worships  it,  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

He  who  goes  to  Devamarga  and  worships  Balakesvara,  reaches 
Pancayatana  and  goes  to  Rudraloka. 

Men  who  die  in  Devamarga  become  purified  souls.  They  do 
not  come  back  again  from  Rudraloka. 

O  most  excellent  one  among  men,  by  listening  devoutly  to 
the  greatness  of  Devamarga,  one  is  rid  of  all  sins.  No  hesitation 
need  be  felt  in  believing  this. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  FIFTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Srhgi  Tirlha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-2.  Thereafter,  one  should  go  to  the  Srhgi  Tirtha  that 
accords  salvation  unto  all  embodied  beings.  O  great  king,  there 
is  no  doubt  about  the  attainment  of  salvation  by  those  who  die 

there 

There  itself  one  should  offer  balls  of  rice.  Thereby  one 
becomes  free  from  indebtedness  to  Pitrs.  Becoming  a  purified 
soul  by  that  merit,  he  attains  the  goal  of  Ganesvaras. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  SIXTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Asadlii 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3  Thereafter,  O  prince,  a  person  should  go  to  AsadhI 
Tirtha  where  Mahesvara  has  stationed  himself  after  assuming 
a  lovely  form.  This  Tirtha  pertains  to  all  the  four  Yugas.  It  is 


606 


Skanda  Parana 


the  most  excellent  one  among  all  the  TIrthas.  By  taking  his 
holy  bath  there,  O  king,  a  man  shall  become  an  attendant  of 
Rudra. 

If  anyone  casts  his  life  into  that  Tirtha  there,  his  departure 
to  Rudraloka  will  certainly  be  one  without  any  return. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  SEVENTEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Erandi  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-3.  Then  one  should  go  to  the  confluence  of  Erandi  (with 
Reva)  which  is  bowed  to  by  Suras  and  Asuras.  That  Tirtha  is 
highly  meritorious  and  destructive  of  great  sins. 

A  devotee  should  observe  fast  with  perfect  restraint  of  the 
sense-organs  and  mind.  Then  he  takes  his  holy  bath  in  accor¬ 
dance  with  the  injunctions;  he  is  rid  of  the  sin  of  Brahmana- 
slaughter. 

If  anyone  devoudy  puts  an  end  to  his  life  there  in  that  Tirtha,  he 
will  undoubtedly  go  to  Rudraloka  without  any  return  therefrom. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  EIGHTEEN 


The  Greatness  of  famadagnya  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-10.  Thereafter,  O  Lord  of  the  Earth,  a  person  should  go 
to  the  highly  splendid  Tirtha  well-known  as  Jamadagni  Tirtha 
where  Janardana  became  a  Siddha. 


Yudhisthira  said: 


O  excellent  Brihmatta,  how  did  Vasudeva,  the  preceptor  of 
the  tttnverre ,  become  a  Siddha?  I5  it  by  assuming  human  form 
with  a  desire  for  the  welfare  of  all  the  worlds? 


V.iii. 218.1 1-20 


607 


I  wish  to  hear  the  full  story  of  the  Discus-bearing  Lord  of 
Devas  properly.  O  sinless  one,  may  it  be  recounted  by  you. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

O  great  king,  formerly  there  was  a  great  ruler  of  the  Haihaya 
clan.  He  was  known  as  Karttavlrya,  a  king  with  a  thousand 
arms. 

He  was  richly  equipped  with  elephants,  horses  and  chariots. 
He  was  the  most  excellent  one  among  all  warriors  wielding 
weapons.  He  was  also  a  master  of  the  Vedic  lore.  He  granted 
freedom  from  fear  to  all  living  beings.  He  was  the  Lord  of  the 
city  of  Mahismati.  He  was  a  glorious  king,  owner  of  an  Aksauhinl. 

Once  that  mighty  king  set  out  for  hunting  deer.  After  many 
days,  he  reached  the  excellent  Bhrgukaccha  where  Jamadagni, 
the  highly  refulgent  ascetic,  was  staying. 

The  glorious  sage  was  in  the  company  of  Renuka.  He  was 
the  bestower  of  freedom  from  fear  on  all  living  beings.  Lord 
Narayana  himself  was  born  as  his  son  Rama. 

He  (Rama)  was  a  knower  of  Brahman,  an  excellent  Brahmana 
but  possessing  all  the  qualities  of  a  Ksatriya.  With  his  genuine 
devotion,  he  indeed  delighted  his  parents. 

Jamadagni  of  great  refulgence  met  Arjuna  who  was  out  hunting 
deer  and  invited  him  as  his  guest. 

11-20.  Saying  ‘yes’,  the  king  went  into  the  meritorious 
hermitage  along  with  his  attendants,  army  and  vehicles.  The 
hermitage  of  the  noble-souled  sage  instantly  became  richly 
equipped  and  enveloped  in  great  glory. 

Seeing  this  amazing  transformation,  the  king  entered  it  and 
was  promptly  served  (fed)  with  his  attendants  and  army. 

Casually  he  (Karttavlrya)  asked  the  cause  thereof  (of  this 
transformation).  After  coming  to  know  that  the  power  of 
Kamadhenu  was  the  cause,  he  said  to  the  Brahmana: 

"O  Brahmana,  give  me  this  excellent  cow  of  variegated  colour 
as  a  donation.  In  return  I  shall  give  you  hundred,  a  hundred 
thousand  or  even  millions  of  embellished  cows.” 

Jamadagni  said: 

I  will  not  give  away  this  excellent  Kamadhenu  in  lieu  of  ten 
thousands,  hundred  thousands  and  even  crores  of  other  cows. 
You  may  go. 


608 


Skanda  Purdna 


On  being  told  thus  by  that  Brahmana,  O  descendant  of 
Bharata,  the  eminent  king  spoke  these  words  with  his  eyes 
turned  red:  "O  base  Brahmana,  even  in  regard  to  me  you  have 
such  self-willedness.  Hence  even  as  you  are  watching,  I  will 
take  away  the  divine  cow  from  your  house.” 

The  Brahmana  said: 

Who  dares  to  play  with  a  great  angry  serpent?  One  who 
dares  to  take  away  my  cow  will  be  sure  to  he  met  by  the  god 
of  Death  on  the  way. 

After  saying  this  the  furious  Jamadagni  seized  a  huge  staff, 
like  another  Brahmadanda  (the  staff  of  Brahma)  and  uttered 
thus: 

21-31.  “Whoever  has  the  power  or  brilliance  of  a  Ksalriya, 
O  base  one  in  the  (Ksatriya)  family,  let  him  take  away  my  cow 
immediately.  His  life  along  with  that  of  his  followers  will  be 
reduced  and  crippled.” 

On  hearing  these  cruel  words,  Haihaya  accompanied  by  hun¬ 
dreds  rushed  in  but  when  struck  by  the  Brahmadanda,  he  fell 
down  on  the  ground. 

The  cow  produced  a  gruff  “ Hum ”  sound  and  from  that  cow 
of  variegated  colour  thousands  were  seen  issuing  forth  (from 
her  nostrils)  with  swords,  nooses  and  other  weapons.  The  Kiratas 
came  out  from  her  nostrils  and  tips  of  the  hair.  The  Magadhas 
came  out  of  the  anus.  Hundreds  and  thousands  of  other  war¬ 
riors  issued  forth  from  the  other  pores.1  They  killed  each  other. 
Haihaya  (King  Arjuna)  burned  them.  All  those  perished  along 
with  the  Brahmanas  due  to  that  refulgence  of  Arjuna. 

After  gaining  victory  in  the  battle  and  killing  the  excellent 
Brahmana,  Karttavirya  joyously  went  to  his  city.  Evidently  the 
king  was  deluded  by  the  prompting  of  the  god  of  Death. 

Only  when  the  enemy  had  gone  away  did  Rama  hurrying 
homewai  ds  came  theie.  He  saw  his  mother  piteously  lament¬ 
ing  near  his  father. 


1.  Here  a  few  verses  are  missing,  apparently  of  the  following  import:  ‘They 
fought  against  the  army  of  Haihaya.  The  mutual  fight  was  very  tumultu¬ 
ous.  1 


V.iii.21 8.32-48 


609 


Rama  said: 

By  whom  has  this  rash  act  been  committed,  only  to  invite 
self-destruction?  He  who  has  thought  of  killing  my  father  has 
been  prompted  by  the  desire  to  meet  Death. 

On  hearing  the  words  of  Rama,  she  lost  all  her  strength 
and  got  agitated.  Beating  her  belly  with  both  the  hands,  she 
spoke  to  him: 

The  ruthless  Aijuna  accompanied  with  other  Ksatriyas  came 
here.  By  that  king  endowed  with  (a  thousand)  arms  (Jamadagni) 
was  killed.  See  your  father  senseless  and  bereft  of  life  on  being 
killed.  Cremate  him  duly,  dear  son,  and  perform  the  requisite 
libations.” 

32-40.  On  hearing  these  words,  Rama  paid  obeisance  to 
her  and  took  this  vow.  O  king,  hear  what  it  is:  “I  will  exter¬ 
minate  the  entire  race  of  Ksatriyas  twenty-one  times.  I  will  take 
my  holy  bath  then  and  offer  libations  to  your  husband  with 
their  blood. 

With  my  axe  I  will  cut  off  the  arms  of  that  wicked  Karttavlrya 
and  will  drink  the  blood  thereof.  Listen  to  this  truthful  vow 
of  mine.” 

After  taking  this  solemn  vow,  the  valorous  son  of  Jamadagni 
performed  the  cremation  of  his  father.  At  the  height  of  his 
fury,  Rama  went  to  the  city  of  Mahismati,  cut  off  the  forest  of 
arms  of  that  base  Ksatriya  and  killed  him. 

Then  for  the  annihilation  of  Ksatriyas  he  surveyed  the  whole 
earth  consisting  of  seven  continents,  oceans,  mountains  and 
forests  and  parks. 

He  dug  five  deep  pits  in  Samantapancaka  in  the  Kuru  land 
in  the  four  directions  of  east,  west,  south  and  north  (as  well 
as  the  centre). 

It  has  been  heard  by  us  that  he,  being  extremely  furious 
offered  libations  to  his  Pitrs  with  blood  in  the  eddy-like  pits 
filled  with  (Ksatriya)  blood. 

Thereupon>Rcika  and  other  Pitrs  approached  the  bull  among 
Brahmanas  and  told  him  to  forgive  him.  So  he  stopped  (the 
bloody  revenge). 

41-48.  The  area  around  those  eddy-like  pits  filled  with 
blood  is  glorified  as  the  meritorious  Samantapancaka. 

After  desisting  from  that  activity,  O  son  of  Pandu,  the  highly 


610 


Skanda  Parana 


righteous  Rama  spoke  to  the  Pitrs:  “Let  this  blood  poured  into 
the  five  pits  by  me  become  an  excellent  Tirtha.”  Saying  uSo  it 
shall  be”  all  the  Pitrs  vanished. 

Thus  the  contact  of  Rama  in  Devamarga  by  perception  and 
touch  is  destructive  of  all  sins  of  men,  O  Yudhisthira. 

In  order  to  convince  Renuka  the  Pitrs  as  deities  are  seen 
even  today,  stationed  in  Devamarga.  They  are  destructive  of  all 
sins. 

O  great  king,  by  taking  a  holy  bath  at  the  confluence  of 
Narmada  and  the  ocean  as  per  injunctions  in  the  Tirtha,  men 
are  rid  of  sins. 

O  son  of  KuntI,  the  great  ocean  should  not  be  touched  even 
by  the  tip  of  a  blade  of  Kusa.  O  excellent  king,  one  should  take 
bath  there  reciting  this  Mantra: 

“Obeisance  to  you,  the  Lord  of  waters,  in  the  form  of  Visnu. 
O  Lord  of  Devas,  be  present  in  the  briny  ocean.”  This  is  the 
Sparsana  Mantra  (Mantra  for  touch). 

49-57.  O  Pandava,  one  should  dive  into  the  Lord  of  rivers 
uttering  this  truthful  sentence:  “Agni  is  the  lustre  in  the  body 
with  forgiveness  and  graciousness.  It  is  the  Retas  in  the  body. 
It  is  the  navel  of  Nectar.” 

Then  the  devotee  should  offer  Arghya  to  the  great  ocean 
with  five  jewels,  fruits,  flowers  and  raw  rice  grain.  O  great  king, 
the  Mantra  thereof  is  as  follows: 

“O  Lord  and  chieftain  of  all  immortal  ones,  you  are  the 
storehouse  of  all  jewels.  You  are  the  receptacle  of  all  Ratnakaras 
(oceans  containing  jewels).  Accept  my  Arghya.  Obeisance  to 
you.” 

The  Mantra  for  bidding  good-bye  is  as  follows: 

O  great  Ocean,  redeem  me  from  the  sins  incurred  ever 
since  my  birth.  O  storehouse  of  jewels,  you  have  been  wor¬ 
shipped.  Do  go  now  to  the  mountains,  O  foremost  among 
Parvanas  (those  who  go  on  increasing  at  Paiva  time).  O  Lord, 
you  are  the  powerful  one  getting  the  portals  to  heaven  opened. 
Who  else  can  be  better  than  Lord  Ocean!” 

There  the  excellent  great  Tirtha  extended  upto  the  ocean. 

There  the  Lord  was  installed  by  Rama,  the  son  of  Jamadagni. 
There  Devas,  Gandharvas,  sages,  Siddhas,  and  Caranas  per¬ 
form  the  Upasana  of  the  Three-eyed  Lord  and  the  excellent 
sage  Jamadagni.  Men  who  see  Goddess  Renuka  also  there,  remain 
in  the  pleasing  Sivaloka  for  as  much  .time  as  they  desire. 


V.iii.219.1— 220.7 


611 


A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  and  offers  libations  to 
Pitrs  and  Devas,  shall  redeem  more  than  a  hundred  generations 
of  his  family  from  terrible  Naraka.  They  should  take  the  holy 
bath,  offer  Dana  and  listen  with  devotion  (to  the  narratives). 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  NINETEEN 
The  Greatness  of  Koti  Tirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-6.  On  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada  is  the  great  Tirtha 
called  Kotisvara.  Here  the  holy  bath  and  Dana  etc.,  yield  a 
crore  times  the  benefit. 

Devas,  Gandharvas  and  sages  free  from  sin  attained  great 
Siddhi  here  at  the  Kotitlrtha,  a  rare  thing  to  be  achieved  on 
the  earth. 

Mahadeva  called  Kotisvara  is  installed  there.  By  visiting  him 
one  attains  excellent  Siddhi. 

O  excellent  king,  whatever  is  performed  there,  auspicious 
or  inauspicious,  shall  have  a  crore  times  the  benefit  (or  re¬ 
sult).  This  is  the  statement  of  the  scriptural  texts:  Those  ex¬ 
cellent  sages  who  are  on  the  southern  path  (i.e.  stay  on  the 
southern  bank  of  the  river)  become  Siddhas  on  death  and 
certainly  they  attain  Pitrloka  and  those  excellent  sages  who  are 
the  residents  of  the  northern  bank  have  already  gone  to  Devaloka. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTY 
The  Greatness  of  Lotanesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

1-7.  Thereafter,  O  Lord  of  the  earth,  a  person  should  go 
to  the  excellent  Lotanesvara  Tirtha  on  the  northern  bank  of 
Narmada.  It  is  destructive  of  all  sins. 

The  sins  accumulated  in  the  course  of  seven  births  are- de¬ 
stroyed  at  the  very  instant  of  visiting  the  Lord  of  Devas. 


612 


Skanda  Purana 


The  sins  incurred  since  childhood,  the  sins  committed  dur¬ 
ing  youth  all  perish  by  visiting  the  Lord  of  Devas. 

Yudliisthira  said: 

The  great  (sanctifying)  activity  (efficacy)  of  Narmada  is  amazing 
to  all  the  three  worlds  and  has  been  entirely  narrated  by  you, 
O  Brahmana.  It  is  destructive  of  all  sins. 

I  wish  to  hear  about  one  great  TIrtha  that  yields  the  benefit 
of  all  the  TIrthas  taken  together.  Have  pity  on  me  and  describe 
it  quickly. 

Many  questions  of  very  rare  (solutions)  in  all  the  worlds,  O 
excellent  one,  have  been  heard  (as  clarified  by  you)  by  me 
along  with  my  kinsmen. 

O  foremost  one  among  those  conversant  with  all  the  ques¬ 
tions,  after  hearing  this  sole  question,  with  your  favour,  I  shall 
go  (to  it)  along  with  kinsmen. 

Sri  Mdrkandeya  said: 

8-18.  Excellent!  Excellent!  O  highly  intelligent  one!  There 
is  nothing  difficult  to  attain  in  all  the  three  worlds  to  a  person 
like  you  whose  mental  power  is  like  this. 

O  leader  of  the  descendants  of  Bharata,  one  who  knows 
Dharma  (piety),  Artha  (wealth),  Kama  (love)  and  Moksa  (lib¬ 
eration)  at  the  proper  times,  is  an  intelligent  one  and  this  is 
his  duty.  Hence  I  shall  tell  you  the  splendid  answer  to  this 
question.  On  hearing  it,  men  on  the  earth  are  liberated  from 
all  sins. 

Narmada  is  the  most  excellent  one  among  all  the  rivers.  She 
is  auspicious  and  identical  with  all  the  TIrthas.  A  special  effi¬ 
cacy  thereof  is  said  to  be  in  the  confluence  of  Reva  with  the 
Ocean. 

On  seeing  Reva  coming  on,  O  excellent  king,  the  great 
Ocean  bowed  down  to  her.  On  being  united  with  Reva  he 
thought,  Who  is  this  excellent  river  coming  into  contact  with 
me?’ 

After  reflection  he  realized  that  it  was  the  great  Reva  orig¬ 
inating  from  a  Linga.  (To  express  his  deep  reverence)  the 
great  Ocean  went  on  rolling  (itself  before  her)  when  he  ap¬ 
proached  face  to  face.  Where  the  great  river  Narmada  entered 
the  Ocean,  a  Linga  of  the  chief  Lord  of  Devas  arose  there. 


V.iii.220.19-27 


613 


The  highly  esteemed  Narmada,  the  most  excellent  one  among 
the  rivers,  that  had  originated  from  a  Lihga,  got  merged  into 
the  Lihga.  Hence  she  is  the  most  meritorious. 

One  who  stays  near  Narmada  always  and  drinks  her  waters, 
is  on  a  par  with  one  initiated  in  all  the  Yajnas  and  drinks  Soma 
juice  everyday. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  at  the  confluence  there  and 
worships  Lotanesvara  attains  the  benefit  of  (the  performance 
of)  a  horse-sacrifice. 

O  king,  all  the  sins  committed  verbally,  mentally  or  physi¬ 
cally,  become  dissolved  on  approaching  Lotanesvara. 

19-27.  A  special  rite  has  been  prescribed  for  KarttikI  by 
Sankara.  O  excellent  king,  listen  to  it,  as  it  is  destructive  of 
all  sins. 

On  coming  to  know  of  the  approaching  KarttikI  (full-moon 
day  of  Karttika),  one  should  observe  fast  on  the  fourteenth 
lunar  day  and  then  take  his  holy  bath  in  the  waters  of  Narmada. 

Then  he  should  offer  libations  to  Pitrs  and  Devas  and  per¬ 
form  Sraddha  duly.  He  should  worship  Lotanesvara  and  keep 
awake  at  night.  His  life  is  fruitful.  All  his  activities  are  fruitful. 

If  Lotanesvara  is  not  seen  with  full  concentration  of  the 
mind,  those  persons  are  no  better  than  lame  ones.  Their  life 
is  futile. 

In  the  family  of  a  true  devotee  none  will  attain  ghosthood 
and  none  will  be  reborn  in  a  base  womb. 

One  should  go  to  the  confluence  and  duly  perform  the  rite 
of  ablution.  The  rite  of  keeping  awake  (at  night)  should  be 
observed  with  a  provision  for  meritorious  songs  and  dances. 

After  the  night  turns  into  dawn,  the  devotee  bows  to  and 
invokes  the  Great  Ocean  and  takes  the  holy  -bath  in  accor¬ 
dance  with  the  injunctions  laid  down. 

The  Mantra  for  Amantrana  ( Invocation ) 

“Om,  obeisance  to  you,  the  Lord  of  the  Tlrtha  in  the  form 
of  Visnu.  O  Lord,  be  present  in  the  briny  Ocean  while  I  take 
bath.”* 

The  Sndna  Mantra: 

“Agni  is  the  depositor  of  the  semen  virile  in  the  body.  It  is 
lustrous.  Visnu  is  the  navel  of  Amrta.” 


614  Skanda  Purana 

Uttering  thus  the  truthful  statement,  O  son  of  Pandu,  the 
devotee  takes  bath  in  the  Lord  of  rivers. 

28-38.  A  man  might  have  committed  many  sins  in  the 
course  of  hundreds  and  thousands  of  births,  but  he  dispels  all 
the  clusters  of  sins  by  taking  a  bath  once  in  the  briny  ocean. 

O  leading  member  of  Kuru  family,  this  all-pervading  great 
Ocean  is  of  divine  origin.  Hence,  otherwise  (without  Mantra) 
the  Ocean  should  not  be  touched  by  learned  men  even  with 
the  tip  of  a  blade  of  Darbha  grass. 

Argha  Mantra: 

"O  receptacle  of  the  store-house  of  all  jewels,  you  are  the 
most  important  of  all  jewels.  O  chief  Lord  of  all  immortal  ones, 
accept  the  Argha.  Obeisance  to  you.” 

Thereafter  the  devotee  offers  libation  to  the  Pitrs,  Devas 
and  human  beings.  The  devotee  comes  out  of  the  river  and 
gets  the  Sraddha  performed  by  eminent  five  Brahmanas  resem¬ 
bling  the  Guardians  of  the  worlds. 

The  Lokapalas  are  to  be  installed  duly  and  duly  worshipped 
(by  worshipping  those  Brahmanas  alone).  Then  the  devotee 
should  confess  his  good  and  evil  acts  to  them. 

The  devotee  confesses  to  them  whatever  sin  has  been  com¬ 
mitted  ever  since  childhood,  in  the  course  of  youth  and  old 
age  and  then  submits  the  same  to  the  Guardians  of  the  worlds. 

The  devotee  utters  it  as  follows:  “Whatever  inauspicious  act 
has  been  perpetrated  ever  since  childhood,  in  the  course  of 
various  births  (or  ever  since  birth)  has  been  entirely  confessed 
to, the  Brahmanas.  Their  presence  is  in  all  my  situations.” 

After  uttering  so  the  devotee  shall  roll  in  front  of  them. 
After  getting  their  permission  the  devotee  has  to  perform  the 
holy  bath. 

O  excellent  king,  the  Sraddha  too  has  to  be  performed  duly 
to  the  Pitrs.  If  this  is  performed,  O  excellent  king,  all  the  sins 
shall  perish. 

If  anyone  is  curious  to  know  about  himself,  analysing  his 
auspicious  and  inauspicious  activities,  then  listen  to  his  proce¬ 
dure  as  follows: 

39-49.  After  taking  the  holy  bath  in  the  great  Tirtha,  the 
man  goes  ahead  rolling.  A  man  of  righteous  actions  goes  to¬ 
wards  the  river  and  a  man  of  evil  actions  to  the  opposite  side. 


V.iii.220.50-55 


615 


Thereby  the  evil-doer  shall  realize  his  previously  accumulated 
sins.  After  taking  the  holy  bath  in  the  excellent  Tirtha  he  should  duly 
make  Dana. 

After  worshipping  Lotanesvara,  he  is  rid  of  all  sins.  After 
adopting  a  non-crooked  way  of  life,  he  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

Hence,  O  excellent  king,  after  becoming  aware  of  this  by 
means  of  all  efforts,  all  men  should  bathe  at  the  place  where 
Hara  is  present. 

After  taking  the  holy  bath  in  accordance  with  the  injunc¬ 
tions,  O  protector  of  the  earth,  he  should  adore  and  honour 
Brahmanas  who  have  mastered  the  Vedas  for  the  purpose  of 
quelling  all  the  sins. 

O  excellent  king,  that  Tirtha  has  all  these  good  features. 
Listen  attentively  to  the  greatness  of  that  Tirtha. 

A  man  who  takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  that  Tirtha,  offers 
libations  to  Pitrs  and  Devas,  devoutly  performs  Sraddha  to  Pitrs 
there  and  makes  Dana  (gifts)  of  cows,  plots  of  land,  gingelly 
seeds  and  gold  to  Brahmanas  is  honoured  in  Svargaloka  for  a 
hundred  crore  and  sixty  thousand  years.  He  goes  to  Svarga 
seated  in  an  excellent  aerial  chariot. 

At  the  confluence  of  Reva  and  the  ocean  one  gets  the  same 
benefit  as  one  derives  through  holy  bath  taken  in  all  the  TIrthas 
on  Narmada. 

By  giving  gold,  silver,  copper,  jewels,  pearls,  cows  and  bulls, 
plots  of  land  and  good  grain  as  charity  ( Dana ),  one  obtains 
everlasting  benefit. 

Undoubtedly  all  auspicious  and  inauspicious  actions  bear 
their  fruits. 

'  50-55.  Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  of  one,  whoever 
be  that  man,  O  Yudhisthira,  who  casts  off  his  life  there  in  the 
Tirtha  with  devotion. 

After  sporting  about  in  the  Palace  of  Siva  for  crores  of  years, 
he  is  reborn  as  a  Brahmana  conversant  with  the  Vedas  and 
Vedangas  in  a  pure  family.  He  will  live  for  a  hundred  years 
richly  endowed  with  sons  and  grandsons,  wealth  and  foodgrain. 
He  shall  be  free  from  all  ailments. 

One  attains  by  worshipping  Lotanesvara  in  the  month  o 
Karttika  when  the  constellation  Krttika  is  present,  the  same 
benefit  as  acquired  by  worshipping  Somanatha  in  the  couise 
of  twelve  pilgrimages. 


616 


Skanda  Parana 


O  son  of  KuntI,  by  visiting  Lotanesvara  one  gets  the  same 
benefit  as  at  Gaya,  Gahga,  Kuruksetra,  Naimisa  and  Puskara. 

A  man  who  devoutly  listens  to  this  auspicious  text  being 
read  shall  go  to  Rudraloka  after  being  rid  of  all  sins. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTYONE 
The  Greatness  of  Hamsesvara  Tirlha} 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  great  king,  a  person  should  go  to  an 
excellent  Tirtha  named  Hamsesvara  on  the  southern  bank  of 
Reva  within  two  Krosas  (4  miles=6  kms.)  from  Matrtlrtha.  It  is 
meritorious  and  destructive  of  mental  depression. 

Formerly,  Harhsa,  son  of  one  of  Daksa’s  daughters  born  in 
the  family  of  Kasyapa,  performed  a  great  penance  and  became 
the  vehicle  of  Brahma. 

Once,  without  any  direction  from  Brahma,  he  became  too 
impetuous.  O  Yudhisthira,  he  was  attacked  by  Sivaganas.  He 
fled  away  in  the  course  of  the  destruction  of  Daksa’s  Yajna. 
Without  bearing  Vidhi  (Brahma)  he  became  a  deserter  and 
ran  away.  Even  when  remembered  by  Brahma,  the  bird  did  not 
come  to  him.  So  Brahma  cursed  him  and  dismissed  him  from 
his  office. 

Knowing  himself  to  be  cursed,  Harhsa  (Swan)  hurriedly  ap¬ 
proached  Brahma,  the  grandfather,  bowed  down  to  him  and 
requested: 

Harhsa  said: 

7-16.  It  does  not  behove  you  to  curse  me  born  of  brutish 
womb.  It  is  but  natural  in  the  case  of  brutes  that  the  mind  is 
devoid  of  discrimination.  Still,  O  Lord,  granting  that  I  am  a 
sinner,  that  I  deserted  you,  the  master,  O  Pitamaha,  I  shall  tell 


1.  In  order  to  explain  the  name  Hamsesvara  the  legend  of  the  curse  of 
Brahma  to  his  vehicle  swan  for  his  desertion  and  Brahma’s  guidance  to 
expiate  sin  of  desertion  by  installing  a  Linga  on  the  bank  of  Reva,  is 
narrated.  ’ 


V.iii.221. 17-27 


617 


you  how  it  happened.  I  became  frightened  when  the  fierce 
attendants  of  Sarva  rushed  at  me  suddenly.  In  my  fright,  I  left 
you  and  fled.  Even  now,  O  Lord,  I  see  the  cause  of  fear  before 
me.  That  was  why,  even  on  being  remembered  by  you,  I  did 
not  come  to  you. 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 


Saying  this  to  the  Creator,  Harhsa  heaved  sighs  in  a  wretched 
manner  worshipping  him  through  the  eyes  (reverential  glance): 
“O  Lord,  save,  save  me,  the  sinning  brute  of  deluded  mind 
fallen  in  front  of  you.  You  are  the  only  Lord,  the  author  of 
the  creation.  All  these  objects  of  diverse  types  have  been  cre¬ 
ated  by  you.  Indeed  if  I  have  been  created  by  you  in  this 
manner,  O  Creator,  it  is  verily  your  own  fault. 

None  other  than  you  is  capable  of  cursing  and  blessing. 
Whom  shall  I  then  seek  for  refuge?  I  have  been  a  slave  but  now 
dismissed  from  the  service.  O  dear  one,  I  deserve  to  be  slapped 


with  the  palm  of  your  hand.  But  save  me,  your  devotee. 

Vidya  and  Avidya  (knowledge  and  ignorance)  manifested 
themselves  from  you.  So  also  Dharma  and  Adharma  (piety  and 
impiety) ,  Sat  and  Asat  (good  and  bad,  existent  and  non-exis¬ 
tent),  Dyu  and  Nisd  (day  and  night).  You  create  the  different 
aspects  of  the  universe.  Such  a  unique  one  I  seek  as  refuge. 

In  view  of  your  single  and  multifarious  activities,  you  are 
single  and  also  have  many  forms.  You  are  devoid  of  activity  as 
well  as  engaged  in  all  activities.  Hence  I  seek  refuge  m  you. 

Obeisance,  obeisance  to  the  most  excellent  one!  Obeisance, 
obeisance  to  the  bestower  of  boons!  Obeisance  to  the  creator 
and  dispense!  Obeisance,  obeisance  to  one  who  is  worthy  of 

being  the  refuge!  _  ,  , 

O  Lord,  what  can  this  speech  of  mine  bereft  of  the  essen 

of  letters  and  learning  offer  by  way  of  eulogy?  What  is  my 
power?  What  is  my  knowledge?  Forgive  this  utterance  of  mine. 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

17-27  Even  as  Harhsa  was  submitting  this  Brahma,  de¬ 
lighted  in  his  mind,  said:  “You  have  been  granted  learning 
(knowledge),  O  bird,  do  not  be  sorry.  Purify  yourself  throug 
penance  so  that  you  will  attain  the  end  of  the  curse.  By  taking 


618  Skanda  Purana 

the  holy  bath  render  service  unto  Reva.  After  installing  Mahesvara, 
you  will  attain  your  original  status  ere  long. 

The  benefit  of  installing  Siva  is  the  same  as  is  attained  after 
performing  many  Yajnas  with  the  full  complement  of  excellent 
monetary  gifts  and  Dana  of  crores  of  cows  and  gold. 

By  installing  Siva  on  the  banks  of  Reva,  one  is  rid  of  all  sins 
whether  he  be  slayer  of  a  Brahmana,  imbiber  of  liquor,  thief 
of  gold  or  defiler  of  the  bed  of  preceptor. 

Hence,  by  installing  the  Three-eyed  Lord  on  the  banks  of 
Bharga-sarit  (Reva)  you  shall  be  rid  of  all  faults  and  attain  the 
excellent  office.” 

On  being  told  thus  by  Brahma,  the  excellent  bird  became 
delighted  and  contented.  Saying  “Yes,  so  be  it”  he  hurried  to 
the  excellent  banks  of  Narmada. 

After  performing  austerities  for  some  time,  he  installed  Sankara 
after  his  own  name,  the  excellent  Hamsesvara,  O  excellent 
descendant  of  Bharata.  By  adoring  this  deity,  the  most  excel¬ 
lent  bird  attained  the  greatest  position. 

O  Yudhisthira,  one  should  go  to  the  Hamsesvara  Tirtha, 
take  the  holy  bath  and  worship  Paramesana.  He  is  rid  of  sins. 

By  eulogizing  the  Lord  with  thorough  concentration  of  mind, 
one  can  avert  wretchedness. 

O  excellent  descendant  of  Bharata,  by  performing  Sraddha, 
offering  a  lamp  and  feeding  Brahmanas  to  the  extent  of  one’s 
capacity,  one  is  honoured  in  Svargaloka. 

O  son  of  KuntI,  a  person  should  adore  Siva  once  or  thrice 
a  day  and  make  gift  of  a  recently  calved  cow  to  an  excellent 
Brahmana.  He  is  honoured  in  Sivaloka  for  sixty  thousand  years. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTYTWO 


The  Greatness  of  Tiladesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

T  3  <3  Kms->  «  **  excellent 

Tileda  Tirtha  where  a  devotee  should  go  thereafter.  It  was 

there  that  jabah  gamed  purity  by  eating  gingelly  seeds. 


V.iii.222. 11-16 


619 


He  was  full  of  defects  and  faults.  He  had  abandoned  his 
father  and  mother.  He  coveted  the  wife  of  his  brother.  He  was 
a  sinful  seller  of  his  son.  He  deceived  his  preceptor.  Being  full 
of  such  sinful  faults,  wherever  he  went  he  was  insulted  and 
rejected  by  good  people,  O  descendant  of  Bharata.  No  one 
cared  to  associate  with  him  even  in  the  assemblies. 

Thus  the  Brahmana  became  excessively  ashamed,  O  king. 
He  worried  over  this  for  a  long  time  because  he  was  not  aware 
of  any  means  of  attaining  sanctity.  ... 

He  performed  pilgrimages  to  all  the  TIrthas.  He  took  his 
bath  in  Reva,  after  reaching  Arnavopanta  (the  vicinity  of  the 
sea)  on  the  southern  bank  of  Narmada.  There,  O  son  of  Kunti, 

.  Tabali  stayed  and  began  eating  gingelly  seeds. 

J  He  started  by  eating  gingelly  seeds  once  a  day;  then  o 
alternate  days;  and  gradually  once  in  three  days,  six  days,  twel 

rlavs  fifteen  d<iys  and  a  month. 

He  observed  the  vows  of  Krcchra,  Candrayana  etc.  with 
gingelly  seeds.  Thus  a  regular  gingelly  seed  eater,  he  rea 

lhCA:r^"onSra  became  pleach  him  andgraneed 
him  purit/here  and.  hereafter  and  also  —  <** 

— 

n.a6.  holy 

being  destructive  of  sins.  P  fourteenth  lunar  days, 

there  in  thatTirtha  on  elevc„th  day).  He 

He  should  observe  fast  on  seeds).  He  shall  smear 

must  perform  Homa  with  Ti  a  fyun guents.  He  must  use 

himself  with  gingelly  see  s  ins  seeds  with  water.  He 

gingelly  seeds.  (Thus) 

must  give  gingelly  seeds  as  g 

he  is  rid  of  different  kinds  o  8  '  d  He  must  offer 

He  must  fill  the  ^.“^/attain  Rudra  Loka.  He  sane- 
lamps  with  the  gmgelly  oil.  He 

tifies  his  family  till  the  seven  ^  Qf  gingeUy  seeds  at 

O  excellent  king,  by  ®  8^  who  had  committed  pro- 

the  time  of  Sraddha  a  ‘  .  twe  desired  goal, 

hibited  actions  (VOaMtkai,  attain  the  des 


620 


Skanda  Purana 


Those  who  are  staying  in  Svargaloka  derive  everlasting  sat¬ 
isfaction  and  rejoice  as  a  result  of  the  Sraddhas  and  Brahmana- 
feeding.  They  rejoice  for  many  years. 

The  man  takes  the  members  of  the  three  families  viz.  that 
of  father,  that  of  mother  and  that  of  wife,  to  heaven  after 
redeeming  them. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTYTHREE 


The  Greatness  of  Vasavesvara  Tirtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-11.  Within  a  Krosa  therefrom,  O  son  of  KuntI,  is  the 
excellent  Vasava  Tirtha.  There  the  Vasus  stayed  for  twelve  years 
and  installed  the  deity. 

The  eight  Vasus  are:  Dhara,  Dhruva,  Soma,  Apa,  Anila,  Anala, 
Pratyusa  and  Prabhasa. 

Formerly,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  they  were  distressed 
due  to  the  curse  of  Pitr  (father,  ancestor)  that  condemned 
them  to  stay  within  womb.  They  came  to  the  Tirtha  on  Narmada 
and  performed  penance  with  the  sense-organs  fully  controlled. 

They  propitiated  the  great  immutable  Lord  of  BhavanI  for 
twelve  years.  O  great  king,  Mahesvara  was  delighted  thereby. 

He  became  visible  to  them  and  granted  them  excellent  de¬ 
sired  boons.  Thereupon  the  Vasus  installed  Mahesvara  called 
after  their  own  name.  Sankara  being  (then)  pleased,  they  went 
away  passing  through  the  firmament. 

Ever  since  then  that  Tirtha  became  well-known  after  the 
name  of  Vasus.  O  great  king,  a  devotee  should  worship  Siva 
with  easily  available  offerings.  Lights  should  be  offered  assidu¬ 
ously  on  the  eighth  day  in  the  bright  half  of  a  month.  The 
devotee  should  offer  the  same  everyday  as  per  his  capacity.  He 
should  stay  in  the  vicinity  of  Siva  for  eight  thousand  years. 
Then  he  enters  Siva’s  abode.  He  never  resides  in  a  womb. 

A  devotee  who  worships  Lord  fsana  with  flowers,  tender 
sprouts,  fruits  and  foodgram  shall  never  meet  with  wretched¬ 
ness.  Freed  from  all  griefs,  he  is  honoured  in  Svargaloka. 


V.iii.224.1-12 


621 


O  son  of  KuntI,  one  who  is  able  to  stay  at  least  one  day  in 
the  Vasavesvara  TIrtha  shall  shake  off  heaps  of  sins  and  rejoice 
in  heaven  like  the  Sun.  He  should  devoutly  feed  Brahmanas 
and  give  clothes  and  monetary  gifts. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTYFOUR 
The  Greatness  of  Kotlsvara  TIrtha 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-6.  Thereafter,  O  son  of  KuntI,  there  is  the  great  Kotlsvara 
TIrtha  within  a  Krosa  therefrom.  If  the  holy  bath,  Dana,  Japa, 
Homa,  adoration  etc.  are  performed  devoutly  by  men,  they  will 
have  a  crore-fold  more  benefit. 

There  Devas,  Gandharvas,  Sages,  Siddhas,  Caranas  etc.,  go 
towards  the  ocean  to  see  Narmada.  They  gathered  there  in 
crores,  O  king,  at  the  confluence  of  Reva  and  the  ocean.  They 
experienced  unparalleled  joy  on  visiting  the  confluence  of  Reva 
and  the  sea. 

They  took  their  holy  bath.  They  installed  Siva,  the  great 
Isvara  named  Kotlsvara  and  adored  him  in  accordance  with  the 
injunctions,  with  their  respective  devotion. 

Thus  by  propitiating  Sarva  in  Kotitirtha  they  attained  great 
Siddhi.  Hence  that  TIrtha  is  unparalleled  among  all  the  Tlrthas, 
meritorious  and  the  most  excellent.  Whatever  is  performed 
there,  auspicious  or  inauspicious,  O  tiger  among  kings,  shall 
give  crore-fold  fruit. 

7-12.  There  in  the  TIrtha,  the  excellent  sages  who  are  sta¬ 
tioned  on  the  southern  bank  go  to  the  eternal  state  of  Siddhas 
and  also  to  the  excellent  Pitrloka.  Those  who  stay  on  the  northern 
bank  of  Narmada  go  to  Devaloka.  This  is  my  firm  opinion. 

A  devotee  should  worship  Mahesvara  with  the  flowers  of 
Bilva,  Arka,  Dhattura,  Kusa  and  Kasa  as  well  as  other  seasonal 
flowers,  make  offerings  of  various  nature  duly  and  with  utter¬ 
ance  of  Mantras  as  per  injunctions,  O  Yudhisthira,  and  propi¬ 
tiate  Dhurjati  with  incense,  lamps,  Arghya  and  Naivedya.  Thereby 
he  attains  Sivaloka  and  remains  there  for  the  duration  of  the 
reign  of  fourteen  Indras. 


622 


Skanda  Purana 


Adoration  performed  on  the  eighth  day  in  the  dark  half  of 
the  month  of  Pausa  is  remembered  as  of  special  significance. 

O  excellent  king,  the  eighth  and  fourteenth  days  of  all  months 
also  are  good.  On  those  days,  a  devotee  should  adore  Siva  and 
honour  Brahmanas  of  excellent  nature  by  feeding  them  de¬ 
voutly. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTYFIVE 


The  Greatness  of  Alikesvara  Tirlha 


Sn  Markandeya  said: 

1-5.  Thereafter,  a  devotee  should  go  to  the  excellent  Alika 
Tlrtha  within  a  distance  of  a  Krosa  (3  Kms.)  therefrom. 

There  was  a  Gandharva  female  named  Alika.  Her  habits 
were  foul  and  her  mind  crooked.  She  was  granddaughter 
(daughter’s  daughter)  of  Citrasena.  She  went  to  Sage  Vidyananda, 
wooed  him  and  was  accepted  by  him.  She  resorted  to  him  for 
ten  years. 

For  some  reason,  she  killed  her  husband  while  he  was  asleep. 
She  then  went  to  her  father  Ratnavallabha  and  told  him  this. 

Hence  she  was  abandoned  by  her  father  and  mother,  O 
king,  and  rebuked  by  many:  “You  are  the  murderess  of  foetus 
and  of  husband.  So  do  not  show  us  your  face.  O  murderess  of 
a  Brahmana,  O  sinful  woman,  go  away.  You  have  been  aban¬ 
doned.  Go  away  from  the  house.” 


Sri  Markandeya  said: 

6-13.  Thus  the  deluded  woman,  on  being  sternly  rebuked 
by  both  of  them,  felt  inclined  to  cast  off  her  body  after  resort- 
ing  to  some  Tirtha  somewhere. 

O  Yudhisthira,  she  went  on  enquiring  about  various  Tirthas 
from  Brahmanas  and  heard  that  the  Tirtha  at  the  confluence 
of  Reva  and  the  ocean  was  destructive  of  sins. 

O  son  of  Kunti,  she  performed  penance  there  and  observed 

such  as  «*«».  ***- 


V.iii.225.14-22 


623 


Through  the  vows  of  Candrayana  and  Brahmakurca  she  got 
her  body  emaciated.  Thus,  O  king,  a  hundred  and  Fifty  years 
passed  off  in  penance  including  meditations,  adorations  etc., 
of  Siva,  since  she  desired  (self-)  purification. 

After  a  few  days,  Siva  came  to  know  of  her  ardent  resolution. 
On  being  induced  by  ParvatT,  the  delighted  Siva  spoke  to  her: 

Isvara  said: 

O  daughter,  do  not  be  rash.  Now  you  are  pure  in  your  body. 

I  am  pleased  now  with  your  penance.  Choose  your  desired 
boon. 

Alika  said: 

O  Lord  of  Devas,  if  you  are  pleased,  (and)  if  I  am  consid¬ 
ered  to  be  worthy  of  boons,  do  grant  me  perfect  purity.  I  have 
already  been  awfully  scorched  by  diverse  kinds  of  fiery  sins.  I 
am  helpless  and  you  are  my  Lord.  You  alone  are  the  preceptor 
of  the  worlds,  the  redeemer  of  the  wretched  and  the  helpless, 
the  deity  worthy  of  being  refuge  unto  all  a  embodied  beings. 

Isvara  said: 

14-22.  O  fair  lady,  you  have  become  purified  in  body;  do 
not  feel  acutely  aggrieved.  Instal  me  here  designating  me  after 
your  name.  Thereby  you  will  attain  heaven. 

After  saying  this,  the  Lord  of  chiefs  of  Devas  vanished  there 
itself.  Alika,  thereupon,  devoutly  took  her  holy  bath,  installed 
Sankara  and  made  liberal  gifts  to  Brahmanas.  She  attained  the 
highly  exalted  region. 

O  Yudhisthira,  she  went  back  to  her  father  and  mother.  She 
was  duly  honoured  by  them  as  well  as  by  her  other  kinsmen. 
Seated  on  an  excellent  aerial  chariot  and  wearing  divine  gar¬ 
lands,  O  king,  she  went  to  the  world  of  Gauri.  Even  today  she 
rejoices  as  the  female  companion  of  the  goddess. 

Ever  since  then,  O  son  of  KuntI,  that  Tlrtha  became  famous 
as  Alikesvara.  O  Yudhisthira,  any  devotee,  man  or  woman,  who 
takes  his  holy  bath  there  in  the  Tlrtha  and  devoutly  worships 
Mahadeva  accompanied  by  Uma,  shall  be  rid  of  all  sins.  He 
attains  the  world  of  Sankara. 


624 


S band  a  Parana 


By  feeding  Brahmanas  always,  one  gets  rid  of  all  sins,  mental 
verbal  or  physical.  Whatever  sin  was  committed  before,  gets 
dissolved. 

By  offering  lamps  to  the  deity,  one  can  avert  attacks  of 
ailments.  By  offering  incense,  utensil,  ornamental  frame,  bell 
and  waterpot  to  the  deity,  O  great  king,  one  shall  obtain  the 
world  of  Sankara. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTYSIX 


The  Greatness  of  Vimalesvara  Tirtlia 


Sri  Markandeya  said : 


1-10.  Within  a  distance  of  a  Krosa  therefrom  is  that  meri¬ 
torious  Tlrtha  Vimalesvara.  By  taking  holy  bath  there,  offering 
Dana,  performing  japa,  Homa,  Arcana  etc.,  and  by  propitiating 
the  deity  Vimalesvara,  one  will  obtain  whatever  one  desires, 
whether  it  be  the  acquisition  of  heavenly  pleasures  or  petty 
worldly  things. 

Formerly,  it  was  due  to  the  great  power  of  this  Tirtha  that 
Satakratu  (Indra)  attained  perfect  purity  after  killing  Trisiras, 
the  son  of  Tvasty. 


It  was  there  that  a  Brahmana,  Vedanidhi,  performed  a  very 
great  penance  formerly  and  became  pure  like  the  Sun.  pvpn 


uiiMaerea  himself  ex¬ 
contact  with  the  king. 


V.iii.226ill-23 


625 


Along  with  Santa,  his  wife,  he  approached  the  confluence  of 
Reva  and  the  ocean.  He  performed  penance  for  twelve  years. 
Through  Krcchra  and  Candrayana,  the  sage  propitiated  the 
Three-eyed  Lord.  By  the  grace  of  Mahadeva  who  was  pleased 
he  regained  his  purity. 

11-18.  Formerly,  O  king,  Sarva  was  instigated  by  SarvanI 
to  infatuate  the  wives  of  sages  in  Daruvana.  Thereupon  he  saw 
himself  Sa?nala  (defiled  by  impurity)  and  considered  the  confluence 
of  Narmada  and  the  ocean  as  the  greatest  holy  spot.  O  great 
king,  he  stayed  there  with  Uma  and  performed  penance.  Since 
he  became  Vimala  (free  from  impurity),  the  deity  is  called 
Vimalesvara.  He  himself  stayed  there  by  that  name  with  a  desire 
for  the  welfare  of  all  the  worlds. 

Then  there  is  the  story  of  Brahma.  The  grandfather  of  the 
worlds  created  Tilottama.  After  creating  her  and  seeing  the 
charming  lady  in  front,  he  was  overpowered  by  Bhavi-yoga-bala, 
the  force  of  inevitability  of  the  future  (course  of  events).  Though 
Lord  of  all  the  subjects,  he  became  her  lover. 

Thereby  he  felt  himself  guilty  and  sinful.  He  resorted  to  the 
banks  of  Reva.  Observing  the  vow  of  silence  he  visited  the 
Tirthas.  He  took  bath  thrice  a  day  remembering  Siva.  He  then 
took  his  holy  bath  at  the  confluence  of  Reva  and  the  ocean 
and  worshipped  Sankara.  In  a  short  time,  O  saintly  king,  Brahma 
too  became  free  from  impurities. 

Thus  many  other  excellent  Devas,  sages  and  kings  eschewed 
the  impurities  of  sins  and  became  pure. 

Similarly,  O  leading  king,  by  taking  the  holy  bath  and  ador¬ 
ing  Siva  there,  you  too  shall  attain  excellent  purity,  although 
you  are  already  pure. 

19-23.  A  person  whether  a  man  or  a  woman  should  take 
the  holy  bath  there  and  worship  Mahesvara.  Thereby  he  shall 
be  rid  of  sins  and  defects  and  become  honoured  in  Brahmaloka. 

He  who  observes  fast  and  visits  Vimalesvara,  O  king,  on  the 
eighth  and  fourteenth  lunar  day  and  on  all  festive  occasions, 
gets  rid  of  the  sins  committed  in  the  course  of  seven  births  and 
goes  to  Sivalaya.  The  person  should  perform  Sraddha  in  accor¬ 
dance  with  the  injunctions  and  be  free  from  the  indebtedness 
to  the  Pitrs. 

He  should  feed  Brahmanas  in  accordance  with  his  capacity 
and  offer  them  monetary  gifts. 


626 


Skanda  Purana 


Whatever  one  likes  most  in  the  world,  whatever  is  beneficial 
to  him  in  the  house  should  be  given  to  a  person  of  good 
qualities,  if  the  donor  desires  everlasting  benefit.  By  offering 
gold,  foodgrain,  clothes,  umbrellas,  shoes,  waterpot  etc.,  and 
constructing  temples  according  to  his  capacity,  one  shall  be¬ 
come  a  king  on  the  earth.  He  should  propitiate  Paramesvara 
through  songs,  dances  and  tales  (about  the  deity). 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTYSEVEN 
Special  Injunctions  regarding  the  Pilgrimage 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-10.  Thus,  succinctly  and  in  accordance  with  their  impor¬ 
tance  these  Tirthas  have  been  recounted  to  you.  O  son  of 
Pandu,  no  one  is  competent  to  enumerate  in  detail  all  the 
Tirthas. 

This  river  Narmada  is  sacred  and  pure.  It  is  well-known  in 
all  the  three  worlds.  She  is  the  most  excellent  of  all  the  rivers, 
and  a  favourite  of  Mahadeva. 

If  anyone  always  remembers  mentally  and  reflects  on  Narmada, 
O  king,  he  obtains  quickly  the  excellent  benefit  of  a  hundred 
Candrayanas. 

Persons  who  have  no  faith,  those  who  are  atheists  fall  into 
the  terrible  Naraka.  So  said  Paramesvara. 

Lord  Mahesvara  himself  resorts  to  Narmada  always.  Hence 
the  river  should  be  known  as  meritorious  and  destroyer  of  the 
sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter. 

This  river  born  from  the  person  of  Mahesvara  is  mentioned 
as  Mahesvari  Ganga  (Ganga  of  Mahesvara);  O  Yudhisthira,  she 
is  called  the  Southern  Ganga  of  Bharata. 

Jahnavl  is  the  Vaisnavl  Ganga,  Sarasvatl  is  Brahmi  Ganga. 
There  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  Reva  is  Mahesvari  Ganga. 

Just  as  in  the  form  of  the  Supreme  Purusa  (Being)  the  Lord 
has  adopted  Traimurtatva  (trinityhood,  being  three  gods)  i.e. 
Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahesa  in  one  and  there  is  no  difference 
among  them,  so  also,  O  son  of  Kunti,  do  not  think  that  there 
is  any  difference  among  the  three  rivers. 


V.iii.227.11-19 


627 


On  the  two  banks  of  Reva,  there  are  Tlrthas  in  thousands, 
hundred  thousands  and  crores,  O  descendant  of  Bharata. 

The  Tirthas  are  situated  in  water,  on  ground  and  in  firma¬ 
ment  and  among  trees.  Who  is  competent  to  decisively  fix 
their  number,  be  he  the  Lord  of  Speech  or  Mahesvara? 

1 1-19.  By  remembering  Reva,  sins  committed  in  the  course 
of  a  single  birth  perish.  By  visiting  it  the  sins  of  three  births 
perish.  By  taking  the  holy  plunge  into  Reva,  the  sins  commit¬ 
ted  in  the  course  of  seven  births  perish. 

If  a  devotee  takes  his  bath  in  Reva,  it  is  as  good  as  a  task 
of  Devas  performed  by  him,  Homa  in  the  sacrificial  fires  duly 
performed  and  as  the  four  Vedas  fully  studied  by  him. 

The  Tlrthas  have  been  recounted  to  you  succinctly  and  in 
accordance  with  their  importance. 

O  son  of  KuntI,  the  details  can  neither  be  recounted  by  me 
nor  heard  by  you. 

Yudhisthira  said: 

Tell  me  the  procedure,  the  Yamas  (restrictions)  and  Niyamas 
(regulations).  Tell  me  further  how  to  understand  the  meaning 
of  expiation. 

Sri  Marhandeya  said: 

You  have  asked  pertinently,  O  great  king,  regarding  what  is 
conducive  to  welfare  in  the  other  world.  Listen  attentively.  I 
shall  tell  you  everything  as  I  know. 

One  should  perform  acts  of  a  permanent  nature  by  means 
of  the  body  that  is  non-permanent.  The  Pranas  (vital  airs)  shall 
surely  go  away  like  guests.  One  should  extract  the  essential 
from  the  inessential  viz.  Dana  from  wealth,  truth  from  the 
word  (speech),  piety  and  glory  from  life  and  benevolence  from 
the  body  (through  physical  activity). 

It  is  heard  that  Kala  (Eternal  Time,  god  of  Death)  cooks 
living  beings  in  this  big  cauldron  of  deep-rooted  illusion  by 
means  of  fire  in  the  form  of  the  sun,  where  night  and  day  serve 
the  purpose  of  fuel,  tossing  and  stirring  with  the  ladle  in  the 
form  of  months  and  seasons. 


628 


Skanda  Purana 


It  behoves  you  to  carry  on  your  duties  hereafter  completely 
knowing  what  is  prescribed  by  the  injunctions  of  the  scriptural 
texts.  Neither  this  world  nor  the  other  one  can  bring  in  hap¬ 
piness  to  a  person  of  suspicious,  hesitating  nature. 

20-29a.  The  achievement  of  result  from  the  following  is 
correlated  with  the  faith  of  the  person  concerned:  Mantra, 
Tirtha,  Brahmana,  godhead,  astrologer,  medicine  and  precep¬ 
tor. 

If  a  Homa  is  performed  without  faith  (and  scrupulous  care) 
gift  is  made,  penance  is  performed  and  pious  act  is  done  simi¬ 
larly,  without  faith,  O  son  of  KuntI,  it  is  called  Asat  (false).  It 
has  no  value  either  here  or  hereafter. 

He  who  disregards  the  procedure  laid  down  in  the  scriptural 
texts  and  acts  capriciously,  does  not  achieve  fulfilment,  nor 
happiness  nor  the  greatest  goal. 

Of  course,  there  are  diverse  means  for  the  purification  of 
the  bodies  of  men.  But  no  means  of  purifying  one’s  body  can 
be  on  a  par  with  resorting  to  Tlrthas. 

Purification  is  possible  (firstly)  through  Krcchra,  Candrayana 
and  other  observances  or  secondly  by  resorting  to  Tlrthas. 

When  a  person  proceeds  towards  a  Tirtha,  O  king,  Devas 
and  Pitrs  too  follow  him  moving  in  the  sky.  They  follow  him 
with  great  delight. 

The  devotee  performs  all  these  rites:  Sraddha  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  prosperity,  taking  leave  of  the  deity  and  beloved  kins¬ 
men,  the  adoration  of  Visnu  and  Sankara  and  of  the  Lord  of 
the  Ganas  etc. 


After  being  formally  permitted  by  Brahmanas  he  should  take 
up  the  regulations  of  the  vows  and  proceed  ahead.  Only  one 
who  practises  these  restraints  can  attain  the  benefit  of  Tirtha, 
O  excellent  king:  eating  food  once  a  day,  celibacy,  lying  down 
on  the  ground,  truthful  speech,  avoidance  of  food  from  other 
peopie,  abstention  from  accepting  monetary  gifts,  avoidance 
of  hatred,  deception  etc. 

He  shall  adopt  the  guise  of  a  saintly  person;  he  should  be 
m°iStMand  free  from  hypocrisy  and  arrogance, 
trnl  an/n  C  WJ10se  hands,  feet  and  mind  are  under  con- 
benefit  orVe'S^"1"8'  aUS“ri*y  a"d  a“ins  the 

O  eminent  king,  one  who  is  free  from 


anger,  addicted  to 


V.iii.227.38b-49 


629 


truth,  steadfast  in  vows  and  regards  himself  equal  with  other 
living  beings  attains  the  benefit  of  the  Tirtha. 

Except  in  the  case  of  Kuruksetra,  Visala,  Viraja  and  Gaya, 
tonsuring  of  the  head  and  observance  of  fast  is  universally 
applicable  in  all  the  Tirthas. 

Holy  bath,  adoration  of  the  deity,  offering  of  balls  of  rice 
during  Sraddha  and  feeding  Brahmanas  in  accordance  with 
one  s  capacity  is  the  general  practice  in  all  the  Tirthas. 

Listen  attentively,  O  son  of  KuntI,  I  shall  recount  the  pro¬ 
cedure  in  regard  to  one  who  sets  out  on  pilgrimage  for  the 
sake  of  expiation  with  the  mind  fully  restrained. 

He  shall  take  food  only  once  a  day.  He  shall  be  celibate.  His 
food  shall  be  without  salt.  After  taking  bath  (elsewhere)  he 
should  proceed  towards  the  Tirtha  (for  another  bath).  His  sole 
food  should  be  Havisya  (sacrificial  food  cooked  in  ghee).  He 
should  avoid  conversation  with  a  fallen  person.  He  shall  not 
indulge  in  talking  too  much. 

He  should  eschew  calumny,  association  with  base  ones  and 
food  from  others.  He  should  wear  two  cloths  but  be  bare¬ 
footed.  He  should  be  clean. 

He  should  make  the  Samkalpa  (ritualistic  affirmation  of  in¬ 
tention)  mentally  and  set  out  after  formal  permission.  After 
going  to  the  Tirtha  and  taking  the  bath  he  should  perform  the 
adoration  of  the  deity.  If  he  is  in  a  mood  to  repent  and  regret 
he  shall  be  rid  of  all  evil  actions. 

38b-49.  The  achievement  of  results  and  fulfilment  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  following  is  in  accordance  with  the  faith:  Vedas, 
Tirthas,  Deities,  astrologers,  medicine  and  preceptor. 

In  Puranas  and  Smrtis,  the  benefits  of  visiting  a  Tirtha  have 
been  stated,  O  leading  descendant  of  Bharata.  A  devotee  should 
not  suspect  that  such  statements  are  Arthavadas  (euphemistic 
utterances).  He  shall  then  reflect  upon  what  is  stated  in  the 
scriptural  texts  and  come  to  a  proper  decision. 

In  regard  to  persons  incapable  of  performing  Krcchra  rites 
physically  the  procedure  for  purification  is  as  follows:  He  shall 
perform  expiation  after  knowing  the  (efficacy  of)  a  particular 
Tirtha. 

Listen,  O  great  king,  to  that  inasmuch  as  it  is  relevant  to 
Narmada.  If  the  man  sets  out  from  a  distance  of  twenty-four 
Yojanas,  he  shall  obtain  the  auspicious  benefit  of  twenty-four 
Krcchras. 


630 


Skanda  Purana 


In  regard  to  the  Yojanas  beyond  this  Padakrcchra  (one-fourth 
of  the  Krcchra)  is  proclaimed  for  one  who  sets  out  with  a 
desire  for  purity  (sanctity)  as  to  the  place  within  this  range, 
the  expiation  occurs  at  every  Yojana  space  according  to  learned 
men. 

O  great  king,  in  the  TIrtha  named  after  Pranava  i.e.  Omkaresvara 
TIrtha,  in  the  confluence  of  Reva  and  UrI  and  in  Bhrguksetra 
the  benefit  is  remembered  as  double  the  previous  one.  In  the 
confluence  of  the  celestial  river,  in  Sulabheda  as  well  as  in  the 
confluence  of  Karaja,  O  excellent  king,  it  is  a  quarter  less  than 
the  double. 

Some  say  that  it  is  thrice  in  the  confluence  of  Erandi,  the 
confluence  of  Kapila  and  also  in  the  confluence  of  Kubja  and 
Reva. 

O  great  king,  in  Orhkara  also  that  shall  be  proper  and  relevant. 
Similar  is  the  case  in  the  confluences  of  other  rivers  also  with  Reva. 

O  Yudhisthira,  they  say  that  the  previous  benefit  is  (on  a 
par)  with  two  Krcchras.  In  the  confluence  of  Reva  and  the 
ocean,  he  attains  (the  benefit  of)  thrice  the  Krcchra. 

50-59.  O  Yudhisthira,  the  Krcchra  in  the  Suklatirtha  is 
mentioned  as  four  times  (in  benefit).  Going  by  the  stages  of 
a  Yojana,  a  devotee  should  stay  there  for  some  time,  O  excel¬ 
lent  king.  Thus  he  shall  cover  twenty-four  Yojanas.  Thus  con¬ 
tinuing  the  service  unto  Reva,  perfectly  united  in  the  Yogic 
state,  the  devotee  should  be  devoid  of  hypocrisy  and  arrogance 
and  equipped  with  pure  intellect  for  the  purpose  of  sanctity. 
He  shall  be  liberated. 

Thus,  O  son  of  Kunti,  the  characteristics  of  the  topic  of 
expiation  have  been  recounted  to  you.  The  procedure  regard¬ 
ing  the  pilgrimage  to  Reva  should  be  guarded  as  a  secret. 


Yudhisthira  said: 


O  sage,  tell  me  the  measure  of  Yojana.  By  understanding  it, 
it  will  certainly  cause  the  purification  of  my  mind. 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 


Listen,  O  son  of  Pandu,  I  shall  describe  the  extent  of  the 
measure  of  a  Yojana  So  also  I  shall  describe  the  special  fea- 

pdgrimage  ^CChra  W“h  r'ferenc'  “  concerned 


V.iii.227.60-67 


631 


They  say  that  the  measure  of  an  Angula  is  the  length  of 
eight  Yava-grain  or  more  placed  obliquely  or  three  Vrihis  (rice- 
grain)  .  Twelve  Angulas  make  one  Vitasli.  Two  Vitastis  make  one 
Hasta  (Hand,  about  18  Inches).  Four  Hastas  constitute  one 
Dhanus  (bow).  The  same  is  called  Danda  by  those  conversant 
with  the  specialities  of  measurements.  Two  thousand  Dhaniis 
constitute  one  Krosa.  Four  Krosas  make  one  Yojana.  Thus,  O 
bull  among  the  descendants  of  Bharata,  the  measure  of  Yojana 
has  been  recounted  to  you. 

Thereby  the  devotee  making  his  pilgrimage  understands  the 
measure  of  the  benefit  too  acquired  by  him. 

O  Excellent  king,  the  benefit  of  Krcchra  has  already  been 
recounted  in  respect  to  the  Tlrtha  in  the  form  of  water.  As  and 
when  special  features  crop  up  I  shall  mention  them  in  those 
contexts.  Even  as  it  is  being  mentioned  to  you  who  have  faith, 
O  king,  listen  to  it. 

60-67.  The  benefit  of  Krcchra  etc.,  has  been  mentioned 
in  the  Tlrtha.  There  too  the  devotee  attains  the  benefit  of 
Krcchra  through  Uposana  (fast)  also.  One  obtains  the  benefit 
of  Krcchra  through  Dinajdpya  (uttering  of  the  names  of  the 
deity  in  the  day  time)  also  within  one’s  capacity. 

After  taking  the  holy  bath  in  the  Tlrtha  and  visiting,  wor¬ 
shipping  and  bowing  down  to  the  Lord  of  Devas  well-known 
there,  a  man  obtains  the  benefit  of  the  Krcchra,  O  son  of 
Kuntl. 

The  main  benefit  of  a  Tlrtha  is  through  the  holy  bath.  The 
second  benefit  is  through  fasts.  The  third  benefit  is  through 
the  visit,  adoration  etc.  of  the  well  known  deity  cited.  The 
fourth  benefit  is  through  Japa  day  and  night  within  one’s  physical 
capacity.  The  fifth  benefit  in  regard  to  all  the  Tirthas  has  to 
be  reckoned  on  the  basis  of  the  distance. 

One  who  has  come  within  a  range  of  a  Yojana  from  the 
banks  obtains  a  tenth  of  the  benefit  accruing  from  the  Tlrtha 
concerned.  No  hesitation  need  be  felt  in  this  regai  d. 

Taking  a  plunge  in  a  MahanadI  (big  river)  together  with 
observance  of  fast  (even  if)  within  a  range  of  a  Yojana,  shall 
accord  the  benefit  of  Krcchra  to  men,  O  son  of  Kuntl. 

Kulydis  a  stream  flowing  to  a  distance  of  six  Yojanas.  Those 
that  flow  twelve  Yojanas  are  called  Alpanadis  (small  rivers). 
Those  that  flow  twenty-four  Yojanas  are  Nadis.  Mahanadis  are 
rivers  that  flow  to  a  greater  distance. 


632 


Skanda  Parana 
CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  T WENTYEI GHT 

The  Benefit  of  Pilgrimage  by  Proxy 
Yudhisthira  said: 

1-9.  O  excellent  sage,  O  storehouse  of  mercy,  if  one  under¬ 
takes  pilgrimage  for  the  sake  of  another,  what  is  the  extent  of 
benefit?  Who  gets  the  benefit? 

Sri  Markandeya  said: 

Listen,  O  king,  to  what  I  say  in  regard  to  the  pilgrimage  on 
behalf  of  others.  How  much  shall  be  the  benefit  accrued?  How 
should  it  be  performed?1 

Resorting  to  Tirthas  should  never  be  undertaken  in  this 
world  on  behalf  of  a  baser  one  by  a  person  of  superior  caste 
through  greed  for  money  etc. 

O  great  king,  a  learned  man  should  perform  a  pious  action 
himself.  If  there  is  no  physical  strength  or  another  pressing 
matter  intervenes,  one  should  get  the  pious  activity  usually 
done  through  a  person  of  one’s  own  caste.  A  pious  rite  got 
done  through  sons,  grandsons  etc.,  or  kinsmen  of  the  same 
Gotra  is  the  ideal  things,  they  say,  O  Yudhisthira.  Hence  it  is 
better  that  one  gets  them  alone  to  do  the  work.  Neither  through 

one  of  a  higher  caste  nor  through  one  of  a  lower  caste  (should 
it  be  got  done).  v 

■  ^  “  my  °Pinj°n  that  a  rite  performed  through  a  baser  man 

Of  an  inf°P-er'  A  Supenor  one  performing  the  rite  on  behalf 
of  an  inferior  one  may  result  in  wretchedness. 

to  a  H  T  tVe  kno'vltd^  ‘“Vines  of  food  or  Havis 

nor  should  ?!  SKhouldno‘ b=  righteous  and  pious  rites 

nor  should  he  be  initiated  in  Vratas  ^ 

IapTahe„f„tln8„f  ‘hingS  CaUSe  d0Wnfa"  «f' »°™n  and  Sudras: 

J  pa  penance,  pilgrimage,  renunciation  of  the  world  Dractice 
of  Mantras  and  initiation  for  j  .  worm>  practice 
im«  a  n  tor  the  adoration  of  a  deitv 

(if  ste  „„dfrSe“  EST V V  **  “ 

thing.  If  the  husband  cannot  perfotnTIh™  T  perform  every’ 
with  his  permission.  P  ’ the  Wlfe  should  perform 

J{o°zi:::2  ;fhe  sake  °f  he  wm 

dentally,  one  gets  half  of  the  benefit* C  t0  “  Tfrtha  ,ncl" 


V.iii.229.1-8 


633 


If  one  undertakes  pilgrimage  accompanying  another  and 
takes  the  holy  bath,  he  gets  the  benefit  of  the  bath  but  not 
the  benefit  of  the  pilgrimage,  as  mentioned  in  the  scriptural 
texts,  namely  destruction  of  sins. 

A  man  who  lakes  the  holy  bath  on  behalf  of  the  following, 
gets  one-eighth  of  the  benefit:  father,  paternal  uncle,  mother, 
maternal  grandfather,  maternal  uncle,  brother,  father-in-law, 
son,  patron,  grandmother,  preceptor,  sister,  mother’s  sister, 
granddaughter,  instructor  and  others. 


One  doing  directly  so  on  behalf  of  parents  shall  attain  one- 
fourth  of  the  benefit.  Learned  men  say  that  the  benefit  is  half 
in  the  case  of  mutual  service  (of  husband  and  wife).  A  man 
obtains  a  sixth,  a  third,  a  fifth  and  a  fourth  of  the  benefit,  if 
he  performs  a  rile  on  behalf  of  a  sister’s  son,  disciple,  brother’s 
son  or  own  son. 

Thus,  O  son  of  KuntI,  the  performance  of  sacred  rites  on 
behalf  of  others  should  be  undertaken  by  kinsmen  as  tradition¬ 
ally  practised.  The  procedure  thereof  has  been  recounted  to 
you. 

At  the  advent  of  rainy  season,  all  the  rivers  are  Rajasvalas 
(like  women  in  their  monthly  courses)  excepting  Ganga,  Yamuna, 
Sarasvatl  and  Narmada. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  TWENTYNINE 
The  Benefit  of  Listening  to  this  Purana 
Sri  Markandeya  said: 

1-8.  Thus,  O  king,  the  Purana,  the  scriptural  text  of  piety 
and  holy  rites  has  been  recounted  to  you  as  narrated  by  Vayu 
in  the  celestial  assembly,  thanks  to  the  pleasure  of  Siva. 

There  are  sixty  crore  sixty  thousand  Tirthas  in  the  begin¬ 
ning,  middle  and  the  end  of  Narmada  at  every  step. 

The  Samhita  consisting  of  twelve  thousand  verses1  was  heard 
by  me  even  as  the  Lord  of  Devas  narrated  it.  It  has  now  been- 
recounted  to  you. 

1.  W  3-4  state  that  this  Pursina  (Reva  Khanda)  consists  of  12,000  verses  and 
was  narrated  on  Ml.  Anianrakai,itaka. 


634 


Skanda  Purana 


While  I  was  staying  on  Mountain  Amarakantaka,  O  king,  I 
was  asked  by  you.  Everything  has  been  succinctly  recounted  to 
you  now. 

Listen  to  the  meritorious  activity  of  Narmada.  It  gives  the 
same  benefit  as  listening  to  the  recitation  of  all  the  Vedas 
along  with  the  six  Angas  in  the  Pada  and  Krama  manner. 

It  may  even  be  more.  When  the  narrative  of  the  divine  river 
is  heard,  one  attains  the  same  benefit  as  is  gained  by  a  person 
by  performing  a  twelve-year  Satra  (sacrifice  lasting  twelve  years). 

By  taking  the  holy  bath  once  in  Narmada,  one  attains  the 
same  benefit  as  is  obtained  by  the  holy  bath  taken  in  all  the 
Tirthas  including  the  ocean.  The  narrative  of  the  activity  of 
Narmada  is  auspicious  at  the  beginning,  middle  and  end. 

9-15.  Listen  to  the  meritorious  benefit  accruing  unto  a  man 
who  hears  the  splendid  story  of  Narmada.  He  attains  Siva’s 
holy  region  and  becomes  an  attendant  of  Rudra  and  rejoices 
along  with  him  surrounded  by  Rudrakanyas. 

If  the  pious  text  of  the  narrative,  the  most  excellent  one 
among  all  scriptural  texts,  is  kept  in  the  house  of  anyone  belonging 
to  any  of  the  four  castes,1  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  whether 
he  is  in  a  city  or  a  village,  country,  rural  area  or  in  a  big  land, 
he  is  Brahma,  Siva  himself  and  Lord  Janardana. 

There  are  three  good  causes  in  the  world,  of  which  the  path 
of  Dharma  is  the  most  excellent.  It  is  the  weighty  scriptural 
text  of  Devas  too.  It  is  the  great  cause  of  Siddhi.  O  son  of 
KuntI,  I  heard  it  directly  from  the  mouth  of  Isvara  and  re¬ 
counted  to  you. 

All  the  meritorious  Tirthas  situated  on  the  southern  or  northern 
bank  (of  Narmada)  have  been  particularly  described  according 
to  their  importance.  One  who  visits,  touches,  glorifies  and  listens 
to  them,  is  liberated  from  all  sins  and  goes  to  Rudraloka. 

16-24.  If  this  Purana  uttered  by  Siva  is  listened  to  always, 
a  Brahmaija  becomes  a  knower  of  the  Vedic  lore,  a  Ksatriya 
becomes  victorious,  a  Vaisya  earns  much  wealth  and  a  Sudra 
becomes  righteous. 

On  hearing  this  a  woman  attains  conjugal  felicity  Droeeny 
wealth  and  heavenly  pleasures.  7’  pr°geny’ 

A  Brahmana-slayer.  a  drink-addict,  a  thief  and  a  defiler  of 


1.  This  generous  ourlook  is  noteworthy. 


V.iii.229.25-28 


635 


preceptor’s  bed  etc.,  become  rid  of  sins  on  listening  to  the 
greatness  of  Narmada. 

A  sinnei  creating  dissension,  an  ungrateful  one,  a  servant 
guilty  of  the  breach  of  master’s  trust,  a  cow-slayer,  one  who 
administers  poison  and  one  who  sells  his  daughter— all  these 
undoubtedly  are  rid  of  sins  after  listening  to  it. 

O  king,  those  devotees  of  purified  souls,  who  always  listen 
to  it  and  adore  it,  are  blessed.  It  is  as  though  Devas,  precep¬ 
tors,  Narmada  and  Lord  Mahesvara — all  these  are  adored  by 
them. 

Hence  this  scripture  becomes  a  bestower  of  benefits,  when 
assiduously  adored  with  great  devotion  through  sweet  scents, 
flowers  and  ornaments. 

One  who  gets  the  entire  auspicious  story  of  Narmada  writ¬ 
ten  and  makes  a  gift  of  it  to  a  Brahmana  attains  that  benefit 
which  accrues  from  holy  baths  and  Dana  performed  in  all  the 
Tirthas  of  Narmada.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it. 

25-28.  This  Purana  narrated  by  Rudra  is  a  bestower  of 
great  meritorious  benefits,  heavenly  pleasures,  progeny,  wealth, 
fame  and  glory.  It  is  destructive  of  all  sins,  O  son  of  KuntI,  and 
dispels  misery  and  evil  dreams. 

It  is  a  bestower  of  all  Siddhis  of  cherished  desires  and  wealth 
on  those  who  read  and  listen. 

May  there  be  peace!  May  there  be  welfare!  May  all  the  people 
be  free  from  ailments!  Hail  unto  cows  and  Brahmanas!  May 
piety  be  our  resort,  O  son  of  Dharma! 

Reva  is  the  destroyer  of  Narakas.  It  sanctifies  the  whole 
universe  through  the  Tirthas  thereof.  O  son  of  KuntI,  may 
Narmada  be  a  bestower  of  piety  and  all-round  welfare  on  you 
always! 


636  Skanda  Purana 

CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  THIRTY 
The  Series  of  Tirthas  Enumerated} 

Siita  said: 

1-10.  After  saying  this  to  the  son  of  Pandu,  the  saintly  son 
of  Mrkanda,  the  wise  sage  who  remembered  the  events  of  seven 
Kalpas,  stopped. 

Everything  connected  with  the  excellent  greatness  of  Reva 
has  been  recounted  to  you,  O  excellent  ones,  in  the  way  it  was 
recounted  to  the  son  of  Kunti  by  Sage  Markanda. 

This  meritorious,  excellent  river  Reva,  the  sole  sanctifier  of 
the  universe,  was  born  of  the  body  of  Rudra.  It  accords  free¬ 
dom  from  fear  unto  all  living  beings. 

To  the  son  of  Dharma  who  had  requested  him  (to  narrate), 
the  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  narrated  the  different  confluences 
and  Tirthas  from  Orhkara  to  Jaladhi  (from  the  shrine  of 
Omkaresvara  to  the  ocean). 

O  sages,  I  shall  briefly  tell  you.  How  can  all  the  sixty  crore 
sixty  seven  thousand  Tirthas  be  recounted  by  any  one?  Even 
m  the  course  of  hundreds  of  years  it  is  not  possible. 

Ct;  °  excellent  sages,  in  the  manner  it  was  narrated  to  the 
son  of  Kunti,  I  shall  enumerate  the  auspicious  series  of  Tirthas 
beginning  with  the  holy  place  Omkara.  Even  as  it  is  being 

XrTo  SagCS’  bC  pIeased  to  listen- 

down  to  hoTn t0,  M?helana  al°ng  with  Uma,  after  bowing 

lotus-like  feet  of  VeTav^st  ^Tthe  Ga,?es'*na>  the 

knower<5  nf  j  ^  ’  3 .  ^  Preceptors  of  yore,  the 

divine  river  NarnT  ,^n^een  objects,  after  bowing  down  to  the 
d.vme  r.ver  Narmada,  I  shall  enumerate  this  series  of  holy 

Om  obeisance  to  Omkarpwnm  .l 
immanent  soul  of  all  bednni!  ’■ u*  °mnif°rmed  one,  the 

VS&?  ° ■ 

enumerated  by  MaTkand^th^Vn^1010^  SCrieS  °f  RevS 
one:  the  chapLs  °ne  ^ 

hermitage  of  Markanda-  then  the  1paS',The  descriPtlon  of  the 
'  •  ’  hen  the  Prasnadhikara  (the  section 


1.  This  is  an  old  way  of  presenling  ^  Qf 


V.iii.230.21-30 


637 


of  questions  asked);  then  the  praise  of  Narmada;  the  glorifi¬ 
cation  of  the  fifteen  flowing  currents; 

The  clarification  of  the  names;  the  origins  of  the  Kalpas;  the 
enumeration  of  the  names  of  twenty-one  Kalpas; 

The  characteristic  features  of  the  seven  Kalpas  experienced 
by  Markandeya;  the  greatness  of  Reva  as  well  as  that  of  Siva 
and  Visnu; 

Characteristics  of  Samhara  (Annihilation)  and  the  origin  of 
Omkara;  the  greatness  of  Omkara;  the  glorificadon  of  Amarankata; 

Amaresvara  Tlrtha;  the  great  Daruvana;  Darukesvara  Tirtha 
and  Carukesvara  Tlrtha; 

Carukasangama  confluence;  Vyatipatesvara;  Patalesvara  Tlrtha 
and  that  (Tlrtha)  which  is  called  Kotiyajna; 

Varunesvara  Tirtha  and  the  hundred  eight  Lingas;  Siddhesvara; 
Yamesa  and  Brahmesvara  thereafter; 

Sarasvata;  Astarudra;  Savitra;  that  which  is  called  Soma;  the 
great  Tirtha  Sivakhata  and  Rudravarta,  O  excellent  Brahmanas; 

The  great  Brahmavarta  Tirtha;  then  Suryavarta;  Pippalavarta 
Tirtha  and  the  confluence  of  Pippali; 

21-30.  The  greatness  of  Amarakanta;  the  confluence  of 
Kapila  (with  Reva);  the  origin  of  Visalya;  the  glorification  of 
Bhrgutunga  Mountain; 

The  meritorious  confluence  of  Visalya;  the  confluence  of 
Karamarda;  Karamardesvara  Tirtha;  the  excellent  Cakratirtha, 

The  confluence  of  Nilaganga;  the  annihilation  of  Tripurasj 
the  glorification  of  Tirthas  and  Darta;  the  Madhuka  Trtiya 
Vrata; 

Apsaresvara  Tirtha;  the  injunction  regarding  hurling  of  the 
body;  the  Tirtha  named  Jvalesvara  Tirtha  the  confluence  of 
Jvala; 

Sakratirtha;  Kusavarta;  Hamsatirtha;  Ambarisa’s  Tirtha  and 

Matrkesvara* Tirtha;  description  of  Bhrgu  Tuhga;  the  great¬ 
ness  of  Bhairava  there;  glorification  of  Capalesvara; 

The  greatness  of  Candapani,  the  confluence  of  Kaveri; 
Kuberesvara  Tirtha  and  the  confluence  of  Varahi; 

The  confluence  of  Candavega;  Candesvara  Tirtha;  the  meri¬ 
torious  confluence  of  Erandi;  the  excellent  Erandesvara  Tirtha; 

Pitrtirtha  there  itself  and  the  origin  of  Omkara  there;  the 
greatness  of  the  five  Lingas  of  Omkara,  O  leading  sages. 


638 


Skanda  Purana 


The  greatness  of  Koti  Tirtha;  and  Kakahrada  Tirtha; 
Jambukesvara  Tirtha;  and  Sarasvata  Tirtha  thereafter; 

31-40.  The  confluence  of  Kapila  and  Kapilesvara  Tirtha; 
Daitya-Sudana  Tirtha  and  Cakra  Tirtha;  Vamana  Tirtha; 

They  know  of  a  hundred  thousand  Tlrthas  in  the  eastern 
confluence  of  Kapila;  then  the  characteristics  of  Svarga  and 
Naraka  as  described  by  the  sage; 

The  structure  and  internal  arrangement  of  the  human  body; 
the  description  of  the  gift  of  a  cow;  Asokavanika  Tirtha  and 
the  description  of  Matanga’s  hermitage; 

Asokesvara  Tirtha;  the  excellent  Matahgesvara;  the  merito¬ 
rious  forest  of  deer;  Manoratha  Tirtha  there; 

The  confluence  of  Angaragarta;  the  excellent  Angaresvara; 
Meghavana  Tirtha;  the  enumeration  of  the  names  of  the  god¬ 
dess; 

The  confluence  of  Kubja;  Kubjesvara  Tirtha;  Bilvamraka  Tirtha; 
the  Purnadvlpa  Tirtha  thereafter; 

The  confluence  of  Hiranyagarbha  of  meritorious  glorifica¬ 
tion;  the  Tirtha  named  Dvlpesvara;,  the  meritorious  Yajnesvara; 

Mandavyasrama  Tirtha;  the  confluence  of  Visoka;  the  Tirtha 
named  Vaglsvara;  the  meritorious  confluence  of  Vagu; 

Sahasravartaka  Tirtha  there;  Saugandhika;  the  confluence 
of  Sarasvatl;  the  excellent  Isana  Tirtha; 

Devatatraya  Tirtha;  Sulakhata  thereafter;  Brahmoda;  Sankara; 
Saumya;  and  Sarasvata  thereafter. 

41-50.  Sahasrayajna  Tirtha;  Kapalamocana;  Agneya;  Aditlsa; 
the  excellent  Varaha  Tirtha; 

Devapath a  Tirtha;  Yajnasahasraka  Tirtha;  Sulda  Tirtha;  Dlpdkesa; 
Visnu  Tirtha;  Yodhana; 

Narmadesvara  Tirtha;  Varunesa;  Maruta;  Yogesa;  RohinI  Tirtha; 
and  Darutlrtha,  O  excellent  ones; 

Brahmavarta,  Patresa;  Vahna;  Saura  glorified:  Meghanada; 
Darutlrtha;  Devatlrtha;  Guhasraya; 

The  Tirtha  called  Narmadesvara;  the  excellent  Kapilatlrtha; 
Karanjesa;  Kundalesa;  Pippalada  thereafter; 

Vimalesvara  Tirtha;  the  confluence  of  Puskariril;  the  praise 
of  Sulabheda;  there  itself  the  exploit  of  Andhaka; 

The  offer  of  solace  unto  the  Devas;  and  the  complete  sub¬ 
jugation  of  Andhaka;  the  origin  of  Sulabheda;  the  testing  of 


V.iii.230.51-70 


639 


the  deserving  ones;  the  praise  of  Danadharma  (munificence 
and  piety);  the  glorification  of  Rsisriiga;  the  attainment  of 
Svarga  by  DIrghatapas;  the  inclination  of  Bhanumati; 

The  departure  of  Sahara  to  heaven;  the  greatness  of  Sulabheda; 
Kapilesvara  Tlrtha;  Moksatlrtha  thereafter; 

The  confluence  of  MoksanadI  river;  Vimalesvara  Tlrtha; 
Uluka  Tlrtha;  the  confluence  of  Puskarini; 

51-60.  Adityesvara  Tlrtha;  Saiigamesvara  Tlrtha;  the 
confluence  of  Bhlmakulya;  the  auspicious  Bhlmesvara  Tlrtha; 

Markandesvara  Tlrtha;  Pippalesvara;  Karotisvara  Tlrtha;  aus¬ 
picious  Indresvara  Tlrtha; 

Agastyesa;  Kumaresa;  the  excellent  Vyasesvara;  Vaidyanatha; 
Kedara;  the  Tlrtha  named  Anandesvara; 

Matrtlrtha;  Mundesa;  Caura;  Kamesvara;  the  confluence  of 
Anudhuhi;  the  two  TIrthas  viz.  Bhlma  Tlrtha  and  Arjuna  Tlrtha; 
the  Tlrtha  named  Dharmesvara;  Lunkesvara  thereafter; 

Then  Dhanadatlrtha;  Jatesa;  Mangalesvara;  Kapilesvara  Tlrtha; 
the  excellent  Goparesvara; 

The  Tlrtha  named  Maninagesvara;  the  confluence  of  Maninadl; 
Tilakesvara  Tlrtha;  Gautamesa  thereafter; 

The  Matrtlrtha  there  itself  was  described  by  the  sage,  O 
leading  sages;  Sankhacuda;  Kedara;  Parasara  thereafter. 

Bhlmesvara;  Candresa;  the  confluence  of  Asvavatl;  Bahvisvara; 
Naradesa;  Vaidyanatha;  Kaplsvara; 

Kumbhesvara;  Markanda;  Ramesa;  Laksmanesvara;  Meghesvara; 
Matsyakesa;  what  is  called  Apsara  Hrada; 

Dadhiskanda;  Madhuskanda;  Nandikesa;  Varuna;  Pavakesvara 
Tlrtha;  Kapilesvara; 

61-70.  The  Tlrtha  called  Narayana;  the  excellent  Cakratirtha; 
the  great  Candaditya  Tlrtha;  the  excellent  Candika  Tlrtha; 

The  Tlrtha  called  Yamahasa;  the  auspicious  Gangesvara,  what 
is  called  Nandikesvara;  what  is  named  Naranarayana; 

Nalesvara;  Markanda;  Sukla  Tlrtha  thereafter;  the  great 
Vyasesvara  Tlrtha  there  and  Siddhesvara, 

Koti tlrtha;  Prabha  Tlrtha;  the  excellent  Vasuklsvara;  the 
confluence  of  Raranja;  the  excellent  Markandesvara; 

The  TIrthas  named  Kotlsvara,  and  Sankarsana;  Kanakesa; 
Manmathesa;  the  Anasuyaka  Tlrtha; 

The  meritorious  confluence  of  Erandl;  the  splendid  Matrtlrtha; 
the  Tlrtha  called  Svarnasalaka;  Ambikesvara; 


640  Skanda  Purdna 

Karaiijesa;  Bharatesa;  Nagesa;  Mukutesvara;  Saubhagyasundarl 
TIrtha;  the  excellent  Dhanadesvara; 

Rohinya;  Cakratlrtha;  what  is  called  Uttaresvara;  Bhogesvara; 
Kedara;  Niskalanka  thereafter; 

Markanda;  Dhautapapa;  Angirasesvara  TIrtha;  the  confluence 
of  Kotavl;  the  meritorious  Kotitlrtha  there; 

The  great  Ayonija  TIrtha;  the  excellent  Ahgaresvara;  Skanda; 
Narmada;  Brahma;  what  is  called  Valmlkesvara; 

71-80.  Kotitlrtha;  Kapalesa;  Pandutlrtha;  Trilocana  TIrtha, 
Kapilesa;  Kambukesa;  Prabhasa;  Kohanesvara; 

Indresa;  Valukesa;  Devesa;  Sakra;  Nagesvara;  Gautamesa;  the 
excellent  Ahalyatirtha; 

Ramesvara;  Moksatlrtha;  Kusesvara  and  Lavesvara,  Narmadesa; 
Kapardlsa;  Sagaresa  thereafter;  the  great  Ghauraditya  TIrtha; 
Aparayonija  TIrtha;  Pingalesvara  TIrtha,  the  excellent  Bhrgvlsvara; 

Dasasvamedhika  TIrtha;  Kotitlrtha,  O  excellent  ones;  Markanda; 
Brahmatirtha;  the  excellent  Adivaraha; 

The  TIrtha  named  Asapura;  Kaubera;  Maruta;  Varunesa  Yamesa; 
Ramesa;  Karkatesvara; 

Sakresa;  Somatlrtha;  the  excellent  Nandahrada;  the 
Vaisnavacakra  TIrtha;  the  ones  called  after  Rama  and  Kesava; 

RukminI  TIrtha;  the  excellent  Siva  TIrtha;  Jayavaraha  TIrtha; 
the  TIrtha  called  Asmahaka; 

Angaresa;  Siddhesa;  Tapesvara  thereafter;  again  the  TIrtha 
named  Siddhesvara;  Varunesvara; 

The  meritorious  Parasaresvara;  the  excellent  Kusumesa; 
Kundalesvara  TIrtha  and  Kalakalesvara; 

81-90.  What  is  called  Nyahkuvaraha;  the  excellent  Ankola 
TIrtha;  Svetavaraha  TIrtha;  Bhargala;  the  excellent  Saura  TIrtha; 

Humkarasvami  TIrtha;  the  splendid  Sukla  TIrtha;  the  confluence 
of  Madhumatl;  Sangamesvara  TIrtha; 

Narmadesvara;  the  confluence  of  three  rivers;  Anekesvara 
TIrtha;  Sarbhesa  named  after  Moksa; 

The  meritorious  confluence  of  Kaverl;  the  TIrtha  called 
Gopesvara;  Markandesa;  Nagesa;  the  confluence  of  Udambarl; 

The  TIrtha  called  Sambaditya  and  the  confluence  of  Udambarl; 
Siddhesvara  (Markanda)  as  well  as  that  created  by  Siddhesvarl; 

Gopesa;  Kapilesa;  the  excellent  Vaidyanatha;  Pingalesvara 
TIrtha;  the  great  Saindhavayatana; 

The  TIrtha  called  Bhutisvara;  thereafter  Gangavaha; 
Gautamesvara  TIrtha  and  Dasasvamedhika; 


V.iii.230.91-110 


641 


The  meritorious  Bhrgutirtha  and  the  well  known 
Saubhagyasundarl;  Vrsakhata  there  itself;  Kedara;  Dhutapataka; 

Dhutesvarl  Tirtha;  Erandl  Sarigama;  Kanakesvarl  Tirtha, 
Jvalesvara  Tirtha  thereafter; 

The  Tirtha  named  Salagrama;  the  excellent  Somanatha;  Udlrna- 
varaha  Tirtha;  Candraprabhasaka; 

91-100.  Dvadasaditya  Tirtha;  the  Tirtha  that  is  named 
Siddhesvara;  Kapilesvara  Tirtha,  the  auspicious  Traivikarma  Tin  ha; 

The  Tirtha  called  Visvarupa;  that  which  is  created  by  Narayana; 
Mulasrlpati  Tirtha;  what  is  called  Caulasrlpati; 

Devatlrtha;  Harhsatlrtha;  the  excellent  Prabhasa  Tirtha; 
Mulasthana;  Kanthesa;  the  Attahasa  Tirtha  thereafter; 

Bhurbhuvesvara  Tirtha;  the  well  known  Stilesvarl;  Sarasvata; 
Darukesa;  the  excellent  Tirtha  of  Asvins; 

The  unparalleled  Savitrl  Tirtha;  Valakhilyesvara;  Narmadesa; 
Matrtlrtha;  the  excellent  Devatlrtha; 

Macchakesvara  Tirtha,  the  splendid  Sikhitlrtha;  O  excellent 
sage,  Kotitirtha  and  Mrda  named  Kotlsvarl; 

The  Tirtha  named  Paitamaha;  (Tirtha)  called  Mandavyesvara; 
Narayanesa  there;  Akruresa  thereafter; 

Devakhata;  Siddharudra;  the  excellent  Vaidyanatha;  Matrtlrtha; 
Uttaresa  thereafter; 

Narmadesa;  Matrtlrtha  again;  Kurarl  Tirtha;  Dhaundhesa; 
Dasakanyaka; 

Suvarnabindutirtha;  Rnapapapramocana;  Bharabhutesvara 
Tirtha;  Mundlsvara; 

101-110.  Ekasala;  Dindipani;  the  great  Apsarasa  Tirtha; 
Munyalaya;  Markanda  Tirtha  named  Ganita-Devata; 

Amalesvara  Tirtha;  Kanthesvara  Tirtha;  AsadhI  Tirtha;  Srngl 
Tirtha; 

Bakesvara  Tirtha;  Kapalesa;  Markanda;  Kapilesa;  the  confluence 
of  Erandl; 

Erandi  Devata  Tirtha;  Ramatlrtha  thereafter;  the  great  Tirtha 
of  Jamadagni,  the  confluence  of  Reva  and  the  ocean; 

Lotanesvara  Tirtha;  Tirtha  named  Lunkesa;  Vrsakhata  Kunda 
also,  O  excellent  sages; 

Hamsesvara;  Tilada;  Vasavesvara;  Kotlsvara  Tirtha;  the  ex¬ 
cellent  Alika  Tirtha;  Vimalesvara  Tirtha  in  the  confluence  of 
Reva  and  the  ocean. 

Thus  the  highly  meritorious  series  of  the  TIrthas  has  been 


642 


Skanda  Parana 


described  by  me,  O  great  sages.  The  meritorious  pearl  neck¬ 
lace  of  the  TIrthas  has  been  wreathed  through  the  string  in 
the  form  of  the  banks. 

It  is  purified  by  the  waters  of  Narmada.  It  has  been  made 
by  Markandeya  for  embellishing  good  people  and  for  the  welfare 
of  all  the  worlds. 

It  suppresses  the  darkness  of  sins.  It  should  always  be  worn 
by  the  seekers  of  piety.  By  repeating  this  once,  sin  committed 
in  the  course  of  a  day  and  night  is  destroyed. 

By  repeating  this  three  times,  the  sin  arising  in  the  course 
of  a  month  is  destroyed.  By  repeating  it  before  Siva,  sin  com¬ 
mitted  in  the  course  of  three  months  is  destroyed.  By  repeat¬ 
ing  it  for  a  month,  sin  of  a  year  is  destroyed  and  by  repeating 
it  for  a  year,  sin  of  a  hundred  years  is  destroyed. 

111-113.  If  a  devotee  recites  the  meritorious  series  of 
the  TIrthas,  standing  before  Brahmanas  taking  food  at  the 
time  of  Sraddha,  he  would  be  on  a  par  with  one  who  performs 
Gayasraddha. 

If  he  recites  this  with  faith  in  front  of  the  deities  at  the  time 
of  worship,  he  will  delight  all  the  Devas  and  sanctify  the 
entire  family. 

Thus  the  meritorious  series  of  TIrthas  situated  on  the  banks 
of  Reva  has  been  recounted  by  me,  O  sinless  excellent  sages. 
Listen  further. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  THIRTYONE 
The  Number  of  Tirlhas  Enumerated 

Sula  said: 

1-6.  Similarly,  O  excellent  sages,  I  shall  enumerate  the 
TIrthastabakas  (bunches  of  flowers  in  the  form  of  the  TIrthas) 
wherewith  the  wreath  of  Tlrtha  series  has  been  strung  together 
and  divided  (into  separate  units)  for  the  increase  of  devotees’ 
delight. 

I  shall  mention  the  bunches  (groups)  of  the  TIrthas  in  the 
same  manner  as  mentioned  by  the  son  of  Mrkanda  earlier  in 
response  to  the  queries  made  by  the  son  of  Kuntl. 


V.iii.231.7-18 


643 


Indeed  the  meritorious  Reva  is  the  Kalpalata  (wish-yielding 
creeper)  that  originated  by  drinking  the  water  of  Siva.  It  is 
splendidly  blossomed  through  the  flowers  of  the  Tirthas  situ¬ 
ated  on  both  the  banks.  The  three  worlds  have  been  rendered 
fragrant  by  the  glorious  sweet  scents. 

Sage  Markanda,  the  most  excellent  one  among  intelligent 
persons  is,  indeed  the  bee  capable  of  knowing  best  the  taste 
of  the  honey  of  those  flowers. 

The  sage,  a  leading  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu,  always 
wears  in  his  heart  that  sacred  garland  of  flowers  rendered 
decorative  by  the  bunches  of  Tirthas.  O  excellent  sages,  I  shall 
explain  the  situation  of  the  bunches  thereof. 

7-18.  Beginning  with  Omkara  Tlrtha  and  ending  with 
the  western  ocean,  there  are  thirty-five  confluences  of  rivers. 
They  are  destructive  of  sins. 

They  are  eleven  on  the  northern  bank  and  twenty-three  on 
the  southern  bank.  The  thirty-fifth  one,  the  most  excellent 
one,  is  the  confluence  of  Reva  and  the  ocean. 

Thus  along  with  the  confluences  on  the  two  banks  of  Reva, 
there  are  four  hundred  famous  Tirthas,  O  excellent  Brahmanas. 

There  are  three  hundred  thirty-three  Siva  Tirthas.  I  shall 
mention  these  too  individually,  which  you  listen  to,  O  excel¬ 
lent  ones. 

O  leading  sages,  among  them  there  are  ten  Markandesvara 
Tirthas,  ten  originating  from  Aditya  (i.e.  Aditya  Ksetras),  nine 
Kapilesvaras,  eight  installed  by  Soma,  an  equal  number  of 
Narmadesvaras,  eight  Kotitlrthas,  and  seven  Siddhesvaras. 

Nagesvaras  are  seven  on  both  the  banks  of  Reva.  Seven  indeed 
are  created  (installed)  by  Vahni  (Fire-god).  There  are  seven 
Avartas  there. 

Kedaresvara  Tirthas  are  five  and  five  Indra  Tirthas.  Varunesas 
are  five  and  five  indeed  are  Dhanadesvaras.  There  are  five 
Devatlrthas  and  four  Yamesvaras; 

Vaidyanathas  are  four  and  four  are  Vanaresvara  Tirthas.  O 
leading  sages,  Arigaresvara  Tirthas  also  are  as  many.  Sarasvata 
Tirthas  are  four  and  there  are  four  Darukesvaras. 

Gautamesvara  Tirthas  are  three  and  Ramesvara  Tirthas  are 
also  three.  Kapalesvara  Tirthas  and  Hamsatlrthas  are  three 
each. 

Moksatlrthas  are  three  and  Vimalesvaras  too  are  three.  The 
sage  stated  that  there  are  three  Sahasra-yajna  Tirthas. 


644 


Skanda  Purdna 


19-27.  Three  Bhlmesvaras  are  enumerated  and  there  are 
three  Svarnatlrthas.  Two  Dhautapapaksetras  have  been  men¬ 
tioned.  So  also  two  Karanjcsas. 

There  are  two  Rnamocana  TIrthas  and  two  Skandesvaras.  O 
Brahmanas,  there  are  two  Dasasvamedha  TIrthas  and  two  Nandi 
TIrthas. 

There  are  two  Manmathesas  and  two  Bhrgutlrthas.  There 
are  two  Parasaresvaras  and  two  Ayonlsambhavas. 

There  are  two  Vyasesvaras  and  two  Pitrtlrthas  have  been 
mentioned.  There  are  two  Nandikesvara  TIrthas  and  two  Gopesvaras 
have  been  remembered. 

So  also  two  Marutesas  and  two  Jvalesvaras  are  remembered. 
There  are  two  meritorious  Suklatlrthas  and  two  Apsaresatlrthas. 

There  are  two  Pippalesvara  TIrthas  and  two  TIrthas  named 
Mandavyesvara.  Similarly  the  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  enu¬ 
merated  two  Dvlpesvaras.  There  are  two  Uttaresvara  TIrthas 
and  two  Asokesas,  two  Yodhanapuras  and  two  RohinI  TIrthas. 

Two  Lunkesvaras  have  been  enumerated  by  the  sage.  O 
Brahmanas,  there  are  one  hundred  nineteen  TIrthas  mentioned 
one  by  one.  Two  hundred  fourteen  TIrthas  have  been  grouped 
in  the  Stabakas  (bunches). 

These  TIrthas  are  Saivas  (pertaining  to  Siva).  O  excellent 
ones,  listen  to  the  Vaisnava,  Brahma  and  Sakta  TIrthas  enu¬ 
merated  in  order. 

28-38.  The  sage  enumerated  twenty-eight  Vaisnava  TIrthas. 
O  excellent  sages;  among  them  six  are  Varaha  TIrthas. 

Four  are  Cakratlrthas.  The  remaining  eighteen  alone  are 
praised  by  Visnu.  Thus  the  son  of  Mrkandu  said  earlier. 

Seven  TIrthas  have  been  enumerated  where  Brahma  achieved 
Siddhi.  In  three  of  them  there  is  the  adoration  performed  by 
Brahma  and  the  other  four  have  Brahma  as  the  Lord.  Thus 
twenty-eight  TIrthas  have  been  enumerated  in  due  order  and 
number. 

This  is  unparalleled  in  sanctity;  this  is  excessively  destructive 
of  sins.  The  greatness  of  the  meritorious  story  of  Narmada  has 
been  declared  by  the  sage. 

Suta  said: 

Thus  the  series  of  TIrthas  on  Reva  have  been  generally  briefly 
mentioned  by  me  in  the  same  way  as  Sage  Markanda  recounted 
to  the  son  of  Kuntl. 


V.iii.231. 39-54 


645 


Many  subsidiary  Tirthas  are  concealed  therein.  O  sinless 
ones,  listen  to  the  details  as  to  where  and  how  many  lie  embedded 
there. 

All  round  Omkara  Tirtha  in  all  directions  within  two  Krosas 
from  Mountain  Amarakantaka  the  number  of  Tlrthas  whether 
hidden  or  manifest,  O  excellent  Brahmana,  is  three  and  a  half 
crore. 

In  the  confluence  of  Kapila,  there  are  a  crore  of  Tirthas. 

In  Asokavanika  Tirtha  there  are  a  hundred  thousand  shrines. 
O  excellent  sages,  in  the  confluence  of  Arigaragarta,  there  are 
a  hundred  Tlrthas. 

There  are  ten  thousand  Tirthas  in  the  confluence  of  Kubja. 
A  hundred  Tirthas  are  stationed  in  the  confluence  of 
Hiranyagarbha. 

There  are  sixty-eight  Tirthas  in  the  confluence  of  Visoka 
and  a  thousand  Tlrthas  in  the  confluence  of  Vagu. 

39-45.  There  are  a  hundred  Tirthas  in  the  confluence  of 
SarasvatT,  two  hundred  in  Sukla  Tlrtha,  a  thousand  in  Visnutirthas 
and  ten  thousand  in  Mahismatl. 

O  Brahmanas,  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  Tirthas  are 
present  in  Sulabheda.  The  sage  has  mentioned  that  there  are 
more  than  a  thousand  Tlrthas  in  Devagrama. 

More  than  seven  hundred  Tirthas  are  present  in  Lunkesvara 
and  one  hundred  eight  Tlrthas  in  the  confluence  of  Maninadi 
.  They  know  of  more  than  one  hundred  eight  Tirthas  in 
Vaidyanatha. 

O  Brahmanas,  in  Kurhbhesvara  Tirtha  there  are  as  many. 
More  than  a  hundred  thousand  Tlrthas  are  situated  in  the 
confluence  of  Reva  and  UrI. 

It  is  the  statement  of  Markanda  that  there  may  be  more 
than  that.  Eighty-eight  thousand  Tirthas  are  present  in  Vyasadvipa. 

There  are  ten  thousand  eight  Tirthas  in  the  confluence  of 
Karanja.  Similarly  there  are  one  hundred  eight  Tirthas  in  the 
confluence  of  Erandi.  There  are  sixty-eight  Tirthas  in  Dhutapapa. 
The  sage  has  spoken  of  a  hundred  meritorious  Tirthas  in  the 
Skanda  Tirtha. 

46-54.  Sixty-eight  Tirthas  are  present  in  Kohanesa  and 
one  crore  and  a  half  Tirthas  are  present  in  Korilapura. 

He  has  mentioned  more  than  a  thousand  in  Ramakesava 
Tirtha.  Indeed  a  thousand  Tirthas  are  present  in  Asmahaka. 


646 


Skanda  Parana 


O  excellent  Brahmanas,  there  are  eight  hundred  two  thou¬ 
sand  Tirthas  in  Suklatirtha  as  mentioned  to  the  son  of  Kunti 
by  the  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrgu  formerly. 

In  the  case  of  the  remaining  rivers,  except  in  the  case  of 
the  confluence  of  Kaverl,  he  has  mentioned  one  hundred  eight 
Tirthas  in  each  confluence. 

O  Brahmanas,  there  are  five  hundred  Tirthas  in  the  confluence 
of  Kaverl.  As  said,  special  efficacy  exists  in  the  Tirthas  during 
Parvans  (festival  days). 

They  say  that  Moksatirtha  is  excellent  and  supported  by  the 
Puranapurusa  (Ancient  Being) .  One  crore  Tirthas  are  present 
in  the  holy  spot  of  Bhrgu.  O  excellent  sages,  who  is  competent 
to  speak  more  about  the  Tirthas?  It  is  mentioned  as  the  resort 
of  all  immortal  ones  and  all  Tirthas.  It  is  well-known  in  all  the 
three  worlds  and  is  honoured.  It  is  the  means  of  achievement 
of  miraculous  powers.  In  Bharabhuti  one  hundred  eight  Tirthas 
are  present. 

One  hundred  fifty  Tirthas  are  present  in  Akruresvara  Tlrtha. 
The  sage  has  mentioned  that  there  are  more  than  a  hundred 
thousand  Tirthas  in  Vimalesvara  Tlrtha  at  the  confluence  of 
Reva  and  the  ocean. 


CHAPTER  TWO  HUNDRED  THIRTYTWO 
The  Finale  of  the  Reva  Khanda 


Suta  said: 

1-7.  Thus,  O  Brahmanas,  the  excellent  greatness  of  Reva 
has  been  recounted  to  you  as  imparted  to  the  son  of  Kunti 
formerly  by  Markandeya. 

So  also  the  groups  of  the  Tirthas  with  special  characteristics 
in  some  have  been  recounted  by  me  in  the  proper  order  and 
the  due  number. 

This  is  unparalleled  in  sanctity.  This  is  highly  destructive  of 
sins.  The  story  of  Narmada  and  the  greatness  spoken  by  the 
sage  is  meritorious. 

O  leading  sages,  the  intelligent  son  of  Mrkanda,  the  Brahmana 


V.iii.232.8-18 


647 


who  survived  seven  Kalpas  on  Narmada  was  the  most  excellent 
one  among  those  who  know  the  Highest  Reality. 

Formerly  after  resorting  to  all  the  Tlrthas  and  all  the  rivers, 
he  sought  refuge  in  Reva  whom  he  saw  as  one  who  remembers 
many  Kalpas,  one  born  of  the  physical  form  of  Siva  and  one 
about  whom  Sarva  said,  “This  is  my  Kala  (digit).”  She  is  a 
divine  river  without  old  age  and  death,  the  great  destroyer  of 
Daityas.  She  is  endowed  with  great  power,  is  a  destroyer  of 
worldly  existence,  the  very  Jahnavi  (Ganga)  of  Bhava. 

He  (i.e.  Markandeya)  had  great  and  excellent  devotion  to¬ 
wards  her  and  he  became  free  from  old  age  and  mortality. 

8-18.  O  excellent  ones,  sixty  crore  sixty  thousand  Tlrthas  are 
established  on  both  the  banks  together  step  by  step. 

All  round  there  are  thousands  of  rivers  with  Tlrthas  therein. 
But,  O  leading  sages,  I  think  they  never  come  on  a  par  with 
Reva. 

O  Brahmanas,  thus  everything  that  was  asked  by  you  has 
been  recounted  to  you,  which  originally  the  Wind-god  told  the 
sages  after  having  himself  heard  directly  from  the  mouth  of 
Mahesa. 

Similarly  the  son  of  Mrkanda  too  after  seeing  the  sacred 
river  along  with  the  Tlrthas  step  by  step  narrated  it  to  the  son 
of  Pandu. 

Thus,  O  excellent  Brahmanas,  the  meritorious  story  of  Narmada, 
very  rare  in  all  the  three  worlds,  has  been  narrated  to  you. 

Of  what  avail  is  the  water  of  the  thousands  of  other  rivers, 
if  the  water  of  Reva  that  destroys  sins  is  resorted  to? 

A  person  who  resorts  to  the  water  of  Mekala  attains  perma¬ 
nent  salvation. 

Even  as  a  man  resorts  to  it  always  with  faith  or  without  it 
and  undertakes  pilgrimage  to  the  Tlrthas,  he  will  invariably 
obtain  whatever  he  wishes. 

This  water  of  Narmada  is  directly  Brahma,  Hari  and  the 
great  Hara.  This  is  the  Brahman  without  form,  the  Kaivalya 

(state  of  being  the  Absolute). 

The  Tlrthas  and  the  rivers  that  bestow  pleasing  benefits 
may  roar  only  as  long  as  Reva  and  the  eager  service  thereto 
is  not  remembered  by  men  during  Kali  Age. 

Certainly,  for  the  sake  of  the  welfare  of  the  world,  this  Reva, 
a  power  in  the  form  of  a  river,  has  been  caused  to  issue  forth 
from  his  own  body  by  Siva. 


648 


Skcinda  Purana 


Yajnas,  forests  and  holy  shrines  etc.,  roar  much  only  as  long 
as  the  glorification  of  the  name  of  Narmada  is  not  carried  out 
in  the  Kali  Age. 

19-30.  The  weight  of  austerities,  Danas,  Vratas  and  other 
things  is  reckoned  only  so  long  as  the  river  born  of  Bharga  is 
not  resorted  to  by  men  on  the  earth. 

Those  who  stay  on  the  northern  bank  are  the  followers  of 
Rudra  (and  go  to  Rudra’s  region).  Those  who  stay  on  the 
southern  bank  attain  the  Vaisnava  Loka. 

They  are  blessed,  they  are  the  excellent  ones  who  reside  in 
the  lands  where  this  Narmada  flows  continuously,  this  Narmada 
that  is  capable  of  destroying  Narakas.  It  is  created  by  Siva 
himself. 


Those  who  drink  the  meritorious  water  originating  from  the 
river  of  the  Consort  of  Parvati,  are  really  meritorious.  They 
never  meet  with  grief. 

O  Brahmanas,  one  who  listens  to  or  glorifies  this  unparal¬ 
leled  sacred  story  of  Reva,  is  rid  of  all  sins. 

The  benefit  thereof  is  eight  times  more  than  the  benefit 
obtained  when  all  the  Vedas  along  with  the  six  Angas  recited 
in  the  Pada  and  Krama  order  are  listened  to. 

By  listening  once  to  the  story  of  Reva  one  obtains  that  benefit 
which  a  performer  of  Sattra  lasting  twelve  years  obtains. 

By  listening  once  to  the  greatness  of  Reva,  one  gets  the 
benefit  of  plunging  into  all  the  Tlrthas,  Oceans  etc.  This  narrative 
is  conducive  to  piety.  It  is  most  excellent  of  all  scriptures.  If 
it  is  written  (copied)  and  kept  in  the  house  by  any  person  of 
any  caste,  in  any  village,  city,  rural  zone  or  region  of  land,  that 
ma"  1 1?  BraBma>  that  man  is  Siva,  he  is  Lord  Janardana  himself. 

This  is  the  path  of  piety,  wealth,  love  and  salvation,  resorted 
to  by  Devas.  It  is  the  preceptor  of  preceptors.  It  is  the  great 
scripture  causing  the  achievement  of  perfection. 

t  31;f-  u  At  deT°^  Sh°Uld  aIways  listen  to  this  Purana  ut¬ 
tered  by  the  Lord  A  Brahmana  shall  become  well-versed  in  the 
Vedas;  a  K^atnya  becomes  victorious;  a  Vaisya  becomes  wealthy; 
and  a  Sudra  becomes  pious.  ’ 

By  listening  to  this  a  woman  obtains  conjugal  felicity  and 
good  progeny  and  also  glory,  happiness,  heavenly  residence 
and  rebirth  in  a  most  excellent  family 

The  following  sinners  are  liberated  from  sins  :  a  person  who 


V.iii.232.40-49 


649 


discriminates  in  seating  people  in  rows  at  the  time  of  meals, 
the  ungrateful,  one  disloyal  to  one’s  master,  one  who  deceives 
friends,  a  slayer  of  cows,  an  administerer  of  poison,  one  who 
sells  one  s  daughtets,  a  Brahmana-slayer,  an  imbiber  of  liquor, 
a  thief,  one  who  lies  on  the  bed  of  the  preceptor.  These  and 
other  sinners  listening  to  the  story  of  Narmada  and  resorting 
to  the  rivei  for  a  year,  shall  undoubtedly  be  liberated  from  all 


sms. 


One  who  spoils  cooked  food,  one  who  cooks  wastefully,  one 
who  censures  Devas  and  Brahmanas,  a  slanderer  of  parents, 
preceptors,  good  people  and  king— all  these  undoubtedly  are 
liberated  from  sins. 

Those  persons  of  purified  souls  who  listen  everyday  to  this 
sacred  narrative  pertaining  to  Narmada  and  worship  it  with 
flowers,  fruits,  sandalpaste  etc.,  diverse  kinds  of  food  offerings, 
do  get  great  benefit.  If  this  sacred  story  is  honoured,  it  is  as 
though  Devas  and  preceptors  are  honoured. 

40-49.  This  benefit  happens  here  as  well  as  in  the  other 
world.  No  hesitation  need  be  felt  in  this  respect.  Hence  by 
means  of  all  efforts  one  should  worship  devoutly  this  sacred 
book  and  a  person  who  reads  it  must  be  honoured  with  scents, 
garments,  ornaments,  etc.,  and  also  the  book,  Reva-Mahatmya. 
In  regard  to  the  auspicious  story  of  Narmada,  one  obtains  that 
benefit  which  is  usually  obtained  through  study  of  the  Vedas 
and  the  maintenance  of  Agnihotras. 

By  listening  to  the  story  of  Narmada  one  gets  that  merit 
entirely  which  is  obtained  in  Kuruksetra,  Piabhasa,  Puskaia, 
Rudravarta,  Gaya,  Varanasi  in  particular,  Gaiigadvara,  Prayaga, 
the  confluence  of  Ganga  and  the  ocean  and  other  similar  Tirthas. 
The  story  of  Narmada  is  auspicious  in  the  beginning,  middle 
and  end.  Listen  to  the  great  benefit  that  one  who  devoutly 

listens  to  it  gets.  ,  ... 

After  reaching  the  shrine  of  Siva,  he  will  become  an  atten¬ 
dant  of  Rudra.  He  will  be  surrounded  by  virgins  of  Devas.  He 

will  rejoice  with  Siva.  .  .  T  • 

This  is  a  narrative  of  reighteousncss.  It  is  meritorious.  It  is 
the  most  excellent  of  all  narratives.  O  excellent  ones,  it  sho 
be  read  in  the  house  of  anyone  of  the  four  castes.  I  consider 
his  house  blessed.  The  householder  and  the  Family 'are I  also 
blessed.  If  any  devotee  honours  the  book  about  Narmada,  ,t 


650 


Skanda  Purana 


is  as  though  Narmada  too  is  honoured  and  also  Lord  Mahesvara. 
If  the  reader  is  honoured,  Devas  and  sages  too  are  honoured. 

50-55.  A  man  who  causes  the  entire  excellent  story  of 
Narmada  to  be  written  and  gifts  it  to  a  Brahmana  obtains  the 
benefit  of  plunging  into  Narmada  and  all  other  Tirthas.  There 
is  no  doubt  about  it. 

This  story  is  an  ornament  unto  all  the  scriptures.  This  Purana 
is  narrated  by  Rudra.  It  accords  the  benefit  of  great  merit, 
heavenly  pleasures  and  sons.  It  is  conducive  to  wealth,  fame 
and  glory. 

It  augments  piety  and  longevity.  It  destroys  misery  and  evil 
dreams.  It  bestows  all  the  Siddhis  and  cherished  things  on 
those  who  read  and  listen  to.  If  this  Purana  of  great  merit 
gifted  by  one  is  read  by  Brahmanas  the  devotee  stays  in  Sivaloka 
for  as  many  years  as  there  are  letters  in  the  Purana. 

Thus  this  story  of  Narmada  has  been  narrated  well  by  the 
chief  sage  Suta.  Originally  it  was  obtained  by  the  Wind-god 
from  the  mouth  of  Sarva  and  narrated  to  others.  It  is  worthy 
of  being  known  by  all  the  three  worlds.  Suta  narrated  this  in 
front  of  the  sages  and  the  Kulapati. 


::  The  End  of  Reva  Khanda  :: 


INDEX 


Abala  12 

abduciion  of  Rukminl  407 
Abhaya  572 
Abhyariga  188 
ablution  75 

ablution  at  the  time  of  solar  eclipse  219 

Acamana  577 

Acarya  350 

Acchoda  572 

Acyuta  171,  447,  450 

Adhoksaja  560 

Ad  h vara  88 

Adimoksa  54 

Adis  7 

Aditi  146 

Aditya  379,  380,  575 
Adi  lyah  rdaya  157 
Adityas  19,  25,  65,  66,  540 
Adityesvara  435,  436 
Adityesvara  shrine  221 
Adityesvara  Tirlha  435,  437 
Adivaraha  535 
Adivaraha  Tirlha  390 
adoration  40 

adoration  of  the  deity  629 
aerial  chariot  17 
afflictions  in  the  cars  539 
Agaslycsvara  230 
Aghamarsana  577 
Aghora  94 
agna  aydhi  46 
Agncya  174,  187,  263,  498 
Agneya  bath  498 
Agncya  missile  170,  174 
Agneya  Purana  4 
Agni  66 

Agnihotra  141,  335 
Agnihotrin  184 
Agnija  360 
Agnikalpa  53 
Agniloka  119,  130 
agnimile  46 

Agnistoma  79,  130,  141,  142 
Agnistoma  Yajna  147 


Agni  Tirlha  125,  384,  415 
Agrayana  79 
Ahalya  396,  397 
Ahalycsvara  Tirlha  396 
Ahavanlya  340 
Ahitagni  184 
ailment  of  eyes  539 
Ailments  of  men  497 
airuvata  167 
Ajyapas  17 
Akarhksa  18 

akarpanya  (absence  of  miserliness)  79 
Aksakumara  265 
Alambusa  543 

Alatacakra  (circular  movement  of  a  fire¬ 
brand)  60 
Alika  TTrtha  622 
Alpanadis  631 
Amalaka  102 
Amalapan'ata  571 
Amalasaraka  173 
Amalesvara  173,  603 
Amalivrksa  102 
Amara  60 

Amarakantaka  74,  81,  84,  90,  115,  572 

Amara  mountain  446 

Amarankata  59 

Amaraparvata  486 

Amaravatl  15,  90 

Amarcsa  52 

Amaresvara  84,  85,  89,  120 
An'iba  113 

Ambarisa  Tirlha  1 1 7 
Ambho  69 
Ambika  570 
Amitarikrama  267 
AmoghaksT  572 
Arnra  102 
Amras  7 

Amrta  (Nectar)  42,  67,  70 
Amrla  12,  17,  33,  572 
Amrtasambhava  14 
Amsuman  540,  541 
Anaksara  85 


652 


SkandaPurana 


Anala  58,  620 
Anandelvara  231 
Anariga  427 

Anarakelvara  Tirtha  453 
Analaka  116 

Anasuya  79,  335,  336,  338,  339,  340, 
341,  342,  343,  344 

Andhaka  162,  165,  166,  167,  168,  170, 
172,  173,  174,  175,  177,  437 
Andhatamisra  443,  445,  493 
Arigaraka  364 
Arigaraka  CaturthI  365 
Arigaraka  Tirtha  363 
An  gas  3,  386 
Anger  572 

anger,  the  place  of  522 
Arigiras  279,  407 
Arigirasa  362 
Arigirasa  Tirtha  362 
Arigiras-s  47 
Anila  620 
Arijana  IS,  575 
Arijanisuta  267 
Ahkura  471 
Ankuresvara  473 
Arikurelvara  Tirtha  472 
Annapralana  79 
annihilation  51,  54,  67 
Annihilation  by  Twelve  Suns  64 
annihilation  of  all  living  beings  54,  134, 
343,  348,  578,  583 
annihilation  of  seven  Kalpas  10 
annihilation  of  the  universe  64 
annihilation  of  the  Yuga  173 
Antahpura  107 
Apa  620 
Apara  569 
dpohisthd  499,  577 
Apsara  555 
Aptoryama  79 
Aranyaka  46 
Arbuda  142 
Arcana  119 
Argha  195 
Argha  Mantra  614 
Arghya  28,  103 
Arghyapadya  98,  99 
Arjuna  85 
Arogya  572 
Arlha  557 


Arundhatl  572 
Aruni  479 
Aryaman  540 
Asadha  301 
Asadhi  605 
A$adhi  Tiratha  605 
Asani  60 
Asat  628 
Asauca  202 

Asipatravana  300,  304,  444,  445 
Asmahaka  414 

Asprha  (absence  of  desire)  79 
Associating  with  sinners  536 
Alarm  as,  system  of  four  137 
Asuimurii  94 
Asthibhanjana  443,  444 
Asuci  593 
AsN'amedha  9,  90 
Asvamedha  Yajna  156,  367,  369 
Asvattha  350,  572 
Asvayuj  79 

Asvayuja  104,  503,  509,  579 
Asvina  100,  307 
Asvina  Tirtha  575 
AtasI  71,  104 
Atikrcchra  38 
Atiralra  79,  384 
Aunan  63,  399,  456 
Atmayajna  37 
Atreya  47 

Au-i  40,  279,  335,  342,  415,  479 

Aiyagnisioma  79 

auspiciousness  158 

Avabhrtha  558,  561 

Avantya-khanda  1 

avariciousness  43 

Avarta  76 

Avici  300 

Avyaya  54 

Ayana  301 

Ayoniga  455 

Ayoniprabhava  'Ortha  382 
Ayonisambhava  Tirtha  363 

Babhru  419 
Badarl  572 
Badaryalrama  306 
Badavamukha  62 
Bahurupa  53 
Baka  27,  30,  53,  111 


Index 


653 


Bakula  7 
Bala  405 
Balabhadra  333 
Balakesvara  605 
Balarama  411 
Bali  77,  371 

Bana  93,  94,  96,  97,  98,  106,  107,  111, 
114,  370 
Banasura  92 
Barhaspatya  53 
Barhaspatya  Purana  5 
barren  woman  525 
bath,  different  kinds  ofj498 
bath  in  Devakhatas  497 
bath  in  the  Kuberesa  Tirtha  394 
bath  in  the  waters  of  Narmada  223 
bath  in  Vrsakhata  520 
bath  in  Yama  Tirtha  394 
bath  on  seven  (consecutive)  Mondays 
537 


battle  between  Rama  and  Ravana  265 
benefit  of  a  Tirtha  631 
bet  247 
Bhadra  569 

Bhadrakali  Sarigama  566 
Bhadra  Kama  77 
Bhadrakarnika  571 
Bhadrapada  579,  580,  581 
Bhadrasundari  572 
Bhadresvari  571 
Bhaga  55,  540 
Bhagavata  5 
Bhagavala  Purana  4 
BhagTralha  500 
Bhairava  113,  117,  231 


Bhakti  144 
Bhalla  356 
Bhandari  Tirtha  354 
Bhanu  465,  621 

Bhanu  afflicts  with  kustharoga  622 
Bhanumatl  207,  210,  212,  215,  542,  624 


Bharabhuta  589 
Bharabhutesvara  Tirtha  589 
Bharabhuti  590 


Bharabhuti  Tirtha  586 
Bharadvaja  471,  479 
Bharala  12, 17, 19,22,24,51,52,53,60, 
80. 115, 125, 127, 133, 139, 140, 143, 


146,  345,  561,  565 
Bharatasrama  572 


Bharatavarsa  362 
Bharati  178 
Bharga  44,  382 
Bhargalesvara  Sankara  433 
Bhargava  121 
Bhargava  (Venus)  176 
Bhargavas  47 
Bhargavi  556 
Bhj^ana  55 

Bhaskara  37,  348,  349,  350,  379,  437, 
465,  565,  575 
Bhaskara  Tirtha  435 
Bhasmasnana  498 
Bhasmi  177 
BhasvatT  160 
Bhaumika  79 
Bha\^a  32,  38,  39 
Bhavamurti  96 
Bhavani  45,  355,  571 
Bhavisya  Purana  4,  92 
Bhavya  79 
Bhima  45 
Bhimadevi  572 
Bhimes\jara  Tirtha  256 
Bhismaka  403 
Bhoga^ti  160,  179 

Bhrgu  31,  40,  47,  279,  341,  354,  513, 
517,  518,  520,  521,  522,  524,  555, 
558,  560,  572 
Bhrgu,  the  anger  of  518 
Bhrgukaccha  576,  607 
Bhrgukaccha,  origin  of  518 
Bhrgukacchaka  493 
bhrguksetra  520,  523,  532,  560,  562, 
572 

Bhrgu  Tirtha  511,  580 
Bhrgutunga  199,  200 
Bhrkutesvara  Tirtha  384,  589 
Bhrngin  61 
Bhrngisa  177 
BhOh  13,  55,  68,  145 
Bhumidana  393 
Bhurloka  35,  54 
Bhuia  79 
Bhutagrama  589 
Bhutas  56,  108 
Bhiiiisvara  Tirtha  498 
Bhuvah  13,  35,  68,  145 
Bhuvar  Loka  55 
Bidala\Tatas  478 


654 


Skanda  Purana 


Bija  19,  45 
Bjjaksepa  78 
Bijavapana  78 
Bilva  46,  102 
Bilvaka  571 
Bilvapatrika  571 
Bilvas  7 

Boar  72,  431,  432 
boon  granted  by  Rudra  237 
Brahma  2,  1 1,  16,  18,  27,  28,  33,  53,  54, 
58,  63,  80,  92,  95,  98,  114,  115,  122, 
135,  143,  144,  146,  148,  164,  169, 
173,  336  339,  355,  369,  373,  383, 
402,  441,  454,  560,  565,  581,  583 
Brahmacarya  557 
Brahmahatya  368 
Brahmakala  572 
Brahmakunda  117 
Brahmaloka  54,  145,  565,  577 
Brahmana  336,  337,  346,  348,  349,  350, 
351,  353,  356,  373,  385 
Brahmanahood  78 
Brahmana  impaled  on  the  slake  378 
Brahmana  not  to  be  killed  478 
Brahmanas,  devotion  to  393 
Brahmana-slaughter  193, 195, 197,  341, 
536,  538 

Brahmana-slayer  218 
Brahmanas  338, 339, 344, 348, 349,  350, 
363,  365,  367,  373,  375 
Brahmanas  Cursed  519 
Brahmanas  deprived  of  their  wealth  394 
Brahmanda  5 
Brahmanda  Purana  5 
Brahman!  144 
Brahmavaivaria  Purana  4 
Brahma,  Story  of  625 
Brahma  Kalpa  53 
Brahma  Paramesthin  141 
Brahma  Purana  4 
Brahmaraksasa  264,  265,  274 
Brahma  Tirtha  383 
Brahmarsis  559 
Brahmasaras  523 
Brahmasavarni  185 
Brahmasila  417 
Brahmasya  570 
Brahmesa  Lihga  178 
Brahmesvara  82 
BrahmT  71,  78,  557 


Brahmya  499 
Brahmya  snana  498 
breach  of  trust  48 
breeding  of  cattle  376 
Brhadrathantara  188 
Brhaspati  361,  368,  478 
Buddha  431,  433 
Bull,  giving  213 

Caitra  79,  92,  102,  103,  185,  301,  334 
340,  348 

Caitraratha  7,  571 

Cakra  Tirtha  161,  178,  206,  298,  301, 
355,  357,  413 
Cakravakas  7 
C.aksusa  Manvantara  185 
Campaka  7 

Camunda  175,  526,  578 
Canakya  438,  440,  441,  447 
Canda  301 

Candadiya  Tirtha  301 
Candala  455 
Candariisu  382 
Candi  57 
Caiidika  572 
Candra  16 

Candrabhaga  88,  572 
Candrahasa  535 
Candrahasa  Tirtlia  371,  374 
Candrahasyesa  539 
Candramas  344 
Candraprabhasa  538 
Candrayana  38, 1 18, 132,  147,  367,  398, 
449 

Candrayana  Vrata  338 
Can ura  411 
Capalesvara  117 
Cannamunda  528 
Carmila  9 

carnally  approaching  a  Vrsali  300 

Camka  82 

Carukesvara  82 

casting  off  the  body  213 

Catacata  56 

Calurbhuja  177 

Caturthi  343 

CaiurtliTangarakavrata  243 
Chagalinga  572 
Chandas-s  108 

characteristics  of  those  who  slip  down 
from  the  heavenly  worlds  250 


Index 


655 


Cil  66 
Cilra  123 

Citragupta  442,  443 
Citrakuta  572 
Citrakuta  17 

Cilrasena  123,  190,  192,  193,  194,  196, 
198,  621 
Gilrotpala  17 

Conch-discus-club-bearing  Lord  33 
Confluence  334 
confluence  of  Erandi  604 
confluence  of  Narmada  and  ihe  ocean 
610,  625 

confluence  of  Reva  and  ihe  ocean  610, 
615,  622,  630 

Confluences  of  rivers,  thirty-five  642 
confluence  with  Aurva  280 
consumptive  disease  539 
control  of  sense-organs  187 
cooked  food  from  a  Sudra  512 
Cosmic  Form  555,  556,  557 
Cosmos  35 
cow  69,  70 

cows  full  of  all  the  Devas  273 
creater  of  impediments  218 
creation  54,  72 

crossing  over  a  threshing  rod  300 

Cudakarma  79 

cultivation,  pursuit  of  376 

curse  of  Brahma  to  his  vehicle  Swan  613 

curse  of  Kadru  389 

curse  of  Pitr  617 

Dadhiskanda  260,  263 
Daiva  Rna  585 
Daivajna  456 
Daivakarma  79 

Daksa  87,  146,  279,  355,  373,  460,  542 
Daksa’s  curse  to  Soma  279 
Daksasavarni  185 
Daksa’s  Yajna  93 
Daksayani  (Gauri)  86 
Daksina  127,  340,  342 
Daksinaganga  15 
Daksinagni  87 

Dama  (control  of  the  senses)  94,  110 

Damaghosa  405 

Damaru  61,  139,  176 

Damodara  426 

Damsa  444,  445 


Dana  41,  45,  83,  84,  85,  90,  132,  157, 
161,  181,  184,  334,  367,  380,  384, 
459 

Dapadharma  185 

Dana  made  over  to  Sivayogins  at  the 
Dasasvamedha  TTrtha  510 
Dana  rites  373 

Danava  93,  162,  355,  357,  359 
Dandaka  467 
Dandapani  1 1 1 
Dantolukhalins  36 
Danu  98,  146,  147 
Darsa  79 

Darn  Tirtha  133,  134 
Damka  121,  133,  134 
Daruka  Tirtha  133 
Darukesvara  Tirtha  82 
Daruvana  82,  137,  138,  139,  625 
Damka  79 

Dasakanya  Tirtha  583 
Dasani!  509 
Dasaratha  346 
Dasarna  17 
Dasasvamedha  508 
Dasasvamcdhika  504 
Dasaviyapeyas  79 
Dattatreya  345 
Dalyayanl  474 
Daurbhag>'a  (ill-luck)  570 
Daya  187 

day  of  Pilamaha  521 

desu  oyer  of  wretchedness  and  sins  77 

destruction  of  the  seven  Kalpas  20 

Devadaruvana  57 

Deva-hood  457 

DeNakhata  495,  496 

DevakI  572 

Devala  479 

Devalaka  455 

De^loka  4,  136,  572 

Devamarga  605 

Dcvanadi  161 

Devapanna  477 

De^sarman  121 

Devasila  136,  156,  204,  206,  208,  209 
Dcvatiriha  135,  136,  386,  563,  570 
Devavrata  188 
Devika  9 
Devikatata  572 

Dhanada  148,  353,  452,  471,  557 


656 


Skanda  Parana 


Dhanadatva  259 
Dhananjaya  463 
Dharadhara  391 

Dharnia  2,  279,  354,  365,  366,  442,  542, 
557,  558 
Dharmanadi  10 
Dharmapalas  442 
Dharmapulra  365,  450,  581 
Dharmaraja  9,  11,  441 
Dharmaranya  161 
Dharmasastra  347 
Dharmasavarni  185 
Dhata  108,  145 
Dhair  382,  540,  540 
Dhatri  78 
DhaumrnI  47 

Dhautapapa  Tiriha  358,  524 

Dhautesvari  524,  525 

Dhi  71 

Dhisni  87 

Dhisnindra  88 

Dhisnis  88 

Dhisnya  88 

Dhisnyapas  88 

Dhriarasp*a  463 

Dhrti  71,  572 

Dhruva  617 

Dhruva  attains  stability  260 
Dhumra  111 
DhuijaU  Nllalohita  55 
Dhvani  572 
Dhyana  187 
Dhyanayoga  194 
Dimbha  111 
Dindi  111 

Dlrghatapas  190,  191 
Diu  146 

Divakara  101,  157,  436,  451,  577 
Divine  rock  resembling  an  elephant 
418 

Divinity  52 
Divyasnana  498 
DraupadT  7 
Dravyas  127 
drawning  521 
Drona  459 
Drupada  577 
Dundubha  111 
Durbhaga  99 
Durga  175,  176 


Durga-goddesses,  eighteen  523 
Durvasas  344 

Durj'odhana  126,  127,  385,  412 

Du§krta  (evil)  180 

duties  of  a  Brahmana  373 

Dvadasadilya  540,  541 

Tirtha  413 

Dvaipayana  6,  315 

Dvandvas  47,  48,  451 

Dvaravall  570 

Dvijati  375 

Dvipas  24,  25 

Dvirada  18 

Dwarf  431 

Dying  at  Dasasvamedha  510 
Dying  in  fire  (by  self-immolation)  521 

Earth  72,  108,  363,  542 
Earth,  son  of  (Mars)  176 
eclipses  381 
eight  Murtis  73 
eight  Vasus  620 
EkSmraka  571 
Ekasala  600 
Ekavlra  572 
Eleven  Rudras  401 

entering  fire  at  Dasasvamedhika  508 
eradicator  of  the  Sin  of  Brahmana- 
slaughter  491 

ErandT  334,  338,  340,  341,  342,  346, 
347,  348,  350,  351 

Eraricli  and  Narmada,  Confluence  of 
334 

Enuidika  351 
Erandisangama  351 
ErandT  Tiriha  526 
Eulogy  62 

excellent  sons  redeem  their  grand-la- 
thcrs  336 
expiation  629 

feeding  a  single  Brahmarta  41 1 
feeding  a  Yogin  401 
feeding  Brahmanas  629 
fifth  face  524 

Fire-god  63,  73,  88,  108,  114,  127,  128, 
145,  446 
Fish  29,  33,  432 
Fish  incarnation  5 
five  bodies  94 


Index 


657 


five  elements  19 

five  fires  8,  37,  124,  149,  340,  354,  436 
five  jewels  349 
five-lettered  Mantra  44,  45 
five-syllabled  Mantra  94 
five  Varahas  535 
five  Yajnas  374 
food  without  salt  629 
forbearance  79 
forest  of  Hanumanta  268 
four  oceans  173 
four  pitchers  80 
four  sons  of  Dharma  542 
four  types  of  living  beings  22,  457 
four  Varnas  37 
four-faced  being  19 
fourth  great  act  of  the  Lord  604 
full-moon  day  in  the  month  of  Karttika 
503 


Gabhastiga  493 
Gabhastipati  540 
Galadavan  455 
Galava  220,  342 
Gana  68 

Ganadhyaksas  28 
Gananatha  101,  161 
Ganas  60,  108 

Gandhamadana  57,  67,  556,  571,  572 
Ganesa  1 
Ganesvara  90 

Gahga  2,  9,  15,  16,  22,  23,  33,  37,  68, 
81, 113, 120, 141, 160, 179, 187, 190, 
203,  220,  345,  358,  360,  389,  439, 
500,  561 

Garigadhara  176 
Gangadvara  572 
Garigagarbha  360 
Garigavahaka  TTrtha  500 
Garbhadhana  78 
Garga  220 
Gargeya  40 
Garhapatya  87,  340 
Garjana  Tirtha  133 

Garuda  42, 108, 174, 246, 339, 388, 527, 


531 

Garuda  missile  174 
Garuda  Purana  5 

Gaurl  92,  335,  353,  361,  569,  571,  574 
Gautama  220,  344,  396,  399 


Gautamesvara  Tirtha  253,  501 
Gaya  77,  160,  161,  187,  220,  417 
Gayasiras  180,  201 

Gayatrl  19,  46,  108,  372,  555,  572,  577, 
578 

Gayatrl  Mantra  386,  400,  489 

Gayatrya  188 

Ghrtacl  316,  543 

Ghrtakambala  448 

gift  of  a  buffalo  304 

gift  of  a  cow  273,  328 

gift  of  a  cow  at  Goparesvara  254 

gift  of  a  Kapila  410 

gift  of  a  pair  of  sandals  or  garments  410 

gift  of  a  virgin  327 

gift  of  bullocks  323 

gift  of  cooked  rice  262 

gift  of  elephant  219 

gift  of  gingelly  seeds  212 

gift  of  grain  of  Yava  at  Puskarini  219 

gift  of  silver  or  gold  410 

gift  of  umbrella,  shoes  226 

gifts  226 

gifts  to  be  made  over  212 

Giri  558 

Girija  173 

Girisa  113 

Girvana  160 

giver  of  a  house  213 

giver  of  cows  213 

giver  of  plot  of  land  213 

Gobhila  220 

Godavari  9,  88 

Godha  108 

Godvasrama  572 

Gokarna  77,  571 

gold  213 

gold  as  the  first  progeny  of  Agni  412 

gold  or  silver;  gift  of  219 

Goman ta  571 

Gomati  571 

Gomeda  26,  59,  488 

Gonasas  61 

Goparesvara  251 

Gopesvara  Tirtha  464,  492 

Gotra  267 

Govinda  171,  344 

Gramabhatta  456 

Grama  Sukara  454 

grandson  336 


658 


SkandaPurana 


grandson  of  the  son  338 
great  annihilation  22 
great  goal  (Moksa)  157 
great  Lihga  28 
great  ocean  20 
group  of  four  Tirthas  391 
Guardians  of  Quarters  45,  392 
guest  601 

guest  who  comes  at  the  time  of  Sraddha 
601 

Guggula  352 
Guha  142 
GuhavasI  137 
Gunas  45 

Guru  (Jupiter)  114,  176 

Haihaya  432 
halo  342 
Hamsa  7,  616 
Hamsatirlha  117,  565 
Hamsesvara  613 

hand  placed  on  his  own  head  by  the 
Daitya  (Kalasprsta)  240 
Hanuman  264,  267,  275 
Hanumantesvara  264 
Hara  1,  18,  31,  39,  45,  61,  62,  80,  108, 
109,  110,  112,  119,  349 
Hari  1,  45,  72,  106,  138,  171,  339,  358, 
450,  563 
Harilocana  66 
Haripingala  433 
Hariscandra  572 
Haslicchaya  301 
Hastinapura  571 
hater  of  others  218 
Hautra  77 
Havis  104 
Havya  52,  182 
Havyavaha  360,  389 
Havyavahana  579 
HayantI  571 
Hcmadri  92 
Hemakuta  57,  67,  572 
He  manta  149 
highest  goal  340 
Himacala  36 
Himalaya  571,  572 
Himavan  25,  57,  67 
Hiranmaya  19 
Hiranyagarbha  1 


Hiranyakasipu  371,  432 

Hiranyaksa  571 

Holder  of  Gahga  347 

holy  42 

holy  ash  498 

holy  bath  40,  90,  629 

holy  bath  once  in  Narmada  634 

holy  plunge  into  Reva  627 

Homa  8,  37,  63,  84,  119,  338 

horripilation  88 

horse-sacrifice  129,  133,  135,  142,  339, 
348 

Hradinl  88 
Hri  71 

Hrsikesa  88,  171,  556 

Hrslkesa  in  Bhadrapada,  worship  of  426 

Hum  56 

Humkara  56,  63,  450 
Humkara  of  Vyasa  320 
Humkarasvami  450 
Humkara  Tirlha  451 
hunter  400 

husband,  a  henpecked  238 
Hutasana  100,  128,  358,  360 

Ida  257 
Iksvaku  440 
Ila  52 
Ilapltha  58 

imbibing  liquor  300,  536 
inauspiciousness  157 
Jndra  11,  16.  28,  37,  46,  58,  77,  84,  92, 
95, 105, 108, 115, 123, 134, 147, 166, 
366,  540,  555,  556,  558 
Indraloka  125 
IndranI  105,  572 
Indrasavarni  185 
Indra  Tirtha  365,  369 
Indratva  260 
Indrayastis  190 
Indrayudha  70 
Indu  (Moon-god)  356 
indulging  in  sexual  intercourse  with 
wives  of  others  218 
infanticide  79 

infiniteness  (Moksa)  through  medita¬ 
tion  83 
Inguda  39,  46 
initiation  629 
Iravati  88 


Index 


659 


Isa  54,  63,  71,  76,  76,  94,  116,  121,567 

Isiina  13,  19,  28,  31,  38,  41,  43,  63,  68 
70,  72,  94,  96,  122,  150,  186,  371 
446 
iselvo  46 
Isia  79 
Istapurla  343 

isvara  12,  20,  31,  33,  41,  68,  71,  85,  90, 
95,  96,  114,  115,  119,  138,  155,  159, 
.  177«  181,  335,  337,  341,  371,  373 

IsvararigT  74 
Isvari  149 

Jabali  141,  435 

Jagarana  596 

jahnavi  15,  23,  561 

Jahnavi  as  the  Vaisnavl  Gariga  623 

Jaiglssavya  220 

Jaimini  220 

Jalaliriga  178 

Jalandhara  572 

Jalasayi  292,  297 

Jalcsvara  82,  84,  92 

Jamadagni  479,  606 

Jamadagni,  the  son  of  601 

Jamadagni  killed  609 

Jamadagni  Tirtha  606 

Jambavan  291 

Jambha  92,  135 

Jamblra  7 

Jaiiibu  102 

Jarhbudvlpa  22,  26,  59,  488 
Jana  62,  145 
Janaka  154 
Janaloka  11 
Janamejaya  6 

Janardana  169,  170,  171,  178,  339,  344, 
358,  449 

Japa  8,  44,  45,  51,  52,  84,  119,  632 

Japa  of  Adityahrdaya  219,  220 

Jarasandha  41 1 

Jatakarma  79 

Jatukarnya  11 

Jatavedas  (Fire-god)  359 

Jaya  472,  535,  536,  571 

Jayanta  53 

Jayavaraha  431 

Jhaiikara  474 

Jnana  542 

Jnana  as  a  Puspa  187 


Jiianacaksuh  (‘Knowledge-eyed’  i,c. 
wise)  159 

Jvalesvara  115,  116 
Jyautisa  53 
Jyestha  104,  353 
Jyestha  Prayaga  417 
Jyotir  Brahmana  188 
JyoiismatT  276,  278 

Kacchapa  517 
KndalT  102,  190 
Kadambagolaka  342 
Kadrii  246,  388 

Kadru  and  Vinata,  die  wages  between 
385 

KaikasI  471 

Kailasa  45,  53,  73,  132,  142,  149,  163, 
165,  173,  175,  177,  191,  360,  448, 
452,  590 
Kaitabha  32,  171 

Kala  11,  13,  21,  35,  44,  54,  63,  77,  108, 
109,  110,  113,  144,  171,  377,  443 
Kala  52,  343,  379,  570 
Kalaghanasana  29S 
Kalagni  68 
Kaliignirudra  531 
Kalakala  437 
Kalakalcs\*ara  TTrtha  437 
Kalanala  62 
Kalanemi  411 
Kalanjara  571 
KalapinT  269 
Kalaspi*sta  233,  241 

Kalaralri  14,  53,  56,  58,  61,  62,  71,  144 

Kalasa  469 

Kiilasutra  443 

KalasCilraka  444 

Kalhodl  Tirlha  307,  369,  370 

Kali  569 

Kali  13,  40,  S2,  113,  443 
Kalika  Upapurana  5 
Kalingadesa  81 
Kalip  463 

Kaliyuga  37,  38,  39,  47,  49 
Kalki  431,  433 
Kalmasayasti  140 
Kalodara  103 

Kalpa  28,  34,  35,  52,  73,  75 
Kalpa  of  Tiladhenu  301 
Kalpas  50,  459 


660 


SkandaPurana 


Kalpavahini  29 
KalyanI  571,  572 

Kama  19,  102,  125,  139,  334,  371,  373, 
557 

Kamada  Tiriha  352 

Kamadhenu  251,  607 

Kamala  571 

Kamalalaya  571 

Kamamohini  473 

Kamandalu  75,  77,  95 

KamapramodinI  475,  476,  477,  485 

Kama  reduced  lo  ashes  428 

Karhbala  145 

Karhbala  Kseira  161 

Kambu  371* 

Kambukesvara  Tiriha  371 
Karhbu  Tiriha  372 
Karnes  vara  Tiriha  245 
Kamsa  41 1 ,  432 
Kamuka  571 
Kamyaka  forest  7 
Kanakhala  81,  264,  439 
Kanakhala  Tiriha  529 
Kancukin  99 
Kahka  40 
Kaniaka  60 
Kantha  605 
Kanlhesvara  604 
Kanva  282 

Kanya  Dana  (gifi  of  a  virgin)  183 

Kiinyakubja  571 

Ra  pal  am  o  can  a  572 

Kapalika  139 

Kapila  (sage)  493 

Kapila  (kalpa)  53 

Kapila  (river)  81,  85,  86,  89,  90 

Kapila  (Upapurana)  5 

Kapila  (cow)  370 

Kapila  Hrada  89 

Kapiladana  370 

Kapila  Tiriha  143,  145,  146,  200,  370 

Kapilesvara  Tiriha  493 

Kapisthala  559 

Kapitihas  7 

Karabha  17,  21,  24 

Karaka  103,  104 

Karanja  147 

Karandava  7,  97,  110 

Karanja  Tiriha  352 

Karahjesvara  Tiriha  146 


Karisa  fire  (fire  of  cowdung  cakes)  184 
Karisagni  158 
Karkatesvara  Tiriha  398 
Karkoiaka  463 
Karma  151,  175,  374 
Karmcandala  (Candiila  by  acls  as  against 
one  born  as  a  Candida)  181 
Karmadi  Tiriha  378 
Karmas  41,  44 
Karnali  77 
Karnika  357 
Karnikara  7,  174 
Karodisvara  227 
Ksupiisa  104,  185,  301 
Karuavirya  346,  607 
Karllavirya  killed  609 
Karilika  448,  572 
Karilikeya  101,  356,  361 
Kiiriliki  594 
Karunabhyudaya  515 
Kasi  190,  191,  193 
Kilsmira  572 

Kasyapa  47,  1 4 1 , 1 46, 1 47, 246, 279, 355, 
388,  479 
Kaias  85 

Kaiyayani  101,  348 
Kauberi  78 
Kaucchera  175 
Kauinari  78 
Kaurma  (Kalpa)  53 
Kaurma  Parana  5 
Kaurmya  18 
Kausika  18 
Kausiki  88 

Kaveri  9,  88,  117,  118,  119,  120 
Kavya  50,  182 
Kayavarohana  570 
Kedara  160,  180,  220,  571 
Kesara  104 

Kesava  38,  39,  40,  171,  333,  403,  405, 
411,  412,  446,  447 
Keiakas  7 
Kliadga  357 
Khadgas  97 
Khadyoia  25 
Kliarjuras  7 
Khali  of  Bhrgu  555 
Kliaivanga  60,  61,  93 
Kliurapinga  (bull)  419 
killer  of  friends  218 


Index 


661 


Kirhsuka  109 
Khiasa  44 
King  as  a,  tree  393 
Kinnaras  61,  167 
Kirilin  306 
Klrii  71,  77 
Klriimail  571 
Kiskindha  572 
Kohanasva  377 
Kotavl  572 

Koii  Tlriha  363,  520,  572,  580 

Kotijiriga  Sthana  161 

Koilsvara  609 

Koilsvara  Tirtlia  308,  621 

Kotlsvarl  580 

Kotiyajna  82 

Kovidara  7 

Krakaca  305 

Krama  587 

Kraiu  279,  354,  407,  462 
Kraunca  26,  59,  488 
Kravyada  .1 1 1 

Krcchra  38,  116,  118,  132,  147,  367 
Krcchra  Candrayana  362 
Krmibhaksya  445 
Krmiputivaha  443 

Krsna  80,  169,  171,  315,  349,  391,  431, 
469,  542 

Kr$na  in  the  form  of  a  girl  239 

Kroda  58 

Krodha  77 

Krpa  21,  23 

Krsna  Dvaipayana  6 

Krsna  Dvaipayana  duly  took  a  wife  318 

KrsnavenT  88 

Krlasauca  572 

Krtayuga  15,  23,  82,  126,  137,  143,  146, 
392,  435,  167,  588,  590 
Krtya  Mantras  154 
Ksama  (forbearance)  187 
Ksamodara  103 
Ksana  144 
K$alriya  158,  375 

Ksatriya,  Vaisya  and  Sudra,  origin  of 
375 

K$airiyas  375 
Ksattr  97 
Ksetrajna  54 

Ksetrapala  (guardian  of  holy  spot)  582 
Kseirapalas  120,  179 


Kubcra  58,  108,  115,  118,  391,  392 

Kuberesa  393 

Kubja  543 

Kuhaka  111,  135 

Kulakoti  491 

Kulapan^atas  22,  25,  67 

Kulata  373,  538 

Kulika  129,  463 

Kulya  628 

Kumara  360 

Kumaresvara  229 

Kumarl  144,  571 

Kumbha  471 

Kumbhakarna  471 

Kuril bhasambhu  277,  278 

Kuriibhesvara  277,  278 

Kurhbhila  111 

Kumbhlpaka  304 

Kurhkuma  104,  105,  188 

Kumuda  569 

Kunda  149,  160 

Kunda  flower  27 

Kundadhara  148 

Kundala  149 

Kundalesvara  148,  149,  430 

Kundalesvara  Tlriha  148 

Kundina  404 

KuntI  565,  342,  344,  391 

Kupa  161 

Kurkuri  582 

Kurkuri  Tirtha  582 

Kurina  26 

Kurma  Kalpa  25 

Kuru  14 

Kuruksetra  36, 46,  77, 81, 122,  160, 220, 
225,  264,  412,  417,  439 
Kusa  26,  52,  59,  488 
Kusadvlpa  572 
Kusurhbha  104 
Kusumesvara  427,  430 
Kulasalmali  300 

Lagna  183 
Laksa  144 
Laksmana  346 
Laksmanapranadata  267 
Lak^ml  14, 143, 169, 171, 518, 555,  559, 
560,  572 

LaksmI  cursed  all  the  Brahmanas  519 


662 


Skanda  Purana 


Lalatadcsa  559 

Lalita  103,  105,  543,  571,  574 

Lalitadina  100 

Lamba  132,  542 

Lava  144 

leprosy  497 

lice  pricked  with  thorns  (by  Mandavya) 
481 

lighting  eight  lamps,  die  merit  of  487 
Lihga  29,  42,  55,61,  140,  141,  149,  161, 
347,  360,  383,  436,  452,  536,  571 
Lingadharinl  571 
Lihga  Purana  4 
Lihgas  51 

Lihgesvara  241,  425 

Lokaloka  26,  58,  140,  372 

Lokapalas  101 

Lokapalatva  471 

Lola  572 

Lomasa  7 

Lord  An  an  la  426 

Lord  (Krsna)  employed  his  Maya  238 
Lord  of  Mountains  12 
Lord  of  the  Cosmos  101,  103 
Lord  of  the  universe  incarnated  as 
Kapila  493 

Lord  (Paramesvara)  cut  off  Brahma’s 
head  491 

Lord  Siva  assumed  the  form  of  a  leper 
60 

Lotanesvara  536 
Lotancsvara  Tirtha  612 
Lunkcsvara  233,  238 
lust  of  women  538 

Madana  138 
MadanaikadasT  209 
Madhava  worshipped  in  Magha  425 
MadhavT  85,  571 
Madhu  (Caitra)  186 
Madhu  (demon)  32,  33,  357 
Madhu  (Brahmana)  188 
Madhuhantr  worshipped  in  Vaisakha 
425 

Madhuka  7,  92,  101,  102,  103,  350 
Madhukatrilya  92,  105 
Madhukavasaka  105 
Madhuparka  195 
Madhuskanda  260,  263 
Madhusudana  344 


Madhuvrksa  104 
Madotkata  571 
Magha  104,  185,  301 
Mahabala  13,  16,  19,  22,  23,  26,  27,  29, 
31,55,  64,  70,96, 121,  124,  131,  134, 
137,  139,  147,  155,  156,  162,  174, 
267 

Mahabhaga  572 

Mahadeva  334,  335,  359,  361,  364,  372, 
381,  392,  413 

Mahadeva  in  the  guise  of  a  Brahmana 
144,  343,  404,  571 
Mahiigiri  108 
Mahah  145 
Mahajvala  443 
Mahakala  220,  236,  572 
Mahakalesvara  1 1 7 
Mahalaksnu  572 
Mahfilarhbhana  (rite)  506 
Mahalaya  572 
Mahalinga  132,  571 
Mahamaya  59 
Mahanadis  631 
Mahananda  17 
Mahanandin  261 
Mahapralaya  18 
Maharaurava  443,  444 
Maharloka  11,  57 
Mahamava  21,  24 
MahasatU'a  25 
Mahascna  (Karttikeya)  356 
MahatT  21,  23 
Mahavaraha  Kalpa  74 
Mahavratl  122 
Mahayogin  Mahesvara  29 
Mahendra  (Kalpa)  53 
Mahendra  97 

Mahendra  mountain  67,  344,  432 
MahendrI  78 
Mahesa  16,  33,  52,  150 
Mahesana  15,  112 

Mahesvara  3,  12,  15,  18,  21,  26,  29,  30, 
31,  32,  36,  49,  52,  55,  59,  60,  65,  66, 
77,  83,  93,  98,  101,  105,  107,  108, 
118,  122,  134,  140,  155,  156,  162, 
163,  172,  180,  339,  340,  344,  351, 
359,  368,  369,  392,  402,  470,  572 
Mahesvara  Yoga  41 
Mahesvari  29,  55,  70,  344 
Mahesvari  572 


Index 


663 


Mahesvarl  Gaiiga  626 
MahT  9 

Mahismatl  126,.  128,  605 
Maholpala  571 
Makota  571 
Manasvatl  67 
Manava  (Upapurana)  5 
MandakinT  14,  17,  18,  21,  23 
Man  dal  a  350 
Manclala  Brahmanas  188 
Mandara  66,  108,  571 
Mandara  23 
Mandaraka  190 
Mandaravana  190 

Mandavya  220,  473,  476,  478,  479,  481, 
483,  484,  486,  567,  572 
Mandavyaka  480 
Mandavya  ofT  ihe  slake  485 
Mandavya  TTriha  474 
Miindavycsvara  486,  487 
Mandhatrpura  82,  91 
Mandodarl  132,  265 
Mandukl  572 
Mangala  571 

Mangala  (auspiciousness)  79 
Marigalesvara  243 
mango  349 
Maninagcsvara  249 
Maninagcsvara  Tiriha  245 
Man-lion  431 
Manmatha  103,  113 
Manmaiha  572 
Manniaihesvara  334,  351 
Manmaihesvara  TTriha  333 
Mantra  45,  77 
Mantra  for  meditation  499 
Mantras  379 
Manu  12,  13,  14,  16,  17 
Miinusyaka  79 
MargadayinI  571 
MargasTrsa  104,  301 
MarTci  146,  279,  407 
Marlcis  399 

Markanda  11,  32,  35,  117,  186 
Markandahrada  161 
markandesa  161,  331 
Markandesvara  186,  469 
Markandesvara  TTriha  467,  469 
Markandeya  8, 10, 13, 14, 18, 21,  25, 27, 
186,  343,  348,  351,  454,  470 


Markandeya  Purana  4 
Mars  363 
Martanda  575 
Manna  53,  88,  167 

Maruta  (Vaya\ya)  missile  174 
Mannas  (Winds)  108 
Maruti  267 

Maruts  40,  92,  273,  402 
Marutvail  542 
Masaka  444 
Masakas  445 
Mata  350,  462,  572 
Matali  134 
Mathura  572 
Matrganas  58 
Malrgocara  232 
Matrs  57,  58 
Mairilnha  232 
Miits)^  18,  53 
Matsya  Kalpa  20 
Miiisya  Purana  5 
Mauktika  136 
Maunjlbandhana  79 
Maya  88,  131,  132 
Maya  21,  29,  341,  342,  351 
Mayapurl  571 
Mayataraka  88 
Mayura  22,  23 
Mayura  18,  52 
Medha  572 
Meditation  40 
Meghaniida  132,  133 
Mcnaka  123,  570 
mental  sins  300 

men  who  die  in  Dtvamarga  605 
merit-giving  benefit  of  Ravitlriha  226 
meritorious  activity  of  Narmada  634 
Meru  57,  61,  108,  166,  363 
milking  what  should  not  be  milked,  sin 
resulting  from  303 
Miraculous  act  of  the  Lord  603 
MisrakesT  543 
Mithila  151,  154 
Mitra  382,  540 
Mlecchas  49 
Modakas  101 

Moksa  45,  119,  137,  339,  447 
Moksa  TTriha  462 
moon  343,  538 
Moon-god  279,  373,  374,  402 


664 


SkandaPurana 


Mother-deities  523 
Mothers  232 
Mrgakrsnambara  60 
Mrgavatl  572 
MrgT  572 
Mrtyu  44,  60,  130 
Mrtyularigala  Mantra  45 
Mrtyuhjaya  Mantra  45 
Mudgas  104 
Muhurta  144,  183,  542 
Mukhya  Vahni  87 
Mukutesvari  571 
Mulasrl  557 

Mulasripati  557,  563,  565 
Mulaslhana  Tirtha  564 
Munda  301 
Mundi  111,  602 
Muni  479 
Musala  357 
Mustika  411 

Nabhasya  (Bhadrapada)  104 

Nabhl  161 

Naciketa  220 

Nadls  628 

Nagakesara  7 

Nagaloka  66,  75 

Naga  Tirtha  387,  464 

Naimisa  2,  77,  122,  120,  417,  453,  569 

Nairrta  108 

Naktam,  Vrata  of  100 

Nalikeras  7 

Namakarma  79 

name  of  Hanlnnan  267 

Nan  da  571 

NandadevI  401 

Nandahrada  401 

Nandana  517 

Nandiglta  43,  44 

Nandikesvara  261,  306 

Nandin  61,  236 

NandinI  572 

Nandlsa  263 

Nandlsvara  28,  29 

Nara  1 

Nara  and  Narayana  307,  411 
Naraca  357 

Narada  95,  96,  97,  98, 99, 106, 107, 235, 
279,  315,  355,  412,  479,  532,  560  * 
Narada  Upapurana  5 


Naradesvara  Tirtha  257 
Naradlya  Purana  4 
Naraka  43,  79,  411,  459,  576,  580 
Narakas  (Hells)  158 
Narakesvara  Tirtha  455 
NaranarayanI  308 
Narasimha  171 
Narasimha  missile  174 
Narasimha  Upapurana  5 
Narayana  1, 38,  102,  447,  450,  473,  479, 
542,  543,  544,  555,  556,  558 
Narayanagiri  557,  558,  563 
NarayanI  355,  399,  572 
Narmada  1,  2,  6,  10,  13,  16,  17,  18,  20, 
22,  23,  24,  25,  26,  29,  30,  31,  32,  33, 
34,  36,  37,  38,  39,  40,  41,  45,  46,  48, 
50,  51,  52,  59,  60,  67,  70,  77,  80,  81, 
82,  87, 88,  89, 90, 107,118,1 20, 1 24, 
129,  132,  134,  136,  142,  145,  147, 
149,  155,  159,  197,  198,  225,  264, 
301,  333,  334,  337,  346,  354,  355, 
365,  369,  371,  381,  385,  439,  452, 
461,  467,  563,  565,  576,  579,  588, 
589,  613,  626 

Narmada,  Epithets  of  1,  21 
Narmadesvara  142,  378 
Narmadesvara  Tirtha  137 
Nasatyas  575 
Navasraddha  449 
Nidhi  572 
Nila  57,  67,  187 
Nila  Bull  419 
Nllaganga  91 
Nllakantha  91,  103 
Nllalohita  21,  54,  60 
Nllaparvata  161 
Nimba  7,  102 
nineteen  Yogas  355 
Nlrajana  564 
Niranjana  113 
Nirrti  115 
Nirucchvasa  304 
Nirudhapasusavana  79 
Nisadha  57,  67 
Niskriima  79 
Nispava  104 
Nisumbha  135 
Nitala  493 
Nlvara  39 

Niyama  44,  94,  132 


Index 


665 


non-violence  187 
Nrsimha  58 
Nyagrodha  18,  36 
Nyiisa  187 

observance  of  fast  629 
offering  a  white  cow  287 
offering  of  balls  of  rice  during  Sraddha 
626 

offering  raw  rice  grains  219 
Omkara  19,  21,  63,  82,  91,  108,  280 
one  hundred  eight  Lihgas  82 
Osadhi  572 

other  people’s  treasure,  destroyer  of 
218 

Pada  587 
Padasauca  188 
Padma  576 
Padma  (Kalpa)  53 
Padniaka  87 
Padmanabha  10 

Padmanabha  worspiphed  in  Asvina  426 
Padma  Purana  4,  5,  18 
Padya  28 

Paitamaha  Tfrtha  580,  582 
Palasa  8 
Panasa  7 
Pah  cam!  343 

Pancagavya  145,  188,  347,  348 
Pancaml  343 
Pancamrta  188 
Pancanana  44,  45 
Pancaratra  system  563 
Panca  TTrtha  (s)  263 
Pancayatana  (five  shrines)  566 
Pandavas  7,  9 

Pandu  8,  52,  80,  92,  142,  150,  333,  334, 
346 

Pandu  Tirtha  365 
Papa-Salyas  89 
Para  570 
Paraka  118 
Paramesthin  54,  470 
Paramesvara  25,  54,  93,  334,  360,  365, 
369,  383,  389 
Paramesvari  144,  536,  572 
Parasara  1,  11,  255,  317 
Parasara  Upapurana  5 
Parasarya  315 


Pa  ra.su  ram  a  345,  431,  439 
Paresvara  (Tirtha)  254 
Parijataka  167 
Pariksita  6 
Parivatsara  63 
Pariyatra  67 

Parthiva  (as  a  mental  flower)  187 
Parvana  (rites)  79 
Parvas  581 

Parvait  113,  177,  255,  335,  343,  572 

Pasa  355 

Pasubhartr  II 

Pasupata  42 

Pastipatya  43 

Pasus  48 

Pataha  356 

Paulla  33,  57,  72,  84,  89,  160,  170,  471, 
572 

Paula  (a  cleily)  572 
Piitala  7 

Patalas,  seven  66 
Pauilesvara  Tirtha  82 
PaUili  102 
Pathina  50 
Patni-samyojana  79 
Patresvara  Tirtha  123 
PaulomT  (Saci)  471 
Paundarika  116 
Pauraniki  lore  3 
Paurnamasi  79 

Paurusasukta  (Purusasukta)  188 
Pausa  104 
Pavaka  88,  111 
Pavamana  188 
Pavani  (river)  88 
Payosni  10,  572 
Peacock-vehicled  One  362 
penance  632 

penance  perishes  due  to  anger  512 
performing  the  rite  on  behalf  of  an 
inferior  one  632 
person  who  gives  foodgrain  213 
Pesana  443,  444 
Phiilguna  92,  104,  267 
physical  sins  300 
pilgramage  626,  632 
pilgrimage  by  proxy  632 
pilgrimage  for  die  sake  of  another  629 
Pinaka  61,  124 
Pinaka-bearing  Lord  39 


666 


SkandaPurana 


Pinaka-wielding  Lord  44 
Pindaraka  572 
Piriga  Bull  419 
Pingaksa  267 
Pingala  257 
Pingalavarta  Tirtha  495 
Pingalesvara  288,  289 
Pingalesvarl  572 
Pipala  102 

Pippalada  153,  154,  155,  156 
Pippalada  Tlrlha  156 
Pippalesvara  151 
Pista  562 

Pitamaha  19,  35,  64,  108,  132,  339,  349, 
355,  365,  373 
Pitr-gods  83 
Pitrkarma  79 
Pitrksclras  417 
Pitrloka  452 

Pitfs  16,  22.  51,  343,  344,  364,  365,  373 
Pitr-Sarhhlta  419 
Pi  tr  tirtha  185 

Planet  of  cmcl  movements  (i.e.  Saturn) 
153 

Prabha  325,  570 
Prabhasa  178,  417,  572,  619 
Prabhasaka  53 
Prabhasesa  327 
Prabhasesvara  325 
Pracanda  572 
Pracetas  279,  355 
Pracetasa  462 
PracI  Sarasvatl  204,  207 
practice  of  Mantras  632 
Pradhana  63,  1 1 1 
Prahlada  371 

Prajapau  171,  336,  379,  555 
Prajapatya  53,  187 
Prajapatya  Vrata  560 
Prakrti  14,  31,  54 
Prakrtis  26 
Pralamba  77 

Pralaya  10,  15,  25,  51,  73,  80,  448 

Pramathas  58 

Pramlocii  543 

Pranava  82,  83,  85,  158 

Pranayama  51,  577 

Prapitamaha  63,  72 

Prasenajit  291 


Prasupta  436 
Pratigraha  376,  577 
Pratipadii  day  100 
Praupat  345 
Pratyusa  619 
Prayaga  160,  220,  571 
precestor’s  bed,  defiler  of  218 
Prince  Kanva,  story  of  282 
procedure  regarding  the  pilgrimage  to 
Reva  630 
progeny  349 

property  of  god,  misappropriais  of  218 
protection  of  the  subjects  394 
Prtha  6 
PrlhivI  80 

Pulaha  47,  279,  356,  407,  415,  462 
Pulastya  7,  47,  148,  265,  279,  354,  407, 
415,  462,  470 
Pulindas  49 
Pumsavana  78 
Pundarika  543 
Pundarika  Yajna  357 
Pundravardhana  572 
Punkhila  Tirtha  600 
Punnaga  7 
Punya  187,  583 
Punyatoya  452 
Pura  18 

Purana  3,  84,  398,  508 
Puranas  2 

Puranasamhita  5,  43 
Puranic  Embiyology  456 
Puruhuia  (a  deity)  572 
Purusa  11,  54,  77,  379,  547 
Pumsarsabha,  Sukta  of  188 
Puusottama  1,  76,  562,  571 
Pusan  38,  540 
Puskali  Tirtha  586 

Puskara  26,  59,  122,  161,  220,  417,  453, 
488,  571 

Puskaras  (holy  places)  141 
Puskaravatl  572 
PuskarinI  157 
Pusti  572 
Put  345,  336,  583 
Pudkesvara  291 
Putra  345 
Putraisana  341 
Puyasampurna  (a  hell)  445 


Index 


667 


Radha  572 

Raghava  (i.e.  Dasaratha)  345 

Raghu  126 

Rahu  120 

Raibhya  479 

Raivata  185,  405 

Rajasa  gift  183 

Rajasi  Bhakti  41 

Raksa  (protection)  108 

Raksasa  380,  446, 

Rama  519 

Rama  13,  274,  346,  397,  398,  430,  605 

Ramacandra  346,  431 

Ramana  (a  deity)  572 

Ramatlrtha  572 

Rarhbha  543,  571 

Ramesta  267 

Ramesvara  Tirtha  395 

Ranjana  17,  21,  24 

Rasa  (water)  23 

Rasa  (mercury)  513 

Rasa  tala  178 

Rasayana  515 

Rati  71 

Ratipriya  (a  deity)  572 
Ratnavallabha  622 
Raucya  (Manvantara)  185 
Raurava  38,  304,  371,  443,  444,  584, 
586,  591 

Ravana  131,  274,  345,  432,  471 

Ravi  380,  436,  575 

Ravi  Tirtha  129,  225,  244,  379,  434 

Re-birth  38 

Redeemer  34 

remembering  Reva  627 

Renuka  607 

renunciation  of  the  world  632 
Rcphas  180 

Reva  1,  2,  6,  18,  21,  24,  33,  34,  37,  39, 
41,  42,  44,  45,  52,  75,  80,  88,  89,  90, 
91,  116,  1 17,  124, 136, 159, 160,  162, 
178,  280,  335,  341,  342,  344,  346, 
347,  369,  435,  448,  450,  501,  559, 
561,  562,  563,  564,  566 
Reva  as  Mahesvari  Ganga  623 
Reva-khanda  1 
Rgveda  121,  157 
Rgvidhana  3 

richness  (i.e.  powers)  of  speech  34 
riding  what  should  not  be  ridden  303 


righteousness  119 

rile  performed  through  a  baser  man 
632 

rivers  as  Rajasvalas  633 
Rk  53,  137,  150,  157,  181 
Rksas  (bears)  24 

Rksasaila  (Rksa  mountain)  14,  17  20 
23 

Rksasrnga  191,  193,  194,  198 
Rnamocana  Tirtha  290,  585 
Rnatrayam  585 
Rohini  279,  357 
Rohini  Tirtha  354 
Rohitaka  fish  23 
Rsti  356 
Rtviks  127 

Rudra  2, 9,  1 1, 13, 14, 17, 18,  19,  23,  29, 
33,  34,  39,  40,  42,  48,  49,  54,  56,  61, 
64,  65,  67,  68,  70,  72,  77,  78,  87,  96, 
107,  111,  113,  114,  115,  156,  159, 
189,  339,  340,  341,  365,  366,  443, 
495,  586 

Rudra,  daughter  of  14 
Rudradhyaya  46 
Rudra  Mantra  45,  469 
Rudra  Mantras  43 
Rudra-nandana  220 
Rudrakoti  569 
Rudrakunda  ISO 

Rudraloka  24,  116,  136,  142,  147,  156, 
338,  342,  363,  374,  449,  464,  574, 
579 

Rudrani  359 
Rudrasavarni  1S5 
Rudnisiaka  83 
Rudrasukta  1S8 
Rudra tva  343 
Rukma  406 
Rukmaka  404 
Rukmini  404,  572 
Rukmini  Tirtha  404 
Rupadevi  572 
Rum  355 

Sahara  216 
Sabaria  story  of  20S 
Sabhananda  (a  dieiy)  572 
Sac!  165,  167,  367 
sacrificial  offerings  37 
Sadasiti  301 


668 


ShandaPurdna 


Sadasiva  1 15 

Sadhya  (a  daughter  of  Daksa)  542 

Sadhyas  16,  28,  273 

Sadyojata  13,  42,  94 

Sahadeva  590,  594 

Sahasraksa  220,  571 

Sahya  67*  572 

Saiva  observances  of  vows  37 
Saiva  region  46 
Saiva  Vrata  38 
Saka  59,  488 

Sakra  44,  117,  124,  166,  168,  382,  400, 
542 

Sakratirtha  399 
Sakresvara  117 
Sakresvara  Tirtha  226 
Sakti  52,  356,  361,  572 
Saktidharinl  572 
Salagrama  installed  532 
Salagrama  Tirtha  532 
SalakutI  (a  river)  9 
Saligrama  571 
Salmala  26 

Sal  mall  59,  102,  444,  445,  488 
Sama  53,  350,  372 
Saman  137 

Saman  (peaceful  overtures)  171 
Saman  hymn  121,  157 
Samantapancaka  609 
Sama  Sakha  150 
S5ma  verses  350 
Samba  5 

Sambara  282,  369,  476 
Sarhbhu  11,  20,  31,  52,  59,  62,  96,  114 
166,  333,  334,  570.  580 
Sambhu  in  the  form  of  a  boy  601 
Samhila  11 
Samhrada  111 
Sami  102 
Samjna  454 

Samkalpa  (a  daughter  of  Daksa)  542 

Samskaras  46,  78,  79 

Samvarta  18,  61 

Samvartaka  62,  68,  109 

Samvatsara  63 

Samvauresvara  Tirtlia  465 

Samaveda  157 

Samyagdrsti  547 

Sanaiscara,  153 

Sanaka  31,  35 


Sanatkumara  5,  63,  559 
Sandhya  340,  577,  578 
Sandhya  prayers  84,  338 
Sandill’s  husband  revaved  486 
Sandilya  220 

Sangama  (confluence)  566 
Sangamesvara  452 

Sankara  13, 15, 20, 23, 31, 32, 38, 41, 43, 
52, 54, 55, 59, 63,  68,  83,  93,  96,  W 
106,  107,  112,  113,  115,  118,  121,’ 

129,  130,  134,  136,  145,  148,  155, 

164,  182,  192,  333,  335,  347,  348,’ 

349,  350,  353,  361,  364  370,  377* 

394,  468,  500,  566,  574 
Sankara  Vrata  43 
Sankarsana  Tirtlia  333 
Sankari  (a  deity)  572 
Sankarsana  333 
Sankha  220 
Saiikhacuda  254,  463 
Sahkhoddhara  502,  572 
Sankhoddhara  Tirtha  500 
Sahkhya  41 
Sahkhyas  36 
Sankranli  day  186,  374 
Sanku  87 
Sanmukha  360 
Sannihati  417 
sanno  devi  46 

Sannyasa  121,  131,  156,  202,  521 
Santanu  314 
Saptasapiaka  60 
Saptasarasvata  82 
Sara  360 


Sarala  (pine)  85 

Sarasvatl  2. 9, 14,  33,  34,  81,  88,  90,  145, 
178’  179,  273,  367,  439'  508- 


Sarasvatl  as  Brahml  Ganga  6?G 

Sarayu  9,  88 

Sarkara  104 

Sarhga  75 

Sarngin  171 

Sarpa  (serpentine)  missile  174 
Sarpaksetra  464 
Sarpa  Tirtha  463 


19'  32.  54,  96,  104,  113,  383,  454 
Sara  instigated  by  Sarani  625 
Sarvamedha  520 
Sarvasuresvari  74 


Index 


669 


Sarvatman  103 
Sasin  356 
Satabahu  267,  271 
Satadru  10 

Satakratu  366,  367,  369,  397,  400,  559 
624 

Satanika  220 
Satarudra  9 
Satarudrika  88 
Sauaiapa  220,  479 
Sail  143,  542,  570 
Satrughna  346 
Sattrayajna  133 
Saliva  8,  47,  48,  77,  80,  109 
Saltvika  (Loka)  183,  349 
SallvikI  Bhakii  41 
Saiurn  154 
Saiya  (truth)  108,  211 
Satya  (Loka)  62,  145 
Satyabhama  312 
Satyaloka  35,  46 
SatyavadinI  572 
Saiyavail  2 

Saubhagya  (conjugal  felicity)  92,  104, 
106,  570 

Saubhagyadayini  103 
Saubhagyasundari  572 
Sauca  108 
Saumika  79 
Saumya  53,  187 
Saunaka  2,  4 
Saunaklya  lore  3 
Saurabhcyl  543 
Saura  Upapurana  5 
Sauri  (Saturn)  153,  176 
Sautramani  79,  121 
Savitr  382,  541 
Savitra  53,  83 

SaviirT  14,  78,  108,  574,  576 
Savilri  TIrlha  576 
second  husband  permitted  240 
seller  of  girls  218 

semen  virile  of  King  Vasu  swallowed  by 
a  fish  312 
Senapura  356 
seven  births  354,  451 
seven  continents  58,  66,  488 
seven  great  oceans  26,  68 
seven  Kalpas  11,  17,  19,  52 
seven  mental  sons  of  Brahma  406 


seven  oceans  61,  62 
seven  Patalas  66 
seven  sages  356,  559 
seven  Somasamsthas  (varieties  of  Soma 
Sacrifice)  337 

seventh  lunar  day  in  Magha  391 
seven  worlds  61 

Siddha  1,  30,  123,  133,  137,  453 
Siddhas  36,  108 
Siddhavata  572 
Siddhesvara  82,  396,  540 
Siddhesvara  (Suddhesvara)  491 
Siddhesvara  Liriga  316,  324 
Siddhesvara  Tirtha  422,  466,  540 
SiddhesvarT  466 

Siddhi  11,  38,  41,  42,  47,  51,  71,  134, 
135,  193,  362,  438,  442,  571,  576 
Siddhi-ksctra  81 
Siddhis  40,  515 
Sikha  579 
Sikhandin  268 
Sikhin  579 
SikhitTrtha  579 
Sila  161 
Silas  445 
Slmanta  78 
Simhavaktra  111 
Simhika  572 
Sindhu  9 

sinners  released  from  sins  (at 
Siilabheda)  218 

sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter  340,  491 
Sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter  and  cow- 
slaughter  524 

sin  of  spitting  into  water  300 
sins  536 

sins  committed  in  childhood  300 
Sipra  88 

Sisupala  405,  41 1 
STta  572 

Sltasokanivartana  (Hanuman)  267 
Sitikantha  438 

Siva  T,  4,  5,  22,  29,  30,  41,  42,  43,  46, 
53,54,58,  77,85,111,117,124,158. 
174,  175,  333.  337,  343,  345,  348, 
349,  353,  360,  362,  371,  413,  451, 
466,  572,  574,  580,  582 
Siva,  benefit  of  installing  618 
Siva  57,  71 
Sivakala  119 


670 


Skanda  Purcina 


Sivaksetra  490 
Sivaliriga  43,  569 
Sivaloka  449,  461 
Sivapura  29 
Sivapuspa  187 
Sivaratri  596 
Siva  Sankara  14 
Siva  Tlrtha  413 

six  causes  of  ihe  downfall  of  women  and 
Sudras  336 
six  Kalpas  12 
six-syllabled  Mantra  383 
sixteen  Kalas  343 
sixteen  Ksetrrapalas  523 
sixth  mental  son  of  Brahma  511 
Skanda  11,  58,  101,  273,  359 
Skanda  Parana  4 
Skanda  Tlrtha  359,  362,  368 
Slokadhyaya  188 
Smara  360 

smearing  oneself  with  the  ash  399 

Smrti  2,  143,  158,  508 

Snana  90,  119,  338 

Snana  Mantra  613 

Sodas!  79 

solar  disc  378 

solar  zone  301 

Soma  114,  115,  374,  620 

Soma  juice  339 

Somaloka  374 

Somanatha  373 

Somanatha,  power  of  284 

Somapas  17 

Somaraja  (Moon-god)  373 
Somasarma  591 
Somasamsthas  335 
Somatlrtha  83,  373,  374,  400 
Somesvara  570,  572 
Sona  17,  18,  21,  23,  572 
son  ofjamadagni  609 
son  of  Parasara  315 
son  of  Vibhandaka  625 
sons  338 

son  saves  his  father  336 

Sosana  443,  444 

Southern  Ganga  23 

Southern  Ganga  of  Bharata  626 

Sparsa  Linga  241 

Spiritrious  liquor,  drinkers  of  218 

Sraddha  41,  144 


Sraddha  79,91, 102, 148,  161,  180,  182 
185,  187,  202,  307,  333,  334,  4l8’ 
437,  466,  564,  579,  581,  582 
Sraddha  at  Somesvara  286 
Sraddha  rites  181 
Sravana  104 
SravanI  day  79 
Sri  71,  339,  344,  348,  560 
Sri  Devi  78 

Srldhara  to  be  remembered  in  Sravana 
426 

Srlkantha  82 

Sripati  171, 553, 559,  561, 562, 563,  564 

Srisa  171,  562 

Srisaila  115,  571 

Srlsukta  188 

Srlvrta  51 1 

SrhgaN'an  25,  67 

SriigI  Tlrtha  603 

Srmi  2,  43,  158,  373,  380,  385  455 
Snuis  31 

stealing  gold  300 
Sthanesvara  571 
Sthanu  52 

Subalni  and  Sikhandin,  stories  of  267 
Subhadra  572 
Subhaga  100 
Sucis  88 

Sudarsana  126,  128 
Suddharudra  491 
Suddhi  572 
Suddhodana  440 
SOdra  157,  374,  577,  632 
Sudras  337,  368,  373,  375 
Sugandha  572 
Suka  1,  316 
Sukantha  103 
Suka  Tlrtha  220 
Sukesa  590 

SuklaiJrilia  438, 439,  440,  442, 446  447 

.  450,  630 

Sukriya  (Sukia)  188 

Sukrui  (merii)  180 

Sukta  46 

Sula  61,  495,  570,  571 

Suhbheda JS9,  160.  161,  162,  177,  187, 

s.-.i  hi7’  98,  201,  206>  21S-  495 

oulabheda,  power  of  218 

Sulabheda  Tlnha  180 

Sulatirtha  566 


Index 


671 


Sulesvara  567 
Sulesvara  Tirtha  566 
Sulesvarl  567,  571,  572 
Suitibha  92,  111,  135 
Sumcru  66 
Sumloca  543 
sun  baih  499 
Sunda  440 

Sun-god  129,  131,  350,  402 
Sanmukha  229 
Sun  remained  paralysed  484 
Suparsva  572 
Suparvan  (a  king)  267 
Surabhi  349,  439 
Surajyeslha  (Brahma)  108 
Surasa  17,  18,  21,  23 
Surya  5,  380,  115 
Suryabiriiba  572 
Suryaloka  46,  465,  566 
Suryasavarni  185 
Surya  Tirtha  565 
sustenance  54 
Suta  2 
Sutala  493 

Suvarnabindu  Tirtlia  584 

Suvarnasila  352 

Suvarnasilaka  344,  351 

Suvarnsila  Tirtha  352 

Svadha  47,  63 

Svah  145 

Svaha  37,  87,  572 

Svarga  15,  37,  38,  61,  90,  164,  345 

Svargadvara  ('Gateway  to  Heaven’)  82 

Svarga  Loka  43,  150,  563 

Svarocisa  185 

Svayambhuva  185,  341 

Sveta  25,  57,  67.  535,  536 

Svetavaraha  431 

Syama  31 

Syamaka  39,  46 

Syandana  173 

Syandanavestakas  (serving  as  cover  of 
the  chariot)  173 

Tailayantra  304 

taking  as  wife  a  sister,  a  daughter  or  a 
member  of  sister’s  family  536 
taking  away  the  deposits  of  others  21 S 
taking  bath  in  Reva  266 
taking  food  only  once  a  day  629 


Taksaka  463 
Talamegha  292 
Tamaha  (a  river)  462 
Tamasa  (gift)  183 
Tamasa  (Manvantara)  185 
Tamasa  17 
Tam  as!  Bhakti  41 
Tam  as!  Maya  313 
Tamisra  hell  441,  444 
Tanclava  dance  167 
Taiikana  (axe)  356 
Tapas  62,  145,  187 
Tiipesvara  Tirtha  402 
Taptakrcchra  184 
Tara  (a  Daitp)  88 
Tara  572 
Tarahga  572 
Tatpurusa  94 
lawny-coloured  cow  287 
Tejovau  132 

ten  daughters  of  Daksa  542 
ten  incarnations  of  the  Lord  431 
ten  leading  sages  mentally  bom  unto 
Brahma  279 

ten-syllabled  Mantra  180 
theft  536 

three  cities  95,  96,  98,  99,  109 
three  Devas  340,  341 
three  divisions  of  time  340 
three  fires  340 
three  Kundas  179 
three  Sandhyas  340 
three-syllabled  Sukta  161 
Three-eyed  Lord  34,  339 
three  Vedas  41,  576 
three  worlds  72,  75,  78,  SS,  90,  95,  98, 
108,  116,  121,  343,  34S,  353,  358, 
584 

three  Yugas  576 
Tilada  Tirtha  619 
Tiladhenu  100,  183,  299.  300 
Tilottama  101,  543,  572,  625 
Timira  159,  543,  564,  572 
Tinduka  7,  102 
Tirtha,  resorung  to  625 
Tirtha  of  Dhanada  242 
tonsuring  of  the  head  629 
Tortoise  (incarnation)  431,  432 
touching  the  conch  502 
Toyesa  58 


672 


SkandaPurana 


transformation  of  foods  601 
Tray!  63 

Treia  Yuga  131,  148 
Trident-bearing  Lord  18,  498 
Trikuta  13,  21,  22,  572 
Trikuta  18 
TrikutJ  21,  22 
Trilocana  282 
Trilocana  Tiriha  364 
Trinetri  177 

Tripura  106,  107,  109,  115 
Tripuras,  city  of  532 
Tripuskara  562 
Trisandhya  572 

Trivikrama  in  Jyesiha,  worship  of  425 

Triyama  348 

Trnabindu  470 

Truth  187 

Truti  144 

tube  of  semen  312 

Tulapurusa  188 

Tvastr  540 

twelve  Adityas  75,  540 

twelve  names  (of  the  Sun-god)  380 

twelve  Sun-gods  523 


Uccaihsravas  167 

Uccaissravas  247,  387 

Udadhikramana-srestha  267 

Uddalaka  7,  220 

Udgatrs  559 

Udirna  536 

Udirna  Varaha  555 

udulyam,  Mantra  begining  with  577 

Udvarta  18 

Udvatsara  63 

Ugra  512 

Ujjayini  443 

Ullekha  577 


Uma  14,  15,  16,  19,  20,  34,  54,  58  f 
93, 100, 103,  104, 105, 107, 118  IS 
132,  137,  143,  155,  163,  165,’  V/ 
333,  348,  352,  358,  359,  360,  36 
362,  396,  448,  567,  570 
Umarudra  115 
Uma  Visvarupa  71 
unwittingly  committed  sins  300 
Upapuranas  5 
Uparicara  Vasu  310 


*  Upasti  578 
Upasunda  440 
Upavasa  117 
Upavedas  2 
Urvasi  555 
Urvasi  572 

Usai*a  (arid)  Ksetra  144 
Usaras  (arid  lands)  141 
user  of  false  weights  218 
Usna  Tiriha  572 
UtpalaksI  571 
Uipalavartaka  572 
Ulsahga  175 
Uuama  184,  185 
Utianapada  162,  182,  197 
Uttarakuru  572 
utterance  of  a  Brahmana  508 

Vacaspati  25 
Vaglsa  76 

Vahni  115,  126,  127,  135,  358 
Vahni  Tirtlia  263 
Vaidyanatha  572 
Vaikhanasa  Brahmanas  36 
Vaimanika  Ganas  35 
Vaisakha  104,  185,  301 
Vaisakha-Sihana  108 
Vaisampayana  6 

Vaisnava  18,  37,  53,  338,  358,  446 

Vaisnava  region  46 

Vaisnavas  18,  41,  78,  144,  300,  305 

Vaisriavavasara  593 

Vaisnavi  466,  572 

Vaisnavi  Maya  342 

Vaisravana  149,  471 

Vaisravarialaya  572 

Vaisya  158,  375 

VaitaranI  336.  445,  458,  459 

Vaivasvata  185 

Vajapeya  79,  364,  397 

Vajapeya  (sacrifice)  366 

Vajasaneyaka  Veda  577 

Vak  71 

Valakhilyas  220,  399 
Vali  345 
Valmiki  1 
Valuvahint  17,  18 
Vamadeva  13,  94,  188 
Vamana  171,  432,  463 


Index 


673 


Vamana  Purana  4 
Vanaspatis  102 
Vanaspatya  187 
Vandinika  572 
Varaha  18,  53,  171 
Varahakalpa  69,  74 
Varaha  Purana  4 
Varahasaila  571 
Varanasi  190,  195,  220,  571 
Vararoha  572 
Varija  187 
Varinan  173 
Vamas  (castes)  157 
Vanina  16,  44,  108,  115,  130,  145,  3 
390,  393,  540 
Varuna  391,  449,  498,  499 
Vanmalaya  263 
Vanina  missile  170,  174 
Vanina  Upapurana  5 
Varunesa  393 
Vanmesvara  262 
Vanini  78 
Vasat’  10,  30,  37 
Va$atkara  63 

Vasava  97,  177,  357,  359,  468 
Vasava  Tlrtha  620 
Vasistha  40 

Vasistha  11,  47,  141,  220,  279 
Vaslrcsvara  572 
Vasu  311,  542 

Vasudeva  172,  432,  451,  491,  493,  5 
546 

Vasuki  330,  387,  461 
Vasuklsa  Tlrtha  328 
Vasus  400 
Vaia  102,  393 
Vatakalpa  53 
Vatesvara  393 
Vatsara  63 

Vayavya  174,  187,  389,  498,  499 
Vayu  18,  21,  58,  115,  392 
Vayudevata  11 
Vayu  Purana  5 
Vayuputra  267 
Vayu-vahini  21,  24 
Vedamata  572 
Vedanga  25 

Vedangas  2,  72,  363,  396 
Vedanidhi  621 


Vedas  2,  3,  32,  72,  88 

Vedavadana  572 

Vedavyasa  7 

Vedhas  52 

Vedic  passage  508 

Vedic  passages  43,  443 

Vedic  Scriptures  26 

Vedic  Vidya  3 

vehicle  of  the  Lord  527 

vehicles  and  bed,  giver  of  213 

Vena  572 

VenI  (Prayaga)  178,  179 
verbal  sins  300 
Vibhanda  220 
Vibhandaka  7 

Vibhlsaiia  265,  432,  471,  472 

Vidasa  17 

Vidhata  108,  145 

Vidhautapapa  525 

Vidhi  557 

Vidya  587 

Vidyadana  387 

Vidyadharas  108 

Vidj'ananda  622 

\^ijhana  54 

Vikumbha  471 

Vi  mala  21,  24,  571 

Vimalesvara  156,  624,  625 

Vina  96 

Vinata  246,  388,  389 

Vinata’s  enslavement  and  release  245 

Vinayaka  101,  572 

Vimiyakas  57,  179 

Vmdhya  7,  67,  572 

Vindhyanivasinl  572 

Vipani  111 

Vipapa  21,  24 

Vipasa  17,  21,  24,  88,  572 

Vipras  2 

Vipula  572 

Vipula  572 

Vlrabhadra  523 

VTrasena  204 

Virat  (Cosmic)  Purusa  19 

Virocana  371 

Virupaksa  7,  43,  96,  111 

Virupanayana  111 

Visabhojana  443 

VisalaksI  571 


674 

Visalya  85,  86,  87,  89,  90 
Visasaihpurna  445 

Visnu  2,  11,  16,  27,  28,  33,  43,  53,  54, 
55,58,  63,  72,  75,  88,107,108,114, 
115,  134,  164,  165,  169,  171,  172, 

301,  339,  340,  341,  355,  356,  369, 

370,  380,  382,  400,  436,  540,  541, 

547,  560,  561 
Visnu  in  Caitra  425 
Visnuloka  46,  77, 9 1 ,  1 55,  356, 45 1 , 563, 
564 

Visnu  Purana  4,  5 
Visnusarman  586,  590 
Viiravas  148,  471 
Visuva  301,  374 
Visvakarma  517,  559 
Visvakaya  (a  deity)  571 
Visvakaya  71 

Visvamitra  141,  397,  479 
Visvamukhi  (a  deity)  572 
Visvarupa  563  . 

Visvavatl  542 
Visvesvara  571 
Vitasia  88 
Vittasaihya  105 

Vivasvan  380,  442,  454,  540,  541 

Vrata  43,  78,  132 

Vratas  32,  46,  52 

Vrkodara  463 

Vrndavana  572 

Vrsabha  115 

Vrsiikapi  188 

Vrsakhata  5 1 1 

Vrsali,  cohabtation  with  449 

Vrsotsarga  252,  323,  419,  490 

Vrtra  367 

Vyaghravaktra  111 

Vyasa  1,  2,  315 

Vyasa’s  birth,  story  of  310 

Vyasatlrtha  309,  321 

Vyalipata  120,  186,  301,  374,  459 

Vyatlpatesvara  82 

water  of  Reva  537 
widow  632 
wife  praised  337 
Wind-god  82 
wine,  diluter  of  218 
woman  335 


ShandaPurdna 

woman  does  not  deserve  being  inde¬ 
pendent  240 

woman  having  only  one  progeny  525 
woman  who  gives  birth  only  to  girls  525 
woman  who  gives  up  her  life  in 
Dhautapapa  526 

woman  whose  child  is  dead  525 
women  of  red  complexion  wearing  red 
garments  221 
worldly  pleasures  83 
world  of  four  types  345 
worship,  procedure  of  596 
worship  of  Kesava  in  Margaslrsa  425 
worship  of  Lord  Narayana  in  Pausa  425 
worship  of  Lotanesvara  in  Karitika  616 

Yajna  357 
Yajnas  341 

Yajnavalkya  151,  152,  154,  155,  220,  479 
Yajfiopavlia  51,  177,  577 
Yajuh  53 

Yajurveda  157,  188 
Yajus  150 
Yajus  hymns  137 
Yaksakardama  188 

Yama  44, 58, 80,  100,  108, 114,  115,  167, 
169,  171,  173,  183,  273,  301,  337, 
380,  382,  390,  432,  441,  443,  444, 
454,  479,  591 
YamacuIlT  304 
Yamahasya  Tirtha  302 
Yamala  mounuains  304 
Yamalaparvaias  444 
Yamatva  260 
Yamesvara  82,  391 

Yamuna  10,  17,  88,  120,  179,  187,  572 
Yilinya  (Tirilia)  391 
VSiudhanas  49 
Yodhanipura  406,  535 
Yoga  155,  194 
Yojanagandha  314 
Yojanesvara  Tlriha  41 1 
Yudhisthira  9,  10,  14, 17,  18,  19,  51,  86, 
115,  119,  134,  343,  344,  346,  353, 
373,  394 
Yuganta  30 
Yugam^gni  67 
Yugmaparvatas  445 


•  :  •  ■  J: 

MU 


