




ISKI 


ksjffit 



m 

i 

1 











- •' — • ....... ... 





^ 5* ? i (\ i 

o 

„ I ,h -i. fi.g j 














ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION AND MYTHOLOGY 


Translated by 

A BOARD OF SCHOLARS 


Edited by 

DR. G.P. BHATT 


Volume 38 


ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND 
MYTHOLOGY SERIES 

[PURANAS IN TRANSLATION] 

o 

Volumes Released 

SIVA 1-4 
LINGA 5-6 
BHAGAVATA 7-11 
GARUDA 12-14 
NARAD A 15-19 
KURMA 20-21 
BRAHMANDA 22-26 
AGNI 27-30 
VARAHA 31-32 
BRAHMA 33-36 
VAYU 37-38 
PADMA 39-48 

SKANDA, PARTS I-XX, 49-68 


Volumes Under Preparation 

SKANDA, PARTS XXI-XXIV 
BHAVISYA 
BRAHMAVATVARTA 

devIbhAgavata 

kAlikA 

mArkandeya 

MATSYA 

vAmana 

VISNU 

VISNUDHARMOTTARA 


THE 

vAyu purAna 


Translated and Annotated by 

DR. G.V. Tagare 


PART II 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 






First Edition: Delhi , 19SS 
Rejnint: Delhi , 2005 


'D MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 
All Riglus Reserved 


ISBN: 81-208-0455-4 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026 
236, 9th Main III Block, Javanagar, Bangalore 560 011 
203 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS—Indian Series. 
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Snies of the UNESCO 
Collection of Representative Works , jointly sponsored by the United 
Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) and the Government of India 


hinted in India 

BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHR1 JAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028 
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 



PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in the 
depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the 
rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies concealed in the 
language which with the passage of time has become obsolete. 
Man has to learn that language before he discovers that truth. 

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in EnglishTranslation. 
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular 
international medium of expression. The publication of the 
Puranas in English Translation is a step towards that goal. 






First Edition: Delhi , 1988 
Rrpnnt: Delhi , 2005 


© MOTILAL banarsidass publishers private limited 

All Rights Reserved 


ISBN: 81-208-0455-4 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026 
236, 9ih Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011 
203 Royapeuah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS—Indian Series. 
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Snies of the UNESCO 
Collection of Representative Works , jointly sponsored by the United 
Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) and the Government of India 


Printed in India 

BYJAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHR1JAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 XARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028 
AND PUBLISHED BYNARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD. DELHI 110 007 


PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


The purest gems lie hidden in the bottom of the ocean or in the 
depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the 
rocks to find them out. Similarly, truth lies concealed in the 
language which with the passage of time has become obsolete. 
Man has to learn that language before he discovers that truth. 

But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on 
that course. We have, therefore, planned to help him acquire 
knowledge by an easier course. We have started the series of 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation. 
Our goal is to universalize knowledge through the most popular 
international medium of expression. The publication of the 
Puranas in English Translation is a step towards that goal. 


I 



PREFACE 


This thirty-eighth volume in the series on Ancient Indian 
Tradition and Mythology constitutes the second part ( Uttarardha ) 
of the Vayu Purana in English translation comprising the last 
two of the four sections ( Padas ) into which the Purana is divid¬ 
ed, viz. (1) Prakriya y (2) Upodghdta, (3) Anusahga and (4) Upa~ 
samhara. 

This part contains in all fifty chapters, out of which the 
first three really belong to the second section ie. the Upodghdta 
Pada of the first part or Purvdrdha , which appear to have want¬ 
only sneaked into this part. The redactors of the Purana should 
have made these three chapters the last three of the Purvardha 
which would in that case have 64 chapters instead of the present 
61, not a big difference really, rather than transfer them to the 
second part, to which they have no special logical affinity. 

The explanation of this anomaly is not far to seek. As Dr, 
Tagare has pointed out in his Introduction to Part I, the 
original Vayu Purana ended with chapter 41 of the Uttarardha 
which contains the Phala§ruti i.e. merit of listening to the Purana 
as well as the Avabhrtha or the valedictory bath taken at the 
completion of a ritual undertaking, followed by a line of 
teachers who received and transmitted the text of the Purana. 
From this it is obvious that chapters 42-50 of the Uttarardha are 
later additions and not a genuine part of the Purana. Apparent¬ 
ly some zealous advocate of the Gayatlrtha which is the subject 
of these chapters included them in the Purana at a later stage 
to impart sanctity to his cherished subject and an authoritative 
character to Gaya pilgrimage, at the same time introducing in 
the text a fake division into Purvdrdha and Uttarardha over and 
above the original four sections and making the two parts as 
two almost exact halves by the spliting and transfer of the three 
chapters of the Upodghdta Pada, without caring for the ano¬ 
maly that would thus result, in order to give to the later addi¬ 
tion an appearance of genuineness. This would look like a most 
plausible explanation. 


viii 


Preface 

As a matter of fact fact, even the older division of the text 
into four sections does not appear to be quite relevant and 
logical as the distribution of the chapters under these four major 
heads does not follow any logical pattern. In view of this one 
could wish that someone bring out a newedition of the Purana 
with only 102 chapters (61 of Part I & 41 of Part II) re-num¬ 
bered from 1 to 102 without these artificial divisions along with 
the last nine chapters in the form of one or rather two Appen¬ 
dices. 

Among the topics included in the contents of this part two 
have obviously received special prominence, viz. the Sraddha 
cult and the glorification of Gaya. But of the total 50 chapters 
12, from 10 to 21, are related to the former, which constitute 
slightly less than one-fourth of the whole. The last seven chap¬ 
ters, approximately one-seventh of the whole, have been devoted 
to Gaya as a great sacred place and related legends as well as 
the rules and procedure to be observed during the pilgrimage to 
Gaya. The importance of this portion is amply shown by the 
fact that it has to a great extent influenced the later Tirtha 
literature, notably Tirlhacintamani and Tristhalisetu. 

The project of this series was envisaged in 1970 by the late 
Lala Sundar Lai Jain of Messrs. Motilal Banarsidass. Thirty- 
eight volumes of the series, including the present one, have so 
far been published and others are in progress. Complete sets of 
eleven major Puranas, viz. Agni, Bhagavata, Brahma, Brahmanda, 
Garu<j.a, Kurma , Linga , Narada, Siva, Vardha and Vayu are now 
available in English to the lovers of ancient Indian wisdom. 

It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks 
to Dr. R.N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their 
kind encouragement and valuable help which render this work 
more useful thanit would otherwise have been. We are extre¬ 
mely grateful to Dr. G.V. Tagare for translating the text. We 
are also thankful to all those who have been helpful in our 
project. —Editor 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE vu 

ABBREVIATIONS xiii 

CHAPTERS 

1. Manvantaras: The Milking of the Earth 457 

2. The Dyanasty of Pfthu 

3. Vaivasvata Manvantara: The Marica Creation 479 

4. The Race of Prajapati: Rebirth of Seven Sages 483 

5. The Race of Dharma 497 

6. Curse to Java Gods: Nrsimha Incarnation: Race of 

HiranyakaSipu : Birth ofMarut-gods 510 

7. The Race of Kasyapa: Danu’s Progeny 522 

8. Dynasties Descended from Kasyapa 525 

9. The Race of Sages 553 

10. The Procedure of Sraddha 561 

11. The Birth of Skanda: Rules Prescribed for Srad- 

dha 569 

12. The Procedure of Sraddha (Continued) 580 

13. The Procedure of Sraddha Performance (Conti¬ 
nued) 584 

14. The Procedure Regarding Performance of Sraddha: 

The Five Mahayajnas 591 

15. Sacred Places for Sraddha 596 

16. The Sraddha Ritual: Purificatory Rites 610 

17. The Test for Eligibility of a Brahmana (for Srad¬ 
dha Invitation) ^18 

18. Benefit Derived from Charitable Gifts 627 





X 


Contents 


19. Benefit of Sraddha Performance on Various 

Tithis 633 

20. Benefit of Sraddha Performance under Different 

Constellations 636 

21. Miscellaneous Topics: Qualifications of a Brah- 

mana for Sraddha-gifts: Merits of Performance of 
Sraddha at Sacred Places 638 

22. The Race of Varuna: Birth of Aivin-gods 649 

23. Creative Activity of Manus: The Story of Sud- 

yumna 656 

24. A Dissertation on Music: The Definition of Murc- 

chana 659 

25. The Science of Music: The Embellishments 666 

26. The Iksvaku Dynasty 672 

27. The Nimi Dynasty 691 

28. The Nativity of Soma and Saumya (Budha) 694 

29. The Lunar Race: The Amavasu Dynasty 698 

30. The Origin of Dhanvantari; Varanasi Cursed; 

Raji’s Exploits 708 

31. The Story of Yayati 717 

32. The Birth of Kartavirya 727 

33. The Dynasty of Jyamagha and Vfsni 732 

34. The Race of Vr?ni 737 

35. Wars between Suras and Asuras: Bhrgu curses 

Vi§nu: The Eulogy of Sambhu by Sukra 758 

36. Glorification of Visrm’s Greatness 778 

37. Royal Dynasties 789 

38. The Manvantaras and Dissolution of the Universe 827 

39. Worlds from Maharloka to Siva’s City 846 

40. Dissolution of the Universe 877 

41. Recreation of the Cosmic Egg 891 

42. Dissipation of Vyasa’s Doubts 899 

43. The Greatness of Gaya 910 

44. The Glory of Gaya: The Story of Gayasura 916 


Contents xi 

45. Gayamahatmya (Contd.): The Story ofSila 924 

46. Gayamahatmya (Contd.): Sila-tirtha and Other 

Sacred Spots 929 

47. Gayamahatmya (Contd.): The Glory of Adigada- 

dhara 942 

48. Procedure of the Pilgrimage to Gaya 947 

49. Procedure of the Pilgrimage at Gaya (Continued) 954 

50. The Glory of Gaya 965 

INDEX 973 








ABBREVIATIONS 


Common and self-evident abbreviations such as Ch(s)— 
Chapter(s), p—page, pp—pages, V—Verse, VV—-Verses, 
Ftn—footnote, Hist. Ind. Philo.—History of Indian Philosophy 
are not included in this list. 


ABORI 

AGP 

AIHT 

AITM 

AP 


Arch.S.Rep. 

AV 

Bd. P. 

BG 

Bh. P. 

Br. 

BS. P. 

BV. P. 

GG 
CVS 
DB 
De or 
GDAMI 
Dh. S. 

ERE 

GP 


Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 
Poona 

S. M. Ali’s The Geography of Purdnas, PPH, New 
Delhi, 1973 

Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, F. E. Pargiter, 
Motilal Banarsidass (MLBD), Delhi 
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series, MLBD, 
Delhi 

Agni Purdna, Guru Mandal Edition (GM), Cal¬ 
cutta, 1957 

Archaeological Survey Report 
Atharva Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh 
Brahman (la Purdna, MLBD, Delhi 1973 
Bhagavadgitd 

BhagavalaPurdria , Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad 
Brahmarfa (preceded by name such as Satapatha) 
Bhaoisya Purdna, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai 
Brahma Vaivarta Purdna, GM, 1955-57 
Caturoarga Cintamarii by Hemadri 
Carana Vyuha Sutra bySaunaka, Com. by Mahidasa 
Devi Bhagavata , GM, 1960-61 

The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Media • 
eval India, N. L.De, Oriental Reprint, Delhi, 1971 
Dharma Sutra (preceded by the author’s name 
such as Gautama) 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics by Hastings 
Garu$a Purdna, ed. R. S. Bhattacharya, Chow- 
khamba, Varanasi, 1964 





xiv 


Abbreviations 


GS 

HD 

IA 

IHQ 

JP 

KA 

KP 

LP 

Manu. 

Mbh. 

MkP 

MN 

MtP 

MW 

NP 

PCK 

Pd.P. 

PE 

PR or 
PRHRC 
RV 
Sat.Br. 

SC or SMC 
SEP 


Gfhya Su.tra (preceded by the name of the author 

such as Apastamba) 

History of Dharma Sasira, P. V. Kane, G. O. S. 

The Indian Antiquary 

The Indian Historical Quarterly 

Purana (Journal of the Kashiraj Trust), Varanasi 

Kaufilya ArthaSdstra 

Kurma Purana, Vehkatesvara Press Edn., Bom¬ 
bay; also Kashiraj Trust Edn., Varanasi, 1971 
Liriga Purana , GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi, 1981 
. Manusmjti 

Mahdbhdrata , Gita Press, Gorakhpur, VS 2014 
M&rkandeya Purana 

Mahdbhdrata Namanukramani, Gita Press, Gorakh¬ 
pur, VS 2016 
Matsya Purana, GM, 1954 

Monier Williams’ Sanskrit-English Dictionary, MLBD, 
Delhi, 1976 

Naradiya or Narada Purana, Venkatesvara Press, 
Bombay 

Bharatavarsiya Pracina Caritrakoia, Siddheshwar 
Shastri, Poona, 1968 
Padma Purana, GM, 1957-59 

Puranic Encyclopaedia, V. Mani, English version, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1975 

Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, 

R. G. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948 
Rg-Veda, Svadhyaya Mandal, Aundh 
Satapatha Brdhmana 
Smrti Candrika by Devanna Bhatta 
Studies in Epics and Purdnas, A.D. Pusalkar, Bhara¬ 
tiya Vidya Bhavan (BVB), Bombay 


vAyu purana 

PART II 


CHAPTER ONE 

Manvantaras : The Milking of the Earth 
Obeisance to Sri ganeSa 

SamSapayana said : 

1. I wish to know precisely the order of Manvantaras 1 and 
all the respective deities pertaining to the different Manvan¬ 
taras. 

Siita said : 

2. Listen to and understand as I recount succinctly and 
in detail, the Manvantaras which have gone and which are 
yet to come. 

3. The first Manu was Svayambhuva and then there was 
Svarocisa Manu. Thereafter the Manus wereAuttama, Tamasa, 


1 Manvantara is a period during which a Manu presides over the 
world. It (the period) consists of seventyone cycles of four yugas (catur-yugi) 
or one-fourteenth part of god Brahma’s day. In other words there are 
fourteen Manus in one day of Brahma at the end of which there is Pralaya 
(Dissolution) of the universe. Every Manu has his special set of gods, Indra, 
an incarnation of Visnu, seven sages (sap tar$ is). Thus in the 1st Manvantara, 
Svayambhuva (the son of god Brahma) was the presiding Manu, Yamas 
were the gods, Yajna, the incarnation of Visnu officiated as Indra and the 
group of seven sages consisted of Marici, Atri, Arigiras, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Pulastya and Vasis^ha. In every Manvantara, though the set of. these func¬ 
tionaries is different, they have got the same powers, functions and the same 
tenure. 

The description of Manvantaras is one of the five essential characteristics 
of a Purana. Thus we find Puranas like Bh. P. VIIL 1.29, NP. 1.40.17-37, 
VP. Ill chs. 1 and 2, KP.I.51, Bd. P. 1.2.36 describing various Manvantaras. 




Vayu Pur ana 


458 

Raivata and Caksusa. These six Manus have already passed 
away. I shall explain the eight future Manus. 1 2 

4. They arc the five Savarnas, Raucya, Bhautya and Vai- 
vasvata. I shall explain them after Vaivasvata Manu. 

5. Know the five Manus who have passed away to be 
Manavas. The Manvantara of Svayambhuva Manu which lias 
already passed has been described by me. 

6. Henceforth, I shall describe briefly the activity of crea¬ 
tion by Svarocisa, the second Manu of noble soul.“ 

7. In the Svarocisa Manvantara, there were the Devas 
called Tusitas and the learned scholars called Paravatas. Only 
these two are remembered as the groups of Devas. 

8. They were born of Tusita as the sons of Kralu, the 
Svarocisa (Manu). The Paravatas and the remaining ones—these 
two Ganas (groups) consist of twelve each. (Thus) all these 
Devas together are remembered as chandajas and they are twen¬ 
ty-four (in number). 

9-10. Dhaivasyasa, Vamanya, Gopa, Devayata, lord Aja, 
the powerful lord Durona, Apa of powerful arms, the vigorous 
Mahaujas, C.ikitvan, Nibhrta, Viryavan, and Amsa: these were 
the sons of Kratu. They were then the imbibers of Soma. 

11-13. Lord Pracetas, Visvedeva, Samanja who was well 
known, Ajihma the suppressor of enemies, Ajihmana and Mahl- 
yana endowed with learning, the blessed Aja and Usa, Yavxya 
of great strength, Hotr and Yajva were the Paravatas of great 
exploit. These all were the deities whofunctioned in the Svaro¬ 
cisa Manvantara. 

14. At that time these twenty-four Devatas (deities) were 
the imbibers of Soma. Their Indra (ruler and leader) was 
Vaidha who was world-famous. 

15-16. The Saptarsis (the Seven Sages) were Orja the son 
of Vasistha, Stambha the son ofKasyapa, Drona the sonofBhrgu, 


1. There are some variations in the names of future Manus in some 
Puranas. Our Purana gives some different names (such as Raucya and 
Bhautya) of future Manus. 

2. Verses 6-22 enumerate and describe the fuiicuonaries (gods, Indra 
etc.) during the second Manvantara. 



1 . 17-28 


459 


Rsabha the son of Angiras, Dattatri the son of Pulastya, Niscala 
the son of Atri, and Dhavan the son of Pulaha. 

17-18. Caitra, Kaviruta,Krtanta, Ravi, Brhat, Guha, Nava 
and Subha 1 : these nine are rememberd as the sons of Svarocisa 
Manu who established his race. They have been enumerated in 
the Purana. Such is the second Manvantara. 

19. The Seven Sages, Manu, Devas and Pitrs—these 
four constitute theroot (and foundation)of a Manvantara. All 
the subjects are subsidiary to them. 

20. Deities are the sons of Sages, Pitrs are the sons 
of Devas and the Sages are the sons of Devas—This is the 
conclusion of the Sastras (Scriptures). 

21. Ksatriyas and Vaisyas were born of Manu and 
Brahmanas were born of the Seven Sages. Thus the Manvan¬ 
tara has been described in brief, not in details. 

22. The detailed description of the Svarocisa Manvantara 
should be understood through (thatof) Svayambhuva Manvan¬ 
tara. It is impossible to describe it in detail even in hundreds of 
years, since the progenies are many in every family and they are 
oft-repeated. 

23. The Manvantara of Auttama is the third among the 
Manvantaras. 2 There are five Ganas . I shall recount them. Under¬ 
stand them. 

24. The Devas are Sudhamans, Vasavartins, Pratardanas, 
Sivas, and Satyas. Each of these groups (< Ganas ) consists of twelve 
(Devas). 

25. The names of the twelve constituting Sudhamans are 
Satya, Dhrti, Dama, Danta, Ksama, Ksama, Dhrti (Dhvani— 
Bd.P.), Suci, Isa, Orjas, Jyestha and Vapusman the twelfth. 

26. The Vamsakarin Devas (Vasavartins) were Sahasra- 
dhara, Visvatman, Samitara, Brhadvasu, Visvadha, ViSvakarma 
Manasvanta, Virad. Yasas, Jyotis, Vibhavya and Klrtiman. 

27-28. Pramardana (Pratardana) gods are glorified. They 
are 3 —Avadhya, Arati, Lord Vasu, Dhisnya, Vivasvasu (Vibha- 


1. As per A. 

2. Verses 23-36 describe the Auttama or Uttama’s Manvantara. As noted 
in v. 36 the activities of creation etc. are the same as in the previous Man¬ 
vantara. 

3. The reading anyanaradhito dtvo c God not worshipped by others’ is mean¬ 
ingless, as this is a list of Pratardana gods.— c Pramardana * in the text is an 



460 


Vayu Purana 


vasu in Bd.P.) Dinakratu (Vitta and Kratu in Bd.P.), Sudh- 
arma, Dhj-tavarma, YaSasvina (Yasasvija in Bd.P.) and Ketu- 

ma 29-30. Harhsa, Svara, Ahiha, Pratardana, Y asaskara, Sudana 
Vasudana, Sumanjasa, Visa Jantuvahyati, Suvitta and Sunaya— 
these are to be known as Sivas. They are the twelve other gods 
worthy of partaking their share in sacrifice. 

31-33. Understand the names of those constituting the 
Satya category of Devas, as agreed (by sages of yore). 
They are Dikpati, Vakpati, Visva, Sarnbhu, Svamrdika, Adhi- 
pa, Varcodhas, Muhyasarvas'a (?), Vasava, Sadasva, Ksema 
and Ananda. These are those sacrifice-worthy other twelve 
(Devas) famous as Satyas. These are the deities who lived in the 
Manvantara of Auttama. 

34-35. Aja, Parasu, Divya, Divyausadhi, Naya, the un¬ 
equalled Devanuja, Mahotsaha, Ausija, Vinlta, Suketu, Sumitra, 
Subala and Suci—these thirteen were the noble-souled sons of 
the Manu Auttama. These were the progenitors of the race of 
Ksatriyas and made them flourish. Such is the third Manvan- 
tara. 

36. The activity of creation etc. in the course of the Auttama 
Manvantara has been explained through (that of) Svarocisa 
Manvantara. Now listen and understand the creation etc. in the 
Tamasa Manvantara in detail and in the proper order. 

37. In the fourth period of Manvantara * 1 2 of the Manu 
Tamasa, the Ganas were four, viz. Satyas, Svarupas, Sudhls and 
Haris. 

38. In the Manvantara of Tamasa, the gardsons of Pulastya 
(manifested themselves). Each of these Devaganas consisted of 
twentyfive (gods). 


obvious misprint, for Pratardana is mentioned in v. 24 above. Verses 26fF. give 
the list of the twelve gods in each set or class [gana) of Devas. The reading 
in our text does not satisfy the condition of giving twelve gods in the Pratar¬ 
dana class. Hence the reading from a corresponding verse in Bd. P. (1.2.36. 
30b) viz. avadhyo' varatir devo is accepted here. 

1. If Vitta, Kratu and Rathormi from the readings in Bd. P. is accepted, 
the list will have twelve names (the expected number of this group of 
Devas). 

2. Verses 37-43 deal with Tamasa Manvantara. 



1 . 39-50 


461 


39. The hundred Indriyas (sense-organs) and the eighth 
Tamas (Darkness) which the top-most sages who value truth as 
life, enunciate, are remembered as the Devas in that Manvan- 
tara. 

40. Sibi the lord of (great) exploit, was the Indra of those 
Devas. O excellent ones, understand the seven sages of that 
Manvantara. 

41-42. Harsa, the son of Kavi; Pfthu, the son of Kasyapa; 
Agni, the son of Atri; Jyotirdhaman, the son of Bhrgu; Vanapltha, 
the son of Pulaha, Gotra, the son ofVasistha; and Caitra, the 
son ofPulastya were the (seven) sages in theTamasa Manvan¬ 
tara. 

43. Janughanda, Santi, Nara : Khyati, Bhaya, Priyabhrtya, 
Avaksi, Prstalodha, Drdhodyata, Rta and Rtabandhu were the 
sons of Tama sa Manu. 

44. In the fifth cycle of Manvantara of Carisnava Manu, 1 
the groups of Devatas are well enumerated. Understand them. 

45. Amrtabha, Abhutarajas, Vikunthaand Sumedhas were 
the auspicious sons of Carisnu alias Vasistha, the Prajapati. 
Their shining and glorious Ganas were fourteen and four (i.e. 
eighteen) (or fourteen for each of the four Ganas). 

46-47. Svatra (Svapna in A.), Vipra, Agnibhas, Pratyetistha, 
Amrta, Sumati, Vavirava, Vacinoda, Srava, PravirasI, Vadaand 
Prasa were the fourteen (?) Amrtabhas remembered as the devas 
in the Carisnava Manvantara. 

48-49. Mati, Sumati, Rta, Satya, Avrti, 2 Vivrti, Mada, 
Vinaya, Jeta, Jisnu, Sahas, Dyutiman and Sravasa—these are 
the names of Abhutarajas Ganas as (they) know. 

50. Vrsa, Bhetta, 3 Jaya, Bhima, §uci, Danta,Yasa, Dama, 
Natha, Vidvan, Ajeya, Krsa, Gaura and Dhruva are glorified as 
Vikunthas. Uunderstand the Sumedhas. 


1. Verses 44-55 describe the fifth Manvantara which the text calls Caris¬ 
nava i.e. of Manu Carisnu but calls the same Manu as Raivata in verses 54, 
55 and 56. Manus from Svarocisa to Raivata belonged to the lineage of 
Priyaviata. 

2. Bd.P. ibid v. 56 adds c Edhana * here and makes up the number fourteen. 

3. Reading in Bd. P. accepted to make up the number (14). 








462 


Vayu Purana 


51-52. Medha, Medhatithi, Satyamedha, Prsnimcdha, Al- 
pamedha, Bhuyomedha and others (?), the lord Dlptimedha, 
Yasomedha, Sthiramedha, Sarvamedha, Asvamedha, Pratime- 
dha, Medhavan and Medhaharta are glorified as Sumedhas. 

53-54. Vibhu of well known exploits and manliness was 
their Indra. Then the (seven) sages in the fifth Manvantara of 
Raivata Manu were: Vedabahu, son (descedant) of Pulastya; 
the sage called Yaju, the son of Kafyapa; Hiranyaroma, son of 
Angiras; Vedasri, son of Bhrgu; Ordhvabahu, son of Vasistha; 
Parjanya, son of Pulaha; and Satyanetra, son of Atri. 

55. Mahapuranasambhavya, Pratyangaparaha, Suci, Bala- 
bandhu, Niramitra, Ketubhrnga and Drdhavrata were the sons 
of Carisnava. Such is the fifth Manvantara. 

56. Svarocisa, Auttama, Tamasa and Raivatas—these 
four Manus belong to the family of Priyavrata. 

57. In the sixth cycle of Caksusa Manvantara 1 the Devas 
are remembered as consisting of five Ganas (classes), viz. Adyas, 
Prasutas, Bhavyas, the heaven-dwelling Prthukas and the 
Lekhas of great dignity. 

58. This creation of heaven-dwellers is mentioned in accor¬ 
dance with the names of their mothers. The Ganas of those 
Devas are the great-grandsons of Aranya, the Prajapati, the son 
of Atri. Each of these groups is remembered as comprising of 
eight Devas. 

59. Antariksa, Vasu, Haya, Atithi, Priyavrata, Srota, Manta 
and Sumanta—these are glorified as Adyas. 

60. Syenabhadra, Pasya, Pathyanetra of great fame. Suma- 
nas, Suvetas, Raivata, Supracetas and Dyuti of great prowess— 
these are mentioned as Prasutas. 

61. Vijaya, Sujaya,Mana, Udyana, Sumati, Supari,Vijnata 
and Arthapati—these Devas are remembered as Bhavyas. Now 
listen and understand the Prthuka gods. 

62. Ajista, the Lord Sakyana, Vanaprstha, Sankara, Satya- 
dhrsnu,Visnu, Vijaya and the highly blessed Ajita are the heaven¬ 
dwelling Prthukas. 


1. Verses 57-69 describe the Caksu§a Manvantara. 




1.63-75 


463 


63-64. I shall now describe Lekhas. Understand as I recount 
them. Manojava, Praghasa, Pracetas of great fame, Vata, Dhru- 
vaksiti, Adbhuta of great virility, Avanaand Brhaspati are glori¬ 
fied as Lekhas. 

65-66. Manojava of great virility and prowess became their 
Indra then. The seven sages in the Caksusa Manvantara were: 
Unnata, son (descendant) of Bhrgu; Havisman, son of 
Angiras; Sudhaman, son of Kasyapa; Virajas, son of Vasistha; 
Atimana, son of Pulastya; Sahisnu, son of Pulaha, and Madhura, 
descendant of Atri. 

67-68. Oru, Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvin, Satyavak, Krti, 
Agnistut, Atiratra and Sudyumna—these nine and the tenth one 
Abhimanyu; these were the sons of Caksusa Manuborn of Nad- 
vall. Such is the six'h Manvantara. 

69. O Bramanas, the creation of that noble soul is explain¬ 
ed through (that of) Vaivasvata Manvantara and it has been 
explained by me in detail and in the proper order. 

The sages requested : 

70. The successors and heirs of Caksusa Manu were 
born in the family of Kasyapa. Please mention (enumerate) to 
us all those others who were born in his family. 

Suta said : 

71. It behoves you to hear the creative activity of Caksusa 
Manu in brief. Prthu, the valorous son of Vena, was born in his 
family. 

72. Other Prajapatis and Daksa, son of Pracetas, too were 
born (of that family). Atri, the Prajapati, adopted Uttanapada 
as his son. 

73-74. The son of Daksaka, the Prajapati,became a king. He 
was given in adoption to Atri for some reason by Svayambhuva 
Manu after the advent of the sixth (Manvantara). O Brahma- 
nas, having reached the future Manvantara Caksusa, I shall now 
explain it by way of introduction. 

75. The very clever daughter of Dharma and his wife 
LaksmI, the lady of sparkling smiles named Sunrta (Suniti), 
the lady who could produce wealth, bore to Uttanapada a son 
named Dhruva and became his auspicious mother. 



464 


Vayu Purana 


76. Uttanapada begot of her Dhruva, Kirtiman, Ayasman 
and Vasu and also two daughters of sparkling smiles, Manasvini 
and Svara. Their sons have been already mentioned. 

77. The valorous Dhruva, praying for (desirous of) exten¬ 
sive fame, performed penance for ten thousand divine years 
observing fast. 

78-79. In the first Tretayuga, he (Dhruva), the grandson 
of Svayambhuva Manu, controlled himself by means of Yoga 
in his desire to win great fame. The delighted Brahma granted 
him the excellent abode among luminaries. It is pleasing and 
lasting till the final dissolution of the Universe. It is devoid of 
setting and rising. 

80. On seeing his unlimited glory and greatness, Usanas, 
the preceptor ofDaityas and Asuras, sang this Sloka (verse). 

81. “How wonderful is the prowess of his penance ! How 
commendable is his learning ! Wonderful is his Huta (Holy rite) 
that the seven sages have kept Dhruva above themselves. The 
firmament depends on Dhruva. He is the controller and the 
lord of the firmament”. 

82. Bhumibore to Dhruva two kings (as sons), viz. Pusti 
and Bhavya. The powerful lord Pusti told his shadow, “Be a 
woman”. 

83. At his truthful utterance, the shadow of divine body 
became a woman immediately. She was bedecked in divine 
ornaments. 

84. Pusti begot of his Chaya five sinless sons, viz. 
Pracinagarbha, Vrsaka, Vrka,Vrkala and Dhrti. 

85. The wife of Pracinagarbha named Bhuvarca gave birth 
to a son who became a king by the name of Udaradhi. In his 
previous birth, he had been Indra. 

86. He used to take food but once at the end of every 
thousand years. Thus the lord secured Indra-hood which lasted 
a Manvantara. 

87. Bliadra bore to Udaradhi the son Divaiijaya. Varangi 
bore to Divaiijaya the son Ripu, the conqueror of foes. 

88. From Ripu, Brhati, bore a son Caksusa endowed with 
aU types of brilliance. Caksusa begot Manu of Puskarini, a 
descendant of Varuna and the daughter of the noble-souled 
Prajapati Aranya. 


1.89-102 


465 


89. O blessed one, Manu begot ten auspicious sons of 
Nadvala, the daughter of Vairaja, the Prajapati. 

90. The sons of Manu and Nadvala were Oru, Puru, Sata- 
dyumna, Tapasvin, Satyavak, Kavi, Agnistut, Atiratra and 
Sudyumna—these nine as well as the tenth son Abhimanyu. 

91. Agneyi bore to Oru six sons of great brilliance, viz. 
Anga, Sumanas, Svati, Kratu, Angiras and Siva. 

92. To Anga, Sunltha bore a single child Vena. Due to the 
misdemeanour of Vena, there was a great indignant commotion. 

93. For the sake of progeny, the sages (churned) his right 
hand. When the hand of Vena was pressed, a great king was 
born. The royal descendant of Vena was glorified as Prthu. 

94. Prthu, the son of Vena, was the foremost of Ksatriyas. 
He was born with a bow and a coat of mail. He appeared 
blazing with his splendour. He protected all the worlds. 

95. He was the first among kings who had been crowned in 
the Rajasuya sacrifice. He was the ruler of the Earth. In order 
to eulogise him, the clever Suta and Magadha (Bards) were 
born. 

96-97. For the sake of his subjects desirous of livelihood the 
Earth in the form of a cow was milked, yielding all sorts of 
plants, along with the Devas, groups of Sages, Pitrs, Danavas, 
Gandharvas, Apsaras-s, all Punyajanas, creepers and mountains. 

98. Being milked in different vessels, the Earth (Vasundhara 
—that which contains rich deposits) yielded milk as much as 
they desired. Thereby, he sustained the world. 

The sages said : 

99-100. O highly intelligent one, narrate in detail the 
story of the birth of Prthu and how the Earth ( Vasundhara ) 
was milked formerly by that noble-souled (king) along with 
Devas, serpents, Brahmanas, Sages, Yaksas, Gandharvas 
and Apsaras-s. 

101. To us who solicit (the information) describe their 
special forms of vessels, the milker, the milk and the different 
calves (used for milking). 

102. Please mention everything to us, for what reason the 
hand of Vena was pressed formerly by the infuriated sages. 



466 


Vayu Purana 


Suta said : 

103. O Brahmanas, I shall describe the origin of Prthu, 
the son of Vena. O excellent Brahmanas, listen attentively 
with minds purified by austerities. 

104. I shall not describe- this holy narrative to an impure 
person, nor to a sinful one, nor to one who is not a disciple, nor 
to one who is malevolent and never to (by no means to) one 
who does not observe holy rites. 

105-106. This story is conducive to fame, longevity and 
attainment of heaven. It is holy and on a par with the Vedas. It 
is esoteric as the sages, have said. He who is not malicious shall 
hear it. The man who recounts this narrative of the birth of 
Prthu, the son of Vena’ to Brahmanas after bowing to them shall 
not bewail errors of commission and omission. This king (i.e. 
Pfthu) was a defender of faith. He was equal to Atri. 

107. The Prajapati named Ahga was born in the family of 
Atri. Vena was his son. He was not very pious or faithful. 

108. The Prajapati was born of Sunitha, the daughter of 
Mrtyu. Vena was the son of the daughter of Kala. Hence on 
account of the (hereditary) evil trait of his maternal grandfather, 
Vena (was cruel). 

109. He turned his back on Dharma; he indulged in covet¬ 
ousness as he pleased. He established institutions devoid of 
Dharma (Virtue and Piety). 

110. Disregarding the Vedas and Sastras he was engrossed 
in sinful and evil activities. While he reigned the subjects were 
devoid of Vedic study and utterance of Vasatkaras. The deities 
did not partake of the sacrificial offerings nor did they drink the 
Soma juice. 

111. “No Yajna should be performed. No offerings should 
be oblated to fire”. This was the cruel, solemn declaration of that 
Prajapati when his (utter) ruin was imminent. 

112. He proclaimed : “In all sacrifices, I deserve to be 
offered sacrifice (sacrificial oblations) and worship, by all twice- 
born castes. Yajnas should be performed unto me. I should be 
invoked while (performing) Homas.” 

-113. When he crossed the limits of decency, when he took 
up an improper stand, Marici and other great sages told him: 





1.114-126 


467 


114-115. “We are going to be initiated (into a rite last¬ 
ing) for many hundreds of years. O Vena, do not perform un¬ 
righteous acts. This is not the eternal Dharma. In the (family of 
the God of) Death you are undoubtedly born as a Prajapati. It 
has been promised by you formerly: T shall protect the sub¬ 
jects. While they talked thus, Vena spoke to the Brahmarsis: 

116-118. The evil-minded but eloquent Vena laughingly 
said thus : “Who else is the creator of Dharma ? Whose words 
aie needed by me ? Who is there on the Earth equal to me 
in prowess, learning, penance and truthfulness ? You all know 
precisely that I am inferior to none, that I am a noble soul. I 
am the source of origin of all the worlds and particularly of all 
Dharmas . If I wish I can burn the entire Earth or make it flood¬ 
ed with water. I can create it or swallow (annihilate) it. No 
doubts or suspicions need be entertained in this matter.” 

119. When the king Vena who was utterly deluded by 
stubbornness and sense of false prestige, could not be dissuaded, 
the great sages became infuriated. 

120. They caught hold of that mighty one even as he was 
dazzling like fire. Highly infuriated, they twisted and churned 
his left hand. 

121-123. O Brahmanas, from his hand that was being 
twisted and churned, a man black in colour and very short in 
stature, was born. Formerly it was heard so (by us). He was 
agitated in all his sense-organs. Frightened, he stood there with 
palms joined in reverence. On seeing him confused and deject¬ 
ed, (the sages) said: ‘‘JVisida (Sit down). He, of infinite valour, 
became the founder of the dynasty of Nisadas (a hill tribe). 
He created Dhivaras too (the fishermen) born of the sins and 
defects of Vena. 

124. All those others (hill tribes) residing on the Vindhya 
mountains such as Tumburas, Tuvaras and Khasas and persons 
interested in evil actions were born of the sins of Vena. 

125. Becoming indignant again, the great sages pressed and 
churned the right hand ol Vena in great fury as though it were 
the Arani (a pice of wood used to kindle sacred fire by attrition) - 

126. From the splendid brilliance originating from the 
pressure exerted on the right hand, Prthu was born. Since he 


468 


Vdyu Parana 


was born of the big ( Prthu ) hand (palm) he was called Prthu. 1 
He was dazzling with the brilliance of his body like the Fire- 
god. 

127. He wielded the primordial bow of loud report, named 
Ajagava. Then he took up the arrows and the coat of mail of 
great lustre for the sake of protection. 

128. When he was born, all the living beings became high¬ 
ly delighted. When the great king was born, Vena went to 
heaven. 

129. Due to the birth of that intelligent noble-souled son, 
he (Vena) was (elevated as) a Rajarsi (a royal sage). The tiger 
among men (Prthu) then protected him from the hell called Put 
(by being born as a son). 

130. All the rivers and oceans brought gems and jewels and 
came there. They crowned the son of Vena as the king. With a 
great royal kingdom, he became an Emperor of great splendour. 

131. That Emperor was coronated by the Devas, the sons 
of Arigiras. The valorous son of Vena, Prthu, became the first 
king and a great Emperor. 

132. The subjects who had been antagonised by his father 
were won over by him. Hence thanks to his Anurdga (love and 
affection) he got the name Raja (king). 

133. When he rushed against the ocean, the waters stood 
steady and motionless, and mountains crumbled before him. He 
never experienced the breakage of his banner. 

134. The Earth yielded food-grains without being cultivat¬ 
ed. All edible things were achieved on mere thought. Cows 
yielded whatever one desired. Honey was obtained in every 
leaf-cup (cluster of flowers ?) 

135. At that time, in the auspicious Yajna of Pitamaha, 
the highly intelligent Suta was born of suti (the extraction of 
Soma juice) on the day intended for the extraction of Soma 
juice. The intelligent Magadha was also born in the same great 
Yajna. 


1. Our text gives a number of popular etymologies, vide that of Nisada 
(in v. 123) and ofPrthu here. 



1.136-146 


469 


136. With the Havis of Indra the Havis of Brhaspati got 
mixed. The offering was made to Indra by the Devasand there¬ 
by Suta was born. 1 

137. The Havya offering of the preceptor which was mingled 
with that meant for the disciple, was over-powered by the dis¬ 
ciple s Havis. On account of the (mingling) activity of the lower 
and the upper, a mixed caste came into being. 

138. A Suta (charioteer) is begot of a Brahmanas lady by 
a Ksatriya who belongs to an inferior caste. Hence Suta is pro¬ 
claimed to have rites of the latter (Ksattriya) one. 

139. It is the middle type of Dharma of a Suta, viz. that 
of Ksattriyas. (He has these duties:) looking after and mainte¬ 
nance of chariots, elephants, horses. Practice of medicine is 
(his) lowliest of duties. 

140. Both of them (Suta and Magadha) were called there 
by the Devas and Sages for eulogising Prthu. All the sages said 
to them: “May this king be eulogised. This is abefitting activity 
of yours. He is also a person deserving praise”. 

141-142. Then Suta and Magadha told all the sages: “We 
shall propitiate the Devas and the sages with our activities. We 
do not know the performances, characteristics and reputation of 
this (Prthu) king. Wherefore, O Brahmanas, can we eulogise 
this brilliant king ?” 

143. They were enjoined by the sages : cc Let him be eulo¬ 
gised by his future activities. He has control over his sense 
organs. He is always engaged in charitable rites. He is truthful, 
endowed with knowledge. He is munificent and is never defeated 
in battles. 

144. Suta and Magadha eulogised him by composing songs 
about the past achievements of the powerful king Prthu. 

145. At the end of the eulogy, the delighted Prthu, the 
lord of the subjects, gave the land of Anupa to Suta and 
Magadha to Magadha. 

146. Ever since, all the kings are eulogised by Sutas 


1. Verses 136-146 explain how and why the mixed class called suta came 
into existence and the duties assigned to that caste. The relation between 
Magadha and the land called Magadha is understandable but not that 
between Suta and Anflpa (South Malwa). 



470 Vdyu Parana 

and Magadhas. They are awakened by Sutas, Magadhas and 
Bandis (Bards) with benedictory songs. 

147. On seeing him (King Prthu), the subjects were 
extremely pleased. The great sages told (them) : “Let this 
protector of men (King), the son of Vena, be the bestower of 
livelihood to you”. 

148-149. Then the subjects hurried and flocked round 
(literally) the blessed son of Vena saying, “As per promise of 
the great sages you make arrangements for our livelihood. On 
being hustled by the subjects, the powerful (king Prthu), with 
the desire to perform what was beneficent to the subjects, took 
up his bow and arrows and rushed at Vasudha (the Earth). 
Being afraid of being hit, the Earth assumed the form of a cow 
and fled. 

150. Taking up his bow, Prthu ran in pursuit of the fleeing 
Earth. Frightened of the son of Vena, she (the Earth) ran to 
Brahmaloka and other worlds (but finally) saw in front of her 
the son of Vena holding the bow lifted up. 

151. He had his splendour brightened up by the blazing 
arrows and shafts. He was of never failing (power) and endow¬ 
ed with great Yogic power. He was invincible even to the Devas. 
He could not be thwarted by anyone. 

152. The goddess (Earth) who is always worthy of being 
worshipped by the three worlds, could not get succour (from 
elsewhere) and so yielded to the son of Vena with palms join¬ 
ed in reverence. 

153. She spoke to the son of Vena r “O king, you are 
not aware of the sin inherent in killing a lady. How are you 
going to sustain the subjects without me. 

154. O most excellent of all kings,-but for me the subjects 
will be ruined. O king, all the worlds rest in me. The whole 
universe is sustained by me. 

155. O protector of the Earth, if you wish to do what is 
beneficial to the subjects, it does not behove you to kill me. Pay 
heed to my words. 

156. All undertakings become fruitful if they are begun 
with proper means. O king, even after killing me, you will not 
be competent to protect and look after the subjects. 



1.157-169 


471 


157. O extremely refulgent one, I shall become the pro¬ 
ducer of food. Refrain from fury. They say that females are not 
to be killed even from among the hundreds of lower animal 
species. O protector of the Earth, in consideration of this, it 
does not behove you to forsake Dharma”. 

158. On hearing these various statements the noble-minded 
king of righteous soul, restrained his anger and spoke thus to 
(the Earth) : 

lo9. If any one destroys a single lifeor many, whether his 
own or anyone else’s and for the sake of one, he attains enough 
sin. 


160. O auspicious lady, when many attain happiness, if 
one man is killed there is no great or small sin. 

161. O Earth (repository of wealth), if you do not act 
according to my instructions which are conducive to the welfare 
of the Universe, I will kill you for the cause of the subjects. 

162. If you turn your face (disobey) against my behest, I 
shall presently kill you with an (single) arrow. After proclaim- 
ing myself (as their Lord), I shall sustain the subjects. 

163. Hence, O excellent lady, foremost among the up¬ 
holders of virtue, paying heed to my words will enliven the 
subjects perpetually. There is no doubt about it that you are 
competent to do so. 

164. Be my daughter. This is the great and excellent step 
(in the circumstances). O furious-looking lady, 1 control you 

for the sake of (establishing) piety”. 


165. Thus admonished, the chaste lady, the Earth, spoke to 

the son of Vena in reply: “O king, undoubtedly I shall carry 
out this thus. 1 

166. O excellent one among the upholders of virtue, give 
me a crlf so that cangive, milk out of affection. Make me flat¬ 
surfaced and level everywhere so that I can spread everywhere 
the flowing milk.” 


167. With the tip of his bow the son of Vena pushed away 
the heaps of rocks everywhere. The hills were raised up by him. 

168-169. In the past Manvantaras the Earth was rugged 
and uneven. Naturally some parts were even and some uneven. 
In the course of the previous creations, there was no demarca¬ 
tion of cities and villages, as the Earth was uneven and rugged. 


472 


Vayu Pnrana 


170. In the Caksusa Manvantara there were no plants, no 
breeding of cows, no cultivation and no trade routes. All these 
occurred in the Vaivasvata Manvantara. 

171. Wherever there was evenness (plain ground) the 
subjects always occupied it. 

172. The diet cansisted of fruits and roots. Since the reign 
of the son of Vena all these things appeared in this world. 

173. When the medicinal herbs were destroyed, lord Prthu 
made Caksusa Manu the calf, and with great difficulty milked 
with his own hand, the Earth (in the form of a cow) 1 and pro¬ 
duced plants. 

174. Food grains and plants were milked by the son of 
Vena from the Earth-goddess after making Caksusa Manu the 
calf and the bare ground the vessel. The subjects always main¬ 
tained themselves with that food. 

175-176. The Earth (The holder of treasures)was eulogised 
by the sages and milked again. Their calf was Soma (the Moon) 
and the milker (milkman) was Brhaspati. The vessel was 
Gayatri and other (Vedic) metres. Their milk was penance 
and the eternal Brahman. 

177. Again (the Earth was) eulogised by the groups of 
Devas led by Purandara after taking up a golden vessel and 
Ampta (Nectar) was milked by them. The Devas led by Indra 
sustained themselves with that alone. 

178. The Earth was eulogised by the Magas (Serpents) and 
milked. Poison was the milk, Vasuki the son of Kadru, was the 
milkman, on behalf of those highly powerful serpents. 

179. O excellent Brahmanas, the fierce, huge-bodied and 


1. The story of Pjthu and his milking of the Earth is a Puranic presen¬ 
tation of the Vedic conception of milking of the Viraj cow. The Virdj Sukta 
(AV. VIII.10) forms the basis of this Puranic legend. The Puranic legend 
asserts the right of sages (public leaders) to remove a wilful tyrant. 

This Prthu is a Vedic king and is recorded to have worshipped the 
Asvins in his sacrificial chamber (AV. XX. 140.5). The milking of Viraj cow 
by Prthu with the earth as a milking pail and Vaivasvata Manu as a calf is 
mentioned in AV. VIII.10.24. But in our Purana Caksusa Manu is made 
the calf. See v. 174. 

This episode is depicted in various Puranas as in Mbh Santi, 59.98-128, 
Bh. P. IV. 18, Mt. P. 10.1-35, Bd. P. 12.36.177-202. 




1.180-189 


473 


excessively aggressive ones among the Nagas and Sarpas sustain 
themselves with that alone. That is their diet and sustenance. 
Their conduct and prowess were in accordance with that. 

180. After making themselves invisible, the Earth was 
milked again by the Yaksas and Punyajanas. They had made 
VaiSravana (Kubera) the calf. It was an unbaked vessel that 
they milked into. 

181. The milker was Jatunabha, the father of Manivara. 
He possessed great strength and excessive splendour. He had 
full self-control. Pie was the son of a Yaksa. The great sage 
said that they sustained themselves with that milk. 

182. The Earth was milked again by Raksasas and 
Pisacas. Their milkman was Kubera endowed with the knowl¬ 
edge of Brahman. 

183. The calf was the powerful Sumali. Blood was the 
milk yielded. It was a vessel of skull that the Raksasas milked 
into by being invisible. All the Raksasas sustain themselves 
with that milk. 

104. In the vessel of lotus (leaves) the Earth was milked 
again by Gandharvas and the groups ofApsaras-s. They made 
Citraratha the calf, and pure scents was the yield. 

185. Visvavasu who was the pure son of a sage and who 
was the very powerful king of Gandharvas and who was a 
noble soul resembling the sun was their milkman. 

186. The goddess Earth was eulogised and milked again by 
the mountains. The yield was the medicinal herbs in embodied 
form and various kinds of precious stones. 

187. Mt. Himavan was their calf. The great mountain 
Meru was the milkman. 1 The mountain itself was the vessel. 
With that the mountain was stabilised. 

188. The Earth-goddess was eulogised and milked again by 
the trees and creepers. They took the leafy cup of Palas'a as the 
vessel. The milk yielded was the ability to grow after being cut. 

189. The mountain in full bloom was Kamadhuk {the milk¬ 
man of what is desired). Plaksa tree was the calf. The Earth 
(was thus) the yielder of all desires, the benefactress of all liv¬ 
ing beings and very famous. 


1. Kalidasa echoes this in Kumara-sariibhaua 1.2. 



474 


Vayu Purdna 

190, Such is the Earth ( Vasundhara ) (the possessor of 
riches) who became the Dhatri (nurse), Vidhatri (the creative 
agent), and DharanI (the support). We have heard that it 
was milked for the welfare of all the people by Prthu. It be¬ 
came the foundation of the world consisting of the mobile and 
the immobile beings and its source of origin. 


CHAPTER TWO 


The Dynasty of Prthu 

*Suta said : 

1. It is reported that the Earth extended to the oceans as 
its limit. It is called Vasudha , because it holds riches ( Vasil — 
wealth, Dharayate —holds). 

2-3. Formerly the earth was covered with the fat of 
Madhu and Kaitabha. Hence the Earth extending to the oceans 
became famous as Medini ( Medas —fat). Since the intelligent 
son of Vena, king Prthu, adopted her as his daughter, she is 
called Prthivi. 1 

4. The division of this famous, beautiful Earth was former¬ 
ly made by King Prthu, The Earth consisting of a series of 
towns and mines (of various natural products) and populated 
by people of four castes was protected by that intelligent king. 

5. That excellent king, the son of Vena, had such prowess. 

He was worthy of being bowed to and worshipped by all living 
beings. & 

6. Beingancient and born of Brahman, Prthu alone is 
worthy of being offered obeisance by Brahmanas of great dig¬ 
nity (and fortune) who were experts in the Vedas and their 
Ahgas (ancillary subjects). 

7. The primordial king Prthu, the valorous son of Vena 
should be bowed to by the excessively blessed kings who seek 
great fame. 


p " vious —* 



2.8-18 


475 


8. Only Prthu, the first maker of men, should be bowed to 
by the warriors also seek victory in battle. 

9. The warrior who, after glorifying Pjrthu, proceeds to 
the battlefield, returns safely from the terrible battle and attains 
glorious fame. 

10. The saintly king Prthu, th~ excessively renowned one, 
should be bowed to by the Vaisyas, strictly adhering to the 
avocation and duties of Vaisyas, as it was he who gave them 
livelihood and sustenance. 

11 • These different calves and milkers, milk and the vessels 
all have been described by me in the proper order. 

12. At the very outset the Earth was milked by the noble- 
shouled Brahma after making Vayu the calf. 1 The vjessel was 
the surface of the Earth and the yield, the seeds. 

13. Then in the early Svayambhuva Manvantara, the Earth 
was milked by Agnldhra 2 after making Svayambhuva Manu the 
calf. 

14. Formerly, when Svarocisa was Manu, the Earth was 
milked by the intelligent Gaitra, after making Svarocisa Manu 
the calf. The yield consisted of plants and foodgrains. 

15. In the Auttama Manvantara, the Earth was milked by 
the most excellent and intelligent Devabhuja, after making the 
Manu Uttama the calf. The yield consisted of all foodgrains. 

16. Again in the fifth Manvantara, viz. the Tamasa Man¬ 
vantara the Earth was milked by Balabandhu after making 
Tamasa Manu the calf. 

17. When the Manvantara of lord Carisnava Manu arrived, 
the Earth was milked by Purana after making Carisnava Manu 
the calf. 

18. When the Caksusa Manvantara arrived, the Earth was 
again milked by Purana, after making Caksusa Manu the calf. 


1. Verses 12-20 give the list of persons who “milked” the earth in each 
Manvantara. Each ‘milking’ shows in a way the advancement of human 
civilization, 

2. Bd. P. 1.2-37 reads Sarva-sasyani caiva hi ‘ all types of foodgrains were 
the milky yield”. Here gri;ma probably stands for Agnidhra. But the milky 
yield is not mentioned in our text. 



476 


Vayu Purdna 


19. When theCaksusa Manvantara elapsed and Vaivasvata 
Manvantara arrived, the Earth was again milked by the son of 
Vena, as narrated by me to you. 

20. Formerly in the previous Manvantaras the Earth was 
milked by the Devas and others, by human beings as well as 
by theBhutas (living beings or goblins) and others. 

21. Thus the Devas should be known in all the past and 
present Manvantaras. Now listen to the sons of Prthu. 

22. Two valorous sons, Antardhi and Palin were born to 
Prthu. SikhandinI bore to Antardhana (Antardhi) the son 
Havirdhana. 

23. Dhisana, the daughter of Agni,bore to Havirdhana six 
sons, viz. Praclnabarhis, Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, Vraja and 
Ajina. 

24. The holy lord Praclnabarhis was a great Prajapati.. 
Thanks to his strength, learning, penance and prowess, he was 
the sole Emperor of the Earth. The tips of his Kusa grasses 
pointed to the east by frequent use in Yajrias. Hence he is called 
Praclnabarhis. 1 

25. That lord duly married Savarna, the daughter of the 
ocean, far beyond the extensive darkness. From the Prajapati 
the daughter of the ocean, Savarna, bore the ten sons of Pracl¬ 
nabarhis. 

26. All of them are named Pracetas. They were masters of 
the science of archery. Performing rtghteous actions (in close 
association) without being separated, they performed great pen¬ 
ance for ten thousand years lying in the waters, of the ocean. 

27. While the Pracetas were performing penance on the 
Earth the trees not being properly cared for covered the earth 
resulting in the decline and ruin of the subjects. 

28. When (the firmament) was obstructed in the Caksusa 
Manvantara, wind could not blow. The sky was covered with 
trees. The subjects could not (carry their activities) for ten 
thousand years. 

29. On realising it by means of their power of penance, all 


1. CfBd. P. 1.2.37.25—an etymology to explain the significance of the 
king’s name. 




2.30-41 


477 


the Pracetas, endowed with Yogic power, became infuriated and 
created wind and fire from their mouths. 

30. Vayu uprooted those trees and dried them up. The fierce 
fire burned them. Thus the destruction of trees took place. 

31. Learning of the destruction of the trees (and when 
only) a few trees survived, king Soma (the Moon-god) 
approached these Pracetas and spoke to them: 

32. “O kings, O sons of Praclnabarhis, give up your 
anger after considering the benefits conferred (by flourishing 
trees) for the continuance of the worlds. 

33. The trees will grow on the Earth. May the fire and the 
wind calm down. This jewel of a girl of fair complexion is the 
daughter of the trees. 

34. Knowing this future (contingency), she has been nurtur¬ 
ed (and brought up) by me with my rays. She is named Marisa 
and is created by the trees themselves. May she, nurtured in the 
womb of the moon*, be your wife. 

35. By means of a moiety of your splendour as well as a 
moiety of my splendour, the learned Prajapati named Daksa 
will be born of her. 

36. He, of fiery splendour, shall again develop the subjects 
andprotect theEarthalmost burnt by the fire of your brilliance.” 

37. Then, at the instance of Soma (the Moon-god) those 
Pracetas curbed their fury and accepted righteously from the 
trees (their daughter) Marisa as their wife. 

38-39. They then impregnated Marisa mentally. Daksa the 
Prajapati was born of Marisa and the ten.Pracetas. He posses¬ 
sed great splendour and virility, thanks to the part of Soma. At 
first Daksa created progeny by mental process and subsequently 
by means of sexual intercourse. 

40. After creating the iinmboile beings, mobile beings, bipeds 
and quadrupeds mentally, Daksa created women (daughters) 
thereafter. 

41. He gave ten (of his daughters) to Dharma, thirteen to 
Kasyapa and twenty-seven engaged in the movement of time 
(i.e. the twenty-seven constellations) to the moon.. 


*i.e. ‘by rays of the moon’ (as stated in v. 34a). 



478 


Vayu Parana 

42. After giving these (daughters) to them he gave four 
other daughters to Aristanemi, two to Bahuputra, two to Angi- 
ras and one daughter to Kpsasva. Now know their progeny. 

43. By this time, the sixth 'Man van tar a of Caksu$a Manu 
ceases giving place to the seventh Manvantara of the Prajapati 
Vaivasvata Manu. 

44. In them (the daughters of Dak$a) Devas, birds, cows, 
serpents, Daityas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Apsaras-s and other 
classes of beings were born. 

45. The creation of the earlier ones was due to thought, 
sight and touch. Thenceforth, the subjects in this world were 
born of sexual intercourse. 1 

The sages said : 

46-48. The auspicious birth of Devas, Danavas, Celestial 
Sages and the noble-souled Daksa has been narrated by you 
before. It was mentioned by you (before) that Daksa, the Pra¬ 
japati, was born of Prana. How did he who had great penance 
subsequently attain the status of the son of Pracetas ? O Suta, 
it behoves you to clarify this doubt of ours. He was the son of 
the daughter of Soma. How did he become his (Soma’s) 
father-in-law? 

Suta said: 

49. O excellent ones, birth and dissolution (death) occur 
perpetually among living beings. The sages and those men who 
are endowed with learning are not deluded in this matter. 

50. O Brahmarias, Daksa and others are born in every 
Yuga. They undergo subsequent death too. A learned man is 
not confused in this matter. 

51. O excellent Brahmanas, formerly there was neither 
seniority nor juniority among them. Penance alone was consi¬ 
dered weightier and prowess was the basis thereof. 

52. He who comprehends this creation of the mobile and 
the immobile beings in Caksusa Manvantara passes his life-span 
fully and is honoured in the heavenly region (after it). 

1. This is the main difference between the previous six Manvantaras 
and the present one. With this chapter closes the description of the 
Manvantara. 



2.53-3.4 


479 


53. This creation of Caksusa Manu has been succinctly nar¬ 
rated. Thus these six cycles of creation, in the form of Manvan- 
taras have elapsed. They have the Svayambhuva Manvantara 
as their first one and the Caksusa Manvantara as the last one. 
They have been briefly narrated in the proper sequence. 

54. O excellent Brahmanas, these creations have been 
narrated in accordance with my understanding. The details of 
these creations should be known through the creation in the 
Vaivasvata Manvantara. 

55. All the creations of Vivasvan are endless and non- 
different (from other Manvantaras) ( in the matter ofstates of 
health, duration of life, virtue, love and wealth. He who reads 
this without malice attains these attributes. 

56. Now I shall describe the creative activity of the current 
noble-souled Vaivasvata Manu succinctly and in detail (as the 
case may be). Listen and understand even as I recount. 


CHAPTER THREE 
Vaivasvata Manvantara : The Marica Creation 
Siita continued : 

1. In the seventh cycle called Vaivasvata Manvantara, the 
Devas and the great sages were born of Kasyapa, son ofMarici. 1 

2. The eight groups of Devas are remembered as follows: 
(1) Adityas, (2)Vasus, (3) Rudras, (4)Sadhyas (5) Vis'vedevas 
(6) Maruts, (7) Bhrgus and (8) Angiras-s. 

3. (Among them) Adityas, Maruts and Rudras are to be 
known as the sons of KaSyapa. The three groups, viz. Sadhyas, 
Vasus and Visvedevas are the sons of Dharma. 

4. Lord Bhargava was born of Bhrgu and Angira was the 
son of Angiras. In this Vaivasvata Manvantara, those Devas are 


1. Hence the title of the chapter ‘Marica creation*. 



480 Vayu Parana 

perpetually Chandajas (born according to their own will or 
born of Vedic chandasl ). 

5. The current auspicious creation should be known as that 
of the descendants of Marici. Their present brilliant Indra is 
Mahabala by name. 

6. All the Indras in the different Manvantaras whether of 
the past or future or those who exist now should be known as 
having equal characteristics. 

7. All of them are the lords of past, present and future 
objects, thousand-eyed and Purandara (destroyers of the cities 
of enemies). All of them are bountiful, crested (wearers of 
crowns with crests). They hold thunderbolt in the hand. All 
performed hundred sacrifices and all possessed hundreds of 
attributes. 

8. They establish themselves after excelling all the living 
beings in the three worlds, whether weak or mobile, for 
various reasons such as Dharma (Piety) etc. 

9. I shall explain everything as to how they are the lords 
of the past, present and future by means of splendour, penance, 
intellect, strength, learning and exploits; how they have become 
powerful; listen and understand even as I recount. 

10. Three worlds have been remembered by the Brahmanas 
asBhuta, Bhavya and Bhavisya A They are respectively remember¬ 
ed as follows : Bhurloka or the Earth, Bhuvarloka or the firma¬ 
ment and Bhavya or the heaven. I shall explain how they 
have been accomplished. 

11-12. This was uttered at the outset by Brahma who was 
desirous of sons and who was meditating. The word “Bhuh” was 
uttered in the beginning and this Bhurloka took shape. The root 
Bhu is remembered in the sense o {Sattd (existence) as also Loka 
Darina (visibility to the people). Since it existed and was 
visible it became Bhurloka, hence this first Loka is remembered 
as Bhuh, because it existed. 

J 3, When this (world) had taken shape, the second word, 
Bhavat” was uttered again by Brahma. That which is about to 

take shape in the immediate future time is indicated by the 
word “Bhavat”. 1 

(v. l’9). VerSeS ^ explain these terms and how the vyahrtis originated 




3.14-28 


481 


14. The word Bhuvarloka is derived from bhauana by those 
who know Nirukta (Etymology). Hence the firmament is called 
the second Loka i.e. Bhuvarloka. 

15. When Bhuvarloka had taken shape, the third 
word “ Bhavya ” was uttered by Brahma and then the Bhavya- 
loka took shape. 

16. The word Bhavya is used in the sense of what has not 
yet come about (i.e. the future). Hence this future world is 
remembered by the name Diva (Heaven). 

17. Another third word “Svah” was uttered (by Brahma). 
Then the Bhavyaloka (future world) took shape. The word Bhavya 
is used in the sense of future time. 

18. The Earth is remembered by the word Bhuh; the firma¬ 
ment is remembered as Bhuva/i; the heaven is remembered as 
Bhavya. This is the set of three worlds in a nutshell. 

19. By the utterances in combination with the three worlds 
the three Vyahrlis( i.e. the mantras Bhu/i, Bhuvah, Sva/i ) originated. 
The root JValh is remembered in the sense of ‘protection’ by 
those who know the (meanings of) roots. 

20. Since they are the Lord Protectors of the Bhiila, Bhavya 
and Bhaval worlds they are the Mlhas (Protectors) of the three 
worlds. They are termed as Indras by the Brahmanas. 

21. The Devendras who are the chiefs in the Manvantaras 
as well as those Devas who are their (subordinates) become 
partakers of shares in the Tajfias . 


22. Yaksas, Gandharvas, Raksasas, Pisacas, Uragas and 
Danavas are all proclaimed as (the products of) the glory of 
the Devendras. 

23. The Devendras are the elders (preceptors), protectors, 
kings and parents. Those excellent Devas protect all these sub¬ 
jects righteously. 

24. Thus the characteristics of the Devendras have been 
briefly described. I shall now recount the seven sages who are 
stationed at present in the heaven. 

25-28. They are: (1) Vis'vamitra of great penance, the inte¬ 
lligent son of Gadhi who was born of the family of Kusika, (2) 
Jamadagni, the valorous son of Oru (Aurva) the scion of the 
family of Bhrgu, (3) Bharadvaja of great penance, the son of 
Bfhaspati, (4) Saradvan the learned and the virtuous son of Uta- 




482 


Vayu Purana 


thya, belonging to the family of Gotama, (5) the fifth one 
Brahmakosa (otherwise known as) lord Atri, son of Svayambhu 
(Brahma,) (6) the sixth one, the son of Vasistha well known in 
the world as Yasuman, and (7) Vatsara, son of KaSyapa. All 
these seven are well honoured by good men. These seven sages, 
all of whom are Siddhas, exist in the present Manvantara. 

29-31. Iksvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrsta, Saryati, the famous 
Narisyanta, Nabha, Uddista, Karusa, Prsadhra and Vasuman 
the tenth—these are the ten sons of Vaivasvata Manu glorified 
byme. The seventh Manvantara has been explained by me. O 
Brahmanas, the second Pada has been described by me in detail 
and in the proper order. What else shall I now explain? 





SECTION 3 : ANUSANGA PADA 


CHAPTER FOUR 

The Race of Prajapati : Rebirth of Seven Sages 
The Sages said : 

1. On hearing the second section (in full) as narrated by 
the intelligent Suta, Samsapayana thereafter asked him about 
(the subject matter of) the third Pdda (Section). 

2. “The second Pdda has been narrated by you along with 
its sequel (Appendix); please recount the third Pdda in detail 
along with the (necessary) introduction’* Being requested 
thus, Suta began to speak with his inner soul highly delighted. 

Suta said : 

3. OBrahmanas, I shall recount the third pada in detail 
along with (necessary) introduction. Even as I recount it, 
listen and understand it completely. 

4. O Brahmanas, listen in details and in proper order to 
the creative activity of the present Vaivasvata Manu of noble 
soul. 

5-7. The (Manu) period is already calculated as being of 
seventyone sets of four Yugas. After bowing to Vivasvan (the 
Sun-god) I shall narrate the Vaivasvata creation beginning with 
Manu and ending with the future events. It comprises Deva- 
ganas, Sages, Danavas, Pitrs, Gandharvas, Raksasas, Bhuta- 
ganas, human beings, animals, birds and immobile beings. 

8-9. The seven great sages who had passed away in the first 
Svayambhuva Manvantara and who were the creators and initi¬ 
ators then, are reborn in the Vaivasvata Manvantara after 



484 


Vayu Puratia 

the lapse of the Caksusa Manvantara. It is due to the curse of 
Mahesvara that the noble souls, Daksa and the very powerful 
sages Bhfgu and others manifested themselves (in this Manvan¬ 
tara) . 

10. The seven sages were born again as seven mental sons 
of Brahma. They were adopted as sons by Svayambhu (the 
self-born god Brahma) himself. 

11. The creative activity was initiated again as before and 
in the proper order, by those noble souls who manifested them¬ 
selves and who created the series of subjects. 

12. I shall mention the progeny of those people of pure 
knowledge and holy rites in brief as well as in detail (according 
to the context) and in the proper order. 

13. This world consisting of mobile and immobile beings 
and embellished with planets and stars is filled with beings born 
of their families. 


14. On hearing these words a doubt arose in the minds of 
the sages. Overwhelmed by the doubt, the sages of pure holy 
rites honoured Suta and asked him for the sake of clarifica- 
tion of their doubts. 

The sages said : 

15. O excellent one, how were the seven sages born as 
seven mental sons at the outset? How were they adopted as 
sons ? Please explain this to us. 

•Thereafter, the highly-splendid Suta well versed in Puranas 
began the auspicious narration. 


Suta said : 

16-17. How the seven great sages who had been great Sidd- 
as in the Svayambhuva Manvantara, failed to attain the fruit 
of penance in the Vaivasvata Manvantara (I shall narrate.) 
Ovemhelmed with the curse of Bhava (Siva)they did not attain 

Jana Loka° f he penance - ° nce the 7 gathered together in the 

anoitr-T. n ^ ^ L ° ka aU thC great sa S es ^oke to one 
another.Theblessed ones were talkingto oneanother in thegrand 

sacrifice of Varuna: “In the Caksusa Manvantara let us all be 




4.20-27 


485 


born as the sons of Pitamaha. Then it will be conducive to 
welfare”. 

20. In the Svayambhuva Manvantara they had been curs¬ 
ed by Bhava. In order to make (the curse) truthful (i.e. fulfill¬ 
ed), they were born again. From the Jana Loka they went to 
heaven. 

21. We have heard that in the Yajiia of the great lord, 
Brahma assumed the form of Varuna. With a desire for progeny 
he had consigned the semen into the holy fire. It was then that 
the sages had their second birth. 

22. Bhrgu, Angiras, Marici, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Atri 
and Vasistha—these eight 1 were the sons of Brahma. 

23. In his grand elaborate Yajna all the Devas had come. 
All the Arigas (ancillaries) of the Yajna and Vasatkara had assu¬ 
med corporeal forms. 

24. The Saman mantras, thousands of Yajur mantras and 
the Rgveda embellished with Pada and Krama 2 (Pathas) were 
present there in embodied form. 

25. The Yajurveda enriched with (relevant) metres, brilli¬ 
ant with Oriikara as its mouth (face) was present here along 
with Suktas, Bralimanas and Mantras related to the Arthas 
(objects & purposes) of the Yajna. 

26. The Sama Veda so rich in (the variety of Vedic) me¬ 
tres and with all Mantra-Songs (which are) to be sung at the 
outset was present there along with Visvavasu and other Gand- 
harvas. 

27. The Braluna Veda (Atharva Veda) was (present there) 
accompanied by terriDie rites. (But) due to (the presence of the) 


1. There are two discrepancies here. Saptarsis means a set of seven 
sages but here eight sons of Brahma are enumerated. Apart from this discre¬ 
pancy in number the names of the Saptarsis of this Manvantara as given in 
vv 25-28 of the last chapter are different from this list even though v. 28 of 
that chapter asserts that “these seven sages exist in the present Manvan- 
tara n ( ete sap tar^ ay ah siddha vartante samprate'nlare). 

This previous list (3.25-28) agrees more with the one in VP.IILi.32 if 
the names therein are regarded as gotras of the sages. 

2. Krama is a special method of reciting vedic texts. It is so called as the 
recitation proceeds from the first member, either word or letter to the 
second, then the second is repeated and connected with the third and so on. 





486 Vayu. Parana 

Pratyangirasas, it appeared to have a single head with two 
bodies. 1 

28. (The following details about the recitation of the Vedas) 
Laksanas (the characteristic topics), Svaras (notes), Stobhas 
(chanted interjections in a Saman-song), Nirukta (etymologies), 
Svarabhaktis (insertion of vowel sound for ease in pronunciation), 
Atraya (resting places or annexation), Vasafkara (pronouncing 
e Vasat’), Nigraha (suppression) and Pragraha (vowels not subject 
to Sandhi rules) (all these were physically present). 

29-30. The brilliantly shining goddess Earth, the quarters, 
the intermediate quarters, the Lords of quarters, the celestial 
virgins, the wives of Devas, the mothers and Ayu—all these were 
present there in embodied form in front of the Lord (Brahma) 
who was performing the Yajna assuming the form of Varuna. 

31. On seeing the ladies, the semen virile of Svayambhu 
fell on the ground. There is no doubt about this that it took 
place on account of the dispensation of the inevitable in the case 
of Brahmarsis (Brahmanical sages). 

32. Pitamaha (god Brahma) then took it up by means of 
Sruks and Sruva (sacrificial spoons and ladles) and performed 
the Homa as if it were ghee, reciting the mantras duly. 

33. Thereafter, the Prajapati began the creation of living 
beings (or aggregate of elements). Due to the splendour that 
was beside, the fiery things were born; the Gunas Sattva and 
Rajas were not pervaded by the Guna Tamas. 

34. From the Saguna brilliance, Tamas stayed perpe¬ 
tually in the sky. All the living beings were born from the 
Tamas (darkness) and the Tejas (brilliance). 

35. When the sons born of Kantian were created, Brahma 
took up his Semen Virile in the ghee-pot and performed the 
Homa. 

36. When the Semen Virile was consigned to the holy 
fire, the great sages manifested themselves. They were embodied 
and very brilliant. All the seven (sages) had the attributes of 
new born infants. 

37. When .the Semen Virile was once poured into the fire, 

{• '^ le AV. consists of two sets of Mantras : the auspicious ones 
(Atharvans) and the terrible ones meant for the destruction of the enemies 
(Angtras ). Hence AV is said to have two bodies. 



4.38-47 


487 


Kavi (i.e. Venus) came out of the flame. On seeing him 
coming out splitting up the flame, Hiranyagarbha (Brahma) 
said: “You are Bhrgu”. Thereafter he is called Bhrgu. 1 - 

38. Mahadeva saw him coming out like that and said to 
Brahma: “I am desirous of a son and I am initiated. He is 
born to me, O lord. Hence may lord Bhrgu be my son.” 

39. Mahadeva was permitted by god Brahma who said: 
“So be it”. Mahadeva adopted Bhrgu as his son. All the descen¬ 
dants of Bhrgu are called Varunas. He became a holy lord 
(sage). 

40. A second (ladleful of) Semen Virile fell on the burning 
coals. Angiras was born of it with his limbs firmly united on 
fire (burning coals). Hence he is known as Angiras. 

41. On seeing his birth, the Fire-god spoke to Brahma: “It 
was I who held your Semen Virile. Hence may this second son 
be mine.” 

42. The Fire-god was addressed by Brahma: “Let it be 
so”. Hence, we have heard that all the descendants of Angiras 
are known as Agneyas. 

43. When the Semen Virile was consigned to the holy fire 
for six more times by Brahma, the creator, the six Brahmas 
(sons of Brahma) were born. So it is heard. 

44. Marici was the first among them, born from the rays 
(of sacrificial fire). Since the (second) son was born in the 
Kratu (sacrifice), he is called Kratu. 

45. “I am the third” (Aham-Trtlya), saying thus the 
third son was born. So he is called Atri. The fourth son was 
born with sharp pointed hairs. Hence he is remembered as 
Pulastya. 

46-47. The son born with long hairs is remembered as 
Pulaha. He who was born out of the Vasu (fire ?) was called 
Vasuman. He is called Vasistha by those who know the truth, 
by the expounders of Vedas. Thus these six great sages are the 
mental sons of Brahma. 


1. Gf. Brhad-devala V. 97-101 for the story of the births of Bhrgu, Angiras 
and Atri. Etymologies of these names also are borrowed therefrom though 
grammarians offer different derivations. 



488 


Vayu Purana 


48. They maintain the continunity of the worlds. These 
subjects are developed and nurtured by them. Hence Brahma s 
sons are mentioned as Prajapatis. 

49-50. Others called Pitrs were created by these great 
sages alone. The seven groups of sages are well known in the 
world, viz. Maricas,Bhargavas, Ahgirasas, Paulastyas, Paulahas, 
Vasisthas and Atreyas; these groups of Pitrs are well-known in 
the world. 

51. These three Ganas have been briefly mentioned before: 
They are Apurvas (Rare), Prakdsas (Brilliant) and Jyolifmaiitas 
(Illuminated ones). 

52. Their king is lord Yama and they have wiped off their 
sins by their (religious) observances. There are other Prajapatis 
also. Listen to them attentively. 

53-54. There are other Prajapatis many in number, viz. 
Kardama, Kasyapa, Sesa (?), Vikranta, Susruvas, Bahuputra, 
Kumara, Vivasvan, Sucilravas, Pracetas, Aristanemi, Bahula 
and many others. 1 

55. Kusoccayas and Valakhilyas had become great sages. 
They had the speed of the mind. They could go anywhere. They 
became Emperors. 

56. The groups of sages called Vaikhanasas are honoured 
by Brahmanas. They were born of the sacred ashes. They are 
engaged in penance and learning. 

57. The handsome Asvinas were born of his ears. The 
pure ones born of the eyes are known as Ak$arajas. 

58. The elder Prajapatis were born of his vessels. The sages 
were born of the hair pores in the skin and the sweat dirt. 

59. From his tears and cry were born the terrible mouths 
Niryasas (?), the junctions of fortnights, years, days and nights 
and the terrible light of Pitrs. 

60. Raudra they say is the blood. Lohita is remembered as 
gold. That should be known as Maitra also. The smoke is 
remembered as animals. 


1. Different Puranas give different lists of Prajapatis. For example, the 
lists in Mbh., Mt. P. or Garuda differ from our text (and Bd. P) and inter se. 


I 




4.61-73 


489 


61. The flames are Rudras and Adityas. Divine human 
beings were born of the burning coal and the flame. 

62. Brahma born of Brahman is the primordial being 
in the world. Requesting (for the hand of) a virgin, the sages 
told him who bestowed everything: 

63. “Brahma, the eldest among Suras, is delighted with 
Devas. These lords will be giving birth to all the subjects. 

64. All of them are Prajapatis. All of them are sages. These 
rites will uphold these worlds with his grace. 

65. They have developed couples increasing your splend¬ 
our. Among Devas there are learned ones in Vedas. All the 
saintly kings are also such. 

66. All of them are devoted to the Vedic Mantras. They 
have been born out of the attributes of Prajapatis. The infinite 
Brahman is the Truth and the greatest penance. 

67. O lord, all of us are your own children, the Brahman 
(Vedas), the Brahmanas and all the worlds including the mobile 
and the immobile beings. 

68. Beginning with Marlci and including all the sages, we 
Devas are thinking about and longing for children by your 
(blessings)”. 

69. (Siita said) O highly blessed ones, Devas along 
with sages identifying (themselves) with the abodes and the 
time are born in this family during the Yajna. 

70. In that very form, they may not establish these sub¬ 
jects. They may be stabilised from the beginning till the end of 
the Yugas. 

71. Then the preceptor of the world (Brahma), without 
any further thought, spoke—“O Devas, it was after deciding 
like this that the subjects had been created by me. There is no 
doubt about this. These sages have been born in your race”. 

72. Among them I shall recount in detail and in proper 
sequence the race of Bhygu, the ancient noble soul and the first 
Prajapati. 

73. Bhrgu had two unequalled, excellent and auspicious 
wives of noble families. One was the daughter ofHiranyakasipu, 
famous by the name ‘Divya’ and the other was the fair-com- 
plexioned daughter of Puloman, named Pauloml. 


490 


Vayu Purina 


74-75. Divyabore to Bhrgu the planet Sukra (Venus) who 
was the preceptor of Dcvas and Asuras, who was the son of Kavi, 
and was known as Kavya, Sukra and Usanas. He was the most 
excellent among the knowers of Vedas. Sukra’s wife named Ahgl 
was the mental daughter of the Soma-drinking Pitfs and very 
famous. She gave birth to four sons. 

76-77. He was endowed with Brahman’s splendour and the 
most excellent among the knowers of Brahman. Sukia begot 
four sons of her, viz. Tvastr, Varutrin, Sanda and Amaika. 
They resembled the sun and in their prowess they were equal to 
Brahma. 

78. Ranjana, Prthurasmi and the scholarly Brhadgiras 
were the sons of Varutrin. They were devoted to Brahman and 
became the priests of Suras. 

79. They approached Manu with the motive of spoiling 
sacrificial rites. On seeing Dharma being violated, Indra spoke 
to Manu: 

80. “I would rather have the sacrifice performed through 
you than through these”. On hearing these words of Indra, they 
fled from that place. 

81. When they absconded, Indra released (their) wife 
Cetana. Then he followed her. 

82-83. On seeing them come there again with the evil in¬ 
tention of killing Indra, he struck at them (while) they slept 
in the altar of the lord of Devas on the southern side. While they 
were being devoured by (dogs, jackals and wolves) their heads 
fell down simultaneously and became dates. 

84. Thus, the sons of Varutrin were killed by Indra former¬ 
ly. Sukra begot (of his wife) Yajani the daughter Devayanl. 

85. The three-headed Visvarupa was the great son of 
Tvastr. Visvakarman is remembered as the younger twin- 
brother of Visvarupa. 

86. Twelve sons were born to Bhrgu (and were known as) 
Bhrgu (Gana) Devas 1 . Lord Kavya begot of Devi those sons. 


1. Mt. P. gives a different list of these 12 Dcva Yajiiika Bhrgus in its 
lists of Gotras and Pravaras. 






4.87-95 


491 


87. They were—Bhuvana, Bhavana, Anya, Anyayata, 
Kratu, Sravas, Murdhan, Vyajaya, Vyasrusa, Prasava, Aja and 
the twelfth one Adhipati. 

88. These twelve sons of Bhrgu are remembered as twelve 
sacrificial Devas. PaulomI bore a lordly son having full self- 
control and engrossed in Brahman. 

89. Since he was sickly in the eighth month of conception, 
he was forcibly taken out of the womb by dire means and so 
his name became Cyavana. He became conscious due to 
Pracetas. Through the anger of Cyavana (revived by) Pracetas, 
Cyavana alias Pracetasa burned the man-eaters through anger 1 2 . 

90. The son of Bhrgu (i.e. Cyavana) begot of Sukanya two 
sons honoured by saints, viz. Atmavana and Dadhica. 

91. The son Sarasvata was born to Sarasvatl and Dadhica. 
The blessed lady Ruci, daughter of Nahusa, was the wife of 
Atmavana. 

92. The sage Orva (Aurva in Bd. P. and Mbh.) of great 
renown was born of him after breaking through the thighs (of 
his mother)- Rclka was the son of Aurva. He was brilliant (in 
complexion) like a blazing fire. 

93-94. When the cams 3 (sacrificial offerings) pertaining to 
lludra and Vi?nu (charged with specific mantras ) by Bhrgu 
were interchanged, Jamadagni was born, as the Cara pertaining 
to Vais pa va fire was (mistakenly) eaten (by his mother). 

enuka bore to Jamadagni the son Rama of unmeasured splen¬ 
dour. He was-equal to Sakra (Indra) in valour and had the 
traits both of a Brahmana and a Ksatriya. 

95 Aurva had a hundred sons of whom Jamadagni was 
the eldest. Those descendants of Bhrgu had thousands of sons 
due to mutual alliance. 


For^hJtl! Prdcetas J c < y auana -krodhad adhvdnam purufadajah is defective, 
for tins tile corresponding text from Bd. P. II-3-I. is accepted. 

2. Mbh. Adi 177 informs that when Haihayas tried a genocide of the 

Bhrgu dan, Bhrgu women fled to hills. While running Cyavana’s wife 
Aru?! concealed her foetus in her thigh. When Haihaya officers arrested her 
hV T?* ^ foetus — a son-broke through his mother’s thigh and 

hiTm W \ th SUpremc brilliance. As this child broke through 

his mothers thigh (uru), he was called Aurva (one bom out of the thigh? 
a. rue i—is a misprint for caru. 




492 


Vayu Purana 


96. Among other sages outside (the original family) there 

are many other descendants of Bhrgu. They are divided into 
seven Gotras , viz. Vatsa, Visva, Asvisena, Panda, Pathya and 
Saunaka. These seven clans are alternatively known as Bhargavas. 

97. Listen to the narration of the family of Angiras, the 
intelligent son of Agni. It was in the family of Angiras, the 
intelligent son of Agni, that Bharadvajas along with Gautamas 
were born. The most important Devas belonging to the family 
of Angiras are Tvisimants (?) of great prowess. 

98. Atharvan, Angiras had three wives, viz. Surupa the 
daughter of Marica, Svarat the daughter ofKardama and 
Pathya the daughter of Manu. I shall mention their progeny. 

99. The heirs of Atharvan born of those wives were the 
uplifters of the family. They were born as a result of the great 
penance of that purified soul. 

100-101. Br-haspati was born of Surupa and Svarat gave 
birth to Gautama. Pathya gave birth of Avandhya, Vamadeva, 
Utathya and Usija. Dhisnu was thes on of Pathya. Samvarta 
was the mental son (of Atharvan). Vicitta, Ayasya and Sara- 
dvan were the sons of Utathya. 

102. Dxrghatama was the son of Asi. Brhaduttha was the 
son of Vamadeva. Dhisnu’s son was Sudhanvan and his son 
was Rsabha. 

103. Rathakaras (Charioteers) are remembered as Devas. 
They are well-known as Rsis (Rbhus ?). Bharadvaja of very 
great fame and well-known was born of Brhaspati. 

104. The progeny of Samvarta, (mental) son of Angiras, 
are considered as Devas. Listen to them. These Angiras Devas 
are regarded as junior to Bjrhaspati. 

105-108. Ten own sons of Angiras were born of Surupa. 
They were ten and their names are—Audarya, Ayu, Danu, 
Daksa, Darbha, Prana, Havisman, Havisnu, Kratu and Satya. 
The following ten and five (i.e. fifteen) are to be known as 
belonging to the Pakfa (i.e. Gotra ) of Angiras—Ayasya, Uta¬ 
thya, Vamadeva, Usija, Bharadvajas, Sankrtikas, Gargya, 
Kanva, Rathitara, Mudgalas, Vi§nuvrddhas, Haritas, Vayus, 
Bhaksas of Bharadvaja family, Arsabhas and Kimbhayas. Many 
others (external) sages (belonging to the families outside) are 
remembered among other sages. 


4.109-118 


493 


• 109. I shall now describe the race of Marlci consisting of 
excellent men as its scions. In his race was born the Universe 
consisting of mobile and immobile beings. 

110. Contemplating on the waters (Apah) with a desire for 
progeny, Marlci desired the waters. The lord mentally concei¬ 
ved thus—“A son born of a praiseworthy woman, endowed with 
all good qualities and having good tastes is honoured”. 

111-112. All the waters were called. Thelord dwelt in their 
company. The lord procreated an unequalled son named 
Aristanemi who became Prajapati and who was of well-con¬ 
trolled mind. Vadhauvesa 1 (?) begot the son Marica, having 
the splendour of the Sun. 

113. Contemplating on the speech of good men 2 he stay¬ 
ed under water for seven thousand years with a desire to beget 
sons. Hence (the son) became unequalled. 

114. Kasyapa was the knower of the sun (?) Hence he was 
on a par with Brahma. In every Manvantara, he is born through 
a part of Brahma. 

115. The subjects 3 were angered by Daksa, it is said (?) 
for the sake of (his) daughters. Then he drank wine. The word 
‘JCaJya means wine. 

116. Hascekasas (?) 4 5 * should be known as Brahma’s KaSya. 
KaSya is remembered by Brahmanas as wine. Because he drank 
Kaiya (wine) he is called Kasyapa. 8 

117. He used harsh words. On being cursed by Daksa, he 
became infuriated and thereby became Kasyapa. 

118. On being requested by Kasyapa and urged by 
Brahma Paramesthin, Daksa gave his daughters to Kasyapa. 

All of them were expounders of Brahman. All of them were 
the mothers'of the worlds. 


1. Bd. P. reads nirata : so’psvatilapat ‘who performed penance in waters’. 

2. Chaste goddess Vak (Bd. P.). 

3. Bd. P. (ibid. v. 120) reads Prabhuh for Prajah hereof. It means ‘When 
the holy Lord got enraged at the over-bearing speech for his daughters’. 

4. HaScekasa is obscure. Bd. P. reads hasye kaSir hi vijiieyo ‘The word KaSi 
should be understood in the sense of humour’. 

5. A funny derivation. The sage Kasyapa is so designated as he was a 

drunkard (Kafra— wine) and whip-like(Kasa—a whip) harsh in speech. 





494 


Vayu Purana 


119. He who knows this holy creation of Rsis through 
Varuna becomes long-lived and meritorious. He becomes Puri¬ 
fied and attains excellent happiness. By listening to this and 
retaining this (in memory) he becomes free from all sins. 

120. Then all the sages spoke to Romaharsaria: “When the sixth 
Prajasarga (creation of the subjects) of Caksusa Manu had been 
dissolved, the creation of Vaivasvata Manu began to function 
(How did it take place ?).” 

Suta said : 

121. When the Vaivasvata Manvantara arrived, Daksa 
was commanded by the self-born lord himself—“Create the 
subjects”. Daksa created mobile and the immobile living beings. 

122. Then Daksa proceeded to create the four types of 
Prajas (subjects), viz. Jarayujas (viviparous) ,Antfajas (oviparous), 
Udbhijjas (plants that pierce the ground and grow), and 
Svedajas (those born of sweat). 

123-125. He performed severe penance for ten thousand 
years. He became endowed with Yogic power and more parti¬ 
cularly with supernatural powers like Anima etc. As he possesses 
glorious power, he divided himself into human beings, serpents, 
Raksasas, Devas, Asuras and Gandharvas. All of them being 
endowed with divine bodies and wealth of beauty and splend¬ 
our, they were lords equal to himself. He was desirous of creat¬ 
ing other mental living beings of various kinds. 

126. (He created) sages, Devas, Gandharvas, human 
beings, serpents, Raksasa’s, Yaksas, Bhutas,. Pisacas, birds, 
animals and deer. 

127. When these mentally created beings did not flourish 
and multiply, he was rebuked by the intelligent lord Mahadeva. 

128-129. He became then desirous of creating the different 
subjects by the process of sexual intercourse. He took to himself 
as wife the daughter of Vlrana, the Prajapati. She was Asikni 
who was endowed with great penance and who supported the 
worlds. The entire Universe consisting of the mobile and the 
immobile beings was sustained by her. 

130-134. In this matter they quoted two verses about 
Daksa, the son of Pracetas. “When Daksa married Asikni the 
great daughter of Vlrana, he created a million mobile wells 






4 . 135-145 


495 


along with those identifying with them. Creating them into 
rivers and mountains, the powerful Daksa pursued them. On 
seeing him the sages said, “He will establish the first and the 
second sets of creation of subjects of Daksa the Prajapati.” 
Thus after creating a million wells Daksa the Pracetasa 
married Asikni, the daughter of Vlrana. Daksa the lord Prace¬ 
tasa begot of Asikni, daughter of Vlrana, a thousand sons of 
unmeasured splendour. 

135. On seeing those subjects desirous of flourishing the 
extremely powerful celestial sage, Brahma’s son Narada, fond 
of arguments, spoke evil words to them resulting in himself be¬ 
ing cursed. 

136. The Brahmana (Narada) is sometimes called son of 
Kasyapa. Due to his mean action the Brahmana sage was 
afraid of Daksa’s curse. 

137-140. Paramesthin was born as Kasyapa’s son. Again 
due to the fear of curse of Daksa, he was born as his 
mental son. His second birth was as the mental son of Kasyapa. 
He was formerly born asNarada (son) of Paramesthin. Formerly 
Daksa’s sons famous as Haryasvas were destroyed for the pur¬ 
pose of censure. They were undoubtedly annihilated. Lord 
Daksa became infuriated and attempted to destroy him 
(Narada). Keeping the Brahmarsis ahead, he (Daksa) was 
requested by Paramesthin (not to kill Narada). 

141. Then Daksa stipulated the conditions with Parame¬ 
sthin: “Let Narada be born of my daughter as your son”. 

142. Then Daksa gave his beloved daughter to Parame¬ 
sthin. Narada was born thereof. The sage became calm and 
ceased to be afraid. 

143. On hearing this those Brahmanas became curious. 
They asked Suta, the seer of truth, the foremost among the 
eloquent ones: 

The sages enquired : 

144. How were the sons of Prajapati, the subjects born 
of Pracetasa destroyed by the noblc-souled Narada ? 

145. On hearing these auspicious truthful words born of 
a desire to know, he (Suta) spoke these sweet words endowed 
with all good qualities : 




496 


Vayu Purana 


146. Haryasvas, the sons of Daksa, desirous of procreating 
subjects, the extremely powerful ones came there and Narada 
spoke to them: 1 

147. “Alas, all of you are childish. You do not know the 
entire surface of the world. What is within, what is above and 
what is below, you do not know. How will you create the 
subjects ? 

148. What is the extent of the Earth ? What are the things 
to be created ? Is it possible to create without knowing these ? 
Small or great defects are sure to be seen therein”. 

149. On hearing his words they went away to various 
quarters. On reaching the aerial zone, they were utterly non¬ 
plussed. 

150. Wandering (here and there) intermingled with the 
(blowing) winds, they have not returned till this day. Thus 
those great sages are wandering after reaching the aerial zone. 

151. When his sons were lost, Lord Daksa, the Pracetasa, 
begot again ofVirini a thousand sons. 

152-153. These sons (known as) Sabalasvas (having 
horses of diverse colours), desirous of multiplying subjects were 
told the same words by Narada. On hearing those words all 
those powerful young men spoke to one another—“The great 
sage has said well. Undoubtedly the track of our brothers 
should be followed. 

154. After knowing the magnitude of the Earth we shall 
easily create the subjects”. They too went the same way to all 
the quarters. Even to this day they have not returned like the 
rivers (not returning) after falling into the oceans. 

155. Ever since then, if a younger brother goes in quest of 
a lost elder brother, he too gets lost. This is riot to be done by 
one who knows. 

156-158. When the Sabalasvas were lost, lord Daksa 
became infuriated and cursed Narada—“Be ruined, endure the 


1. According to Mbb Adi. 75.7-8, Narada instructed Haryasvas, the 
first batch of 1000 sons of Daksa, in Sankhya Philosophy. Thereby all be¬ 
came recluses and frustrated Dak;a’s plan of populating the world. Here 
(w. 147-48) Narada advised them to know the magnitude of the earth, 
which they were going to populate. 





4.159—5.9 


497 


pain of staying in a womb 5 ’. When those noble-souled (sons) 
were lost, Daksa begot of Virini sixty daughters. Those daugh¬ 
ters were accepted as wives by Lord Kasyapa, Dharma, Lord 
Soma (the Moon god) and other great sages. 

159. He who knows entirely this creation of Daksa precise¬ 
ly, becomes long-lived, famous, blessed and endowed with 
progeny. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
The Race of Dharma 

The sages requested : 

1. Please narrate in detail the birth and origin of all 

Devas, Danavas and Daityas in the Vaivasvata Manvan- 
tara. 

Suta said : 

2-3. I shall now recount the progeny of Dharma. 
(Listen and) understand. Daksa, the son of Pracetas, gave these 
ten daughters to Dharma as wives, viz. Arundhati, Vasu, Yarn!, 
Lariiba, Bhanu, Marutvatl, Sariikalpa, Muhurta, Sadhya and 
ViSva. 

4. Sadhya bore to Dharma twelve sons called Sadhyas. The 
highly fortunate Sadhyas were born according to their wish and 
were partakers of shares in Yajfias. Those who are conversant 
with Devas (Devata-lore) know them to be greater than other 
Devas. 

5. It is reported that the Devas (called) Jayas were creat¬ 
ed out of the mouth of Brahma through the desire for progeny. 
All of them are remembered as having Mantras as their bodies 
in the Manvantaras. 

6-7. These names of those Jayas are famous : Darsa, 
Paurnamasa, Brhad Rathantara, Citti, Vicitti, Akuti, Kuti, 
Vijnatr, Vijnata, Manas and Yajna. 

8-9. As a result of the curse of Brahma, they were born 







498 


Vayn Purana 


again in Svayambhuva Manvantara as Jitas; in Svarocisa Man- 
vantara they were born as Tusitas; and in the Auttama Man¬ 
vantara they were born as Satyas. In the Tamasa Manvantara, 
they were born as Haris and in the Raivata Manvantara they 
were born as Vaikunthas.. In the Caksusa Manvantara the 
Sadhyas were born as Suras as per their will. 

10. The blessed sons of Dharma, the twelve deathless ones 
(named) Sadhyas, had been formerly born in the Caksusa 
Manvantara. 

11-12. The highly powerful Devas who had passed away in 
the Svarocisa Manvantara assumed the name of Tusitas in the 
Caksusa Manvantara and spoke to one another. When the 
duration of Svarocisa Manvantara remained but little, the 
Tusita Devas conferred with one another—“We shall enter the 
blessed Sadhyas and be born in the Manvantara. That will be 
conducive to our welfare 5 ’. 

13. After saying thus, all of them were born in the Cak¬ 
susa Manvantara as the twelve sons of Dharma, son of Svayam- 
bhu (god Brahma). 

14. Nara and Narayana too were born there again. Vipas- 
cit who was Indra and Satya who was Hari were in the Svaro¬ 
cisa Manvantara the Tusita gods. 

15-16. When Tu§itas became Sadhyas, these names are 
mentioned—Manas, Anumanta, Prana, Nara, the power¬ 
ful Yana, Citti, Haya, Naya, Harhsa, Narayana, Prabhava 
and Vibhu. They were born as the twelve Sadhyas. 

17-18. In the Svayariibhuva Manvantara at the outset, 
then in the Svarocisa Manvantara these were the names of the 
Tusitas. (Listen and) understand them. They were—Prana, 
Apana, Udana, Samana, Vyana, Caksus, Srotra, Prana(?), 
Sparsa, Buddhi and Manas. 

19. Formerly only these • names of Tusitas were remem¬ 
bered: Prana, Apana, Udana, Samana and Vyana. 

20. The Vasus were the sons of Vasu. They are remember¬ 
ed as the younger brothers of Sadhyas. These are glorified as the 
eight Vasus Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Apa, Anala, Anila, Prat- 
yusa and Prabhasa. 

21. Dravina and Hutahavyavaha were the sons of Dhara; 






5.22-33 


499 


Dhruva’s son was Bhava who in the name of Kala became the 
impeller of the worlds. 

22. Soma’s sons were lord Varca and Budha who is 
known as a planet. These two were born of Rohini and are 
famous in the three worlds. 

23. Dhara, Ormi and Kalila—these three too were the sons 
of Candramas (Moon god). Apa’s sons were Vaitandya, 
Sama and Santa. 

24. Skanda and Sanatkumara were born of the fourth part 
of Tejas (fire). Agni’s son Kumara was born in the Sara grove 
(a kind of reed). Sakha, Visakha and Naigameya were his 
younger brothers. 

25. Anila’s (Wind god) wife was Siva and her sons were 
Manojava and Avijnatagati. Anila had these two sons. 

26. They know that the son of Pratyusa was sage Devala 
by name. Devala had two sons Ksamavan and Manxsin. 

27-28. Brhaspati’s sister was an excellent woman, celibate 
and having Yogic Siddhis. Unattached (to the worldly affairs 
or things) she roamed the entire Universe. She who became 
the wife of Prabhasa, the eighth among the Vasus, had a son 
Visvakarma who was the Prajapati of all Silpis (artisans and 
sculptors). 

29. He is the maker of all arts and crafts. He is the car¬ 
penter of the Devas. He makes and causes others to make orna¬ 
ments. 

30. He makes the aerial chariots of all Devas. The human 
craftsmen depend upon (and emulate) his mechanical arts. 

31-32. The ten renowned Visvedevas were born of Visva. 
They were—Kratu, Daksa, Sravas, Satya, Kala, Kama, Dhuni, 
Kuruvan, Prabhavan and Rocamana. [ They] are remembered 
as the ten sons of Dharma. They were the auspicious sons born 
of Visva. 

33. The Marutvants were the sons of Marutvatl. The 
Bhanu groups were remembered as the sons ofBhanu. The 



500 


Vay u Parana 


Muhurtas (auspicious hours) were born of Muhurta 1 . Lamba 
gave birth to Ghosa. 

34. The learned Samkalpa (conception) was born of Sam- 
kalpa. The Nagavlthls consisting of three patlis were born of 
Jam! (Yarn!). 

35. All the objects on the Earth were born of Arundhatl. 
Thus the learned and eternal creation of Dharma has been 
narrated. 

36. O men of holy rites, I shall mention the names of the 
Muhurta's and Tithis along with their presiding lords. 1 Even as I 
recount, listen and understand. 

37. (Incidentally I shall mention) the divisions of days 
and nights, the constellations in briefand all the Muhurtas and 
stars that appear during days and nights. 

38. More than six hundred Kalas are mentioned during 
days and nights. The manifestation of Rtus is based on the 
special movement of the Sun. 

39. Those who know Vedas calculate Tithis as the basis of 
festivals. For the purpose of charitable gifts on behalf of Pitrs, 
they utilise the different occasions (even if no apparent peculia¬ 
rity is seen). 


40-42. The divisions {Muhiirtas or Bhagas) in the day are 
Raudra, Sarva, Maitra, Pintjya, Vasava, Apya, Vaisvadeva, 
Brahma—these Muhurtas cover the period till mid-day. Praja- 
patya, Aindra, Indra, Nirrti, Varuna and Aryamna and Bhaga: 
these Muhurtas of the day are caused by the Sun. They are to 
be known in accordance with their magnitude by means of the 
gnomons. 

43-45. Aja, Ahir-Budhnya, Pusa, Yamadevata, Agneya, 
Prajapatya, Brahma, Saumya, Aditya, Barhaspatya, Vaisnava, 
Savitra, Tvas tra and Vayavya—these are the fifteen Muhurtas 


um a prcsiaing deny. 




5 . 46-50 


501 


occurring in a single night in order. The movements and rising 
of the moon are to be known from the JValika or the Pada of its 
rise. These are the different periods of time remembered as 
Muhurtas. Their presiding deities (are also mentioned) . 

46-48. Only three positions have been assigned for all the 
planets. They must be known in order as southern, northern 
and middle ones. 

The place Jaradgava is the middle, the place Airavata is the 
northern one and the place of Vaisvanara has been indicated 
as the southern one factually. 

The constellations Asvini 1 , Krttika and Yamya (i.e. BharanI) 
arc remembered as Naga vithi 2 *. The constellation Pusya, Aslesa 
and Punarvasu are considered as Airavatl Vithi. These three 
Vlthis are mentioned to be in the northern path. 

49-50. The constellations Purvaphalgunl, UttaraphalgunI 
and Magha are remembered as AryamI (Vithi), The constella¬ 
tions Hasta, Citra and Svatl are termed Govlthi). The constel¬ 
lations Jyestha, Visakha and Anuradha are remembered as 
Jaradgavi Vithi. These three Vlthis are mentioned to be in the 
middle path. 


1. The enumeration of Naksalras from Asvini shows that this portion of 
the Purana should be assigned to A JD. 300-400 as the Vedic list of Naksa- 
tras starts from Krttika. Vide H.D. V.l pp. 501-504 for a comparative table 
of the list ofNaksatras in Vedic Sariihitas, their deities, their modem names 
etc. 

2. Vithis are the divisions of planetary sphere comprising of three aster- 
isms, c.g. Asvini, Bharai^i, Krttika constitute Nagavithi. Verse 48 states, vithis 
are three in number in the northern path but actually only two Naga and 
Airavatl are mentioned. The line regarding Gajavlthl seems to be omitted. 

Verses 48-52 give the distribution of different Naksatras to different Vithis. 
The sky is divided into three zones—the northern, the middle and the south¬ 
ern designated as Airavati, Jaradgavi and Vais'vanari respectively. Each of 
these have three (sub) Vithis and to each (sub-Vithi) three constellations 
arc assigned (3 + 3 + 3=27 Naksatras). 

♦Here the line found in Bd. P. II.3-48a *brahmam saumyam tathardra ea 
gaja-vUhiti samjhltd appears to be omitted. It continues the scries of constella¬ 
tions after Krttika and means : c The constellations Rohini, Mrgasiras and 
Ardra are termed Gajavithi”. Unless this line is included the words in 48.b 
tisras tu vlthayo hyetd uttare mdrga ucyate 

would be meaningless as only two Vithis and not three are mentioned in the 
Va. P, 



502 


Vayu Pur ana 


51-52. The constellations Mula, Purvasaqlha and Uttara- 
sadha are termed Ajavlthl. The constellations Sravana, Dhani- 
stha and Satabhisak are the GarglVithi. The constellations 
Purva Bhadrapada, U ttara Bhadrapada and Revati are glorified 
asVaisvanarl (Vithi). These three Vithls are remembered by 
learned men to be in the southern path. 

53. The twenty seven (constellations) daughters whom 
JDaksa gave to Soma (Moon god) are glorified in Astronomy 
as Naksatras by name (i.e. Stars). They all bore children illu¬ 
minated with unmeasured splendour. 

54. From the daughters (of Daksa) who remained, Kasyapa 
married fourteen 1 blessed ones. All of them are mothers of the 
worlds. 

55. They were Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kala, Arista, Surasa, 
Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavas'a, Ira, Kadru and Muni. 
O knowers ofDharma, listen and understand their progeny. 

56. The twelve Vaikuntha gods who were prominent in 
the Carisnava Manvantara that has passed, became Sadhyas, 
in the Caksusa Manvantara. 

57-59. When the present Vaivasvata Manvantara had 
arrived, they were propitiated by Aditi. They gathered together 
and spoke to one another. “We shall enter this blessed Aditi 
alone, in the present Vaivasvata Manvantara by means of a 
moiety of our Yagic splendour and become her sons. That will 
be conducive to our welfare. Those who are born of Aditi will 
attain the status of Adityas”. 

_ p®' After saying this, all of them were born as the twelve 

Adityas from Kasyapa, the son of Marici, in the Caksusa Man¬ 
vantara. 

61. Satakratu (Indra) and Visnu were born again as 
Nara and Narayana in the present Vaivasvata Manvantara. 

62. Death and birth are mentioned to happen even to 
those Devas. Just as the Sun rises and sets in this world, even so 


1 ' Th °“ gh ^ DU “ ber of Kas > a P a ' s wives is stated to be fourteen 
v. 55 gives the names of thirteen only. lourteen. 




5.63-74 


503 


there is manifestation and dissolution to Prajapati (Brahma), 
Visnu and Bhava (Siva) the noble soul. 1 

63. Since they are attached to the great Vedic tradition as 
well as worldly objects like sound and the eightfold super¬ 
human powers like Anima (minuteness) these Devas were born. 

64-65. The attachment to sensual objects is declared as the 
cause of birth. Due to the curse of Brahma, the Jayas were 
born in the Svayambhuva Manvantara as Jitas. In the Svaro- 
cisa Manvantara, they were born as Tusitas and in the Auttama 
Manvantara they were born as Satyas. Devas were born 
as Haris in the Tamasa Manvantara, Vaikunthas in theCaris- 
nava Manvantara, Sadhyas in the Caksusa Manvantara and 
Adityas in the present (i.e. Vaivasvata) Manvantara. 

66-67. The follwing are remembered as the twelve Adityas, 
the sons of Kasyapa: Dhata, Aryama, Mitra, Varuna, Ariisa, 
Bhaga, Indra, Vivasvan, Pusan, the tenth one Parjanya, Tvastr 
and Visnu the last but not the least (i.e. really the great) . 

68-70. Purified by penance and blessed by Mahadeva the 
chaste Surabhl bore to KaSyapa the eleven Rudras. They were 
Angaraka, Sarpa, Nirrti, Sadasaspati, Ajaikapat, Ahirbudhnya, 
Ordhvaketu, Jvara, Bhuvanesvara, Mrtyu and Kapala who was 
famous. With her great penance, Surabhl bore these elven Devas, 
the Rudras, the lords of the three worlds. 

71. Then she gave birth to two daughters, viz. RohinI hav¬ 
ing the lustre of Rudra and Gandharl the renowned. 

72-74. Four daughters, very famous in the worlds were born 
of RohinI, viz. Surupa, Harhsaklla, Bhadra and Kamadugha. 
Kamadugha and Surupa gave birth to two sons. Hamsaklla gave 
birth to Nrpa (king) and sages (?) and to Bhadra were born 
the famous and blessed Gandharvas, the sons of Vajin (horse). 
The horses Uccaissravas were born then; they roamed about in 
the firmament with the speed of mind. They were of different 
colours, white, red, tawny, deer-coloured, green and gray and 
(also of the lustre of) Rudra. These horses were of Gandharva 
wombs. They were the vehicles of the Devas. 


1. Verses 62-64 (in fact verses 56-65) stated that even gods like Brahma, 
Visnu and Siva have their births and deaths due to their attachment to 
sensual objects. Non-attachment is the way to liberation. Cf. w. 79-80 below. 




_ VayuPurana 

504 

75 Again to Surabhi was born (a bull) that was glorious, 
and had the good lustre like that of themoon. He had a garland 
on. He was lustrous with a (big) lump. He was born of the 
storehouse of nectar. With the permission of Surabhi he was 
given to Mahcsvara as his banner. 

76 Thus these sons of Kasyapa, Rudras and Adityas have 
been glorified. Sadhyas, Visvedevas and Vasus are remem¬ 
bered as the sons of Dharma. 

77. Aristanemi’s wives had sixteen childern. The sons of 
the learned Bahuputra are remembered as Vidyuts. The excell¬ 
ent Rks honoured by Brahmarsis are born of Pratyangirasa. 

78. The sons of Krsasva, the celestial sage, are remembered 
as Devapraharanas. These are born again at the end of a thous¬ 
and Yugas. 

79-80. O Brahmanas, all the thirty-three groups of Devas 
are Chandajas (born from Vedic chandas or mantras). These 
Devas too are said to have annihilation and birth. Just as the 
sun rises and sets in this world, so also these groups of Devas 
are born in every Yuga. 

The sages enquired : 

81-84. (How were) Sadhyas. Vasus, Visvedevas, Rudras 
and Adityas famous • by the nobility of their birth, greatness of 
the prowess or actions ? We wish to know the difference among 
Prajapati, Visnu and the noble-souled Bhava as to who excels 
whom among them ? Who originates from whom ? Who is 
established in whom ? Who is the eldest ? Who is the middle 
one ? who is the youngest among them ? Who is the most 
important among them ? Who is the greatest among them by 
means of actions, nobility of birth and prowess ? Please 
mention all these to us as you know these precisely. 

Siita replied : 

85. In this context I shall describe the difference that is 
remembered among them. Listen to what I am going to say 
as to difference among Brahma, Visnu and Rudra. 

86. The bodies of the Self-born Lord that are said to be 
born from time to time are proclaimed as Rajasa, Tamasa and 


5.87-96 


505 


Sattvika. 1 

87. O excellent Brahmanas, it is not possible to state the 
difference among these bodies, since they are dependent upon 
the increase of (a particular) Guna and the two-fold bondage 
due to Anugraha (blessing or favouring) and Nigraha (control¬ 
ling) . 

88. O Brahmanas, in accordance with my ability I shall 
recount Pravrtli (activity), Nivrtti (desistance from activity) and 
the increase of the Gunas of the bodies. (Listen to it) and 
understand. 

89. One among them, the Rajasa body creates all the sub¬ 
jects; the Sattvika one staying in the ocean, blesses; and the 
Tamasa one swallows the subjects and overthrows them at the 
proper time. 

90. When god Brahmamanifests himself with the resurgence 
of Rajas guna, the Sattvika body which is called Purusa 
vanishes. 

91. With the excess of Tamas, when it assumes the form 
of Kala (the destroyer), the Rajasa form designated as 
Brahma disappears. 

92. When with the dominance of Sattva, the lord be¬ 
comes Purusa, the body named Kala ceases to exist. 

93: The form, name and activity of the Lord in favouring 
and controlling those prevailing in the three worlds disappear 
in due course. 

94. When Brahma manifests himself the difference .is 
mentioned. When the lord is Brahma, Purusa does not 
exist. 

95-96. Just as the crystal jewel assumes various colours due 
to its purity, and as a result of the contact with other objects, 
the colours and sizes being in accordance with those objects, so 
also the self-born assumes shapes and sizes due to the 


1. Verses 86-121: A philosophic synthesis of Brahma, Vi?$u and Siva— 
‘Three bodies of the single self-bom lord’ (v. 99) for the three activities of 
creation, protection and destruction (v. 104)—The Vedas, Dharma-sastra, 
Sankhya and Yoga hold unanimously that Reality or the Supreme Lord is 
one. Synthesization of the Trinity of gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva)as mani¬ 
festation of the Supreme Lord (Brahman) is a favourite subject of Purapas. 





506 Vayu Purana 

Gunas. In its singleness and separateness this is the example 
cited. 

97-98. Just as the cloud, though single, remains (or seems) 
different in colour and form so also the self-born Lord though 
single one assumes different forms due to Gunas and appears 
single, double or triple. The single entity has the three forms 
of Brahma (the creator), annihilator and Purusa. 

99. These three bodies arc remembered as those of the 
single self-bom Lord. The three bodies are Brahma, Paurusa 
and Antakarl. 

100. Herein what is (known as) His Rajasa body is verily 
the creator of subjects (i.e. the Universe). What is called the 
Tamasa form is the annihilator of the subjects. The Sattvika 
form called Paurusa is remembered as the bestower of bles¬ 
sings. 

101-102. From the Rajasa part of Brahma Marlci and 
Kasyapa were born. From the Tamasa form that causes dissolu¬ 
tion was born Bhava. The Sattvika or Paurusa form is called 
Visnu. These three bodies of the self-born are thus remem¬ 
bered in the three worlds. 

103. The supreme being, Kala, assumes states for different 
functions (such as) creating the subjects in the capacity of 
Brahma, supporting them in the status of Visnu and devouring 
in the guise of Rudra, the subjects who had been blessed by the 
Vaisnava form. 

104. The Self-born one, Kala, performs three activities 
through the three (bodies). It creates, supports and annihilates 
the subjects. 

105. Thus the three bodies of the self-born God which 
are called Prajapatya (belonging to Prajapati or god Brahma), 
Raudra (belonging to Rudra) and Vaisnava (belonging to 
Visnu) have been proclaimed. 

106. Only one body is remembered in the Vedas, Dharma 
Sastras and in the ancient (schools of) Sankhya and Yoga by 
the intelligent sages who could see (both) analytically and 
synthetically, were conversant with nobility of pedigree and 
prowess and could visualize the Reality. 

107. In the matter of unity and diversity people are of 


5 . 108-118 


507 


different opinions. Advocates of different points of view say 
“This is great and this not so”. 

108. Some hold that Brahma is the cause (of the Universe) ; 
some say that it is Prajapati. Some say that Siva is the grea¬ 
test while others call Visnu supreme. Out of ignorance and 
with the mind vitiated by passion, attachment etc. they think 
like this. 

109. Considering the reality, time, place, cause and effects 
precisely, these deities are declared as working for diverse 
purposes. 

110. He who censures one among them censures them 
all. Pie who praises one, praises all of them. They call him 
Brahmavadin (propounder of Brahman) who undestands 
one Purusa. 

111. The attitude of non-censure must always be adopted 
towards the deities by one who knows (the Reality). It is im¬ 
possible to know Isvara established in all Ativarya (prosperity, 
power and glory). 

112-113. It is one supreme Soul. He becomes three and 
deludes the subjects. People seek difference among these three 
Beings, with diverse points of view, curiously testing their forms 
andsaying, “This is the greatest; this is not (so)”, out of deluded 
mind. 

114-115. These deities permeate even Yatudhanas, Pisacas 
and human beings. The Self-born stays unified and separate 
deluding the subjects by means of the bodies solely consisting 
of the Gunas. He who worships one among them, worships all 
the three. 

116. These three deities remain non-different (factually). 
So where is separatness or unity? Where is their number ? 
Whence do they come and go ? Who is competent to know 
their unity or multiplicity? 

117. Since in view of their being united with the Gunas 
they create, sustain and devour the subjects in the three units 
of time, the supreme Being is said to be one. 

118. Brahmanas call that one lord, Rudra, Brahma, Indra, 
guardians of the quarters, sages, Danus (Manus in Bd. P.) and 
Narayana, in diverse ways. 



508 


Vayu Purdna 


119. The Prajapatya body (i.e. that of Brahma) and the 
Vaisnava body (i.e. that of Visnu) recur again and again in all 
the Manvantaras and Kalpas. 

120. In splendour, fame, intellect, learning and strength 
they are born equal to Him. Know them also. 

121. With the Rajasa part of Brahma, Marlci and Kasyapa 
were born. It is said that Rudra of the nature of Kala was born 
with theTamasa part. With the Sattvika part of Purusa Visnu 
was then born in the Yajna. 

122-124. The bodies born of parts of Brahma occur in all 
the three units of time. Becoming Kala, Rudra destroys the 
subjects again. When the end of the Kalpa approaches, the sun 
of seven rays becomes the Sariivartaka Sun (the sun at the time 
of world dissolution) and burns the three worlds. With changes 
in name and form, Visnu blesses i.e. sustains the subjects. In 
the different situations he is the cause of the origin of different 
things. 

125. With the Paurusa body of Bahma which had a predo¬ 
minance of Sattva guna, the god was born here in the first 
Svayambhuva Manvantara as the mental son of Akuti. 1 

126. Thereafter, when the Svarocisa Manvantara arrived, 
he was born of Tusita along with the previous Tusita groups 
of Devas and passed away along with them. 

127. In the Auttama Manvantara also, he was known as 
Tusita. Born along with Vasavartis (i.e. Devas of that name), 
Hari was again known as Vasavartin. 

128. He was born of Satya, as-Satya, along with the excel¬ 
lent gods Satyas. When the Tamasa Manvantara arrived, Hari 
himself was bom of Harya along with the Haris. 

129-132. In the Carisnava Manvantara, Lord Hari was 
again born of Vaikuntha along with the Abhutarajasas. When 
the Caksusa Manvantara arrived that lord Vaikuntha was born 
as Narayana, Dharma and Sadhya along with the Sadhya 
group of gods. When the Vaivasvata Manvantara arrived, the 
lord Sadhya Narayana, was born of Aditi and Kasyapa, the son 


1. Verses 125-132 state different incarnations of Visnu in different Man¬ 
vantaras, and his achievement as Trivikrama. But the unity of Brahma, 
Vamana and the great Atman is emphasized. 



5.133-142 


509 


of Marici. Visnu, of big steps, conquered all the worlds by 
means of three steps and handed them over to Indra and the 
Devas. Thus these seven bodies of the lord have appeared in 
the seven past Alanvantaras. Thereby the subjects were pro¬ 
tected. 

Io3. Since, at the time of his birth, all the worlds were 
permeated by Vamana (Lord in the form of a dwarf) he is 
remembered as Visnu. The root V vi§ means c to enter, to 
permeate’. 

134. Thus the unity, separatness and the speciality of 
Brahma and Vamana, the great Atman have been glorified. 

1°5- The deities are born of the part of other deities. They 
are then born equal to them in brilliance, intellect, learning 
and strength, thanks to their blessings. 

1 J 6. Know that whatever being exists endowed with special 
riches, glory and strength, is born of a part of Visnu’s bril¬ 
liance. 

137. Some men say that the lord alone is born partially. 
Others say that the deities are born of one anothers’ part. 

1j8. Thus arguing with one another they say after seeing 
them. For, there is no difference between Manas and Cttas 
Hence they arc blessed. They become Ksetrajnas. 

139. Isvara, though one, becomes manifold, due to the 
power of his lordship. For the same reason after becoming mani¬ 
fold he becomes one again. 

140. From that (Lord) of good intentions and the diversity 
of brilliance are born the subjects consisting of mobile and the 
immobile beings in all the Manvantaras. When they are created 
once at the beginning of Sarga, they continue to live res¬ 
pectably (?) 

141. Whenever any Kalpa comes to a close Rudra annihi¬ 
lates the subjects. Isvaras are born by means of Yogic Maya 
deluding others. 

142. They are moving about due to their Aisvarya and the 
non-lsvaras (those devoid of Aisvarya) are deluded. Hence 
there is nothing proper or improper in things where faults 
spread. 






510 


Vayu Parana 


143. Those who spread scandal about living beings are 
wicked; those who are favourable to living beings are middling; 
those who slight and disregard living beings are competent. 
There are three Vedas for those who are eloquent. 

144. (A line is missing from the the Text.) Because it is 
heard firmly, because it is heard before, bacause it is a rumour 
and because it is worldly, for these four reasons one does not get 
at the precise truth. 

145. Formerly they meant and were used in another sense, 
and even after the lapse of time one does not accept the new 
sense out of spite. 

146. He who is a solid among solids, he who becomes the 
attribute therein, he who is the creator of activities and minds 
and he who is great due to pedigree, are glorified by those who 
know the tradition, for these four reasons. 

147. The incompetent and the infuriated know the deities 
only partially. They state these two verses in tins connection in 
regard to Yogesvara (Lord of Yogas). 

148-149. The Yogesvara makes replicas of himself and 
others in thousands by means of Yogic power. He moves about 
among them. He attains the (pleasures of) sensuous objects 
performing severe penance. Like the Sun withdrawing his 
brilliance and attributes (of heat etc.) he annihilates them all 
again. 


CHAPTER SIX 

Curse to Jaya Gods : Nrsimha Incarnation 
Race of HiranyakaHpu : Birth of Marut-Gods 

1. On hearing his words, the sages and ascetics of the 
Naimisa forest asked the most excellent one (i.e. Suta) in due 
course. 

The sages said: 

2. How were the Devas, the extremely powerful Adityas, 
the chief of whom were Indra and Visnu, born in the seven 


6.3-16 


511 


Manvantaras ? 
details to us. 


O Romaharsana, please narrate all this in 


3. On being urged and requested by the expounders of 
the Brahman (Vedas) the modest Suta, the most excellent 
among eloquent ones spoke in accordance with the query of the 
great sages. 

Suta narrated : 

4. All the Devas created from the mouth of Brahma with 
a desire for progeny in the Manvantaras had their bodies 
constituted of Mantras. 

The twelve Manus, the twelve sons of Brahma were: 
Darsa, Paurnamasa, Brhad, Rathantara, Akuta the first, Akuti, 
Vitti, Suvitti, Akuti (or Akuta the second?), Kuti, Adhista, 
Adhlti, Vijnati and Vijnata. These are the cumulative (names) 
of years. Seeing them Brahma said, 'O Jayas, procreate the 
Devas. Perform the Agniholra Yaga after marriage*’. After saying 
this, Brahma vanished there itself. 

9-12. But they did not act in accordance with the instruc¬ 
tion of Paramesthin (Brahma). They found out defects even in 
those who abide by the mental, verbal and physical activities 
of a truthful nature; they saw the fruits of actions excessively 
reduced; they hated progeny and procreation. They were 
alei t but free from the sense of my-ness (possession); they 
aspired for permanence; they were detached (from worldly 
objects); they saw defects (in worldly activities); they abandon¬ 
ed wealth, love and virtue; they adhered to knowledge 
pertaining to the supreme being and remained with their 
splendour withdrawn. 

13. On realising the trend of their thought, Brahma became 
angry. Brahma spoke to those gods in despair. 

14. “You have been created by me for the sake of further 
procieation and not otherwise. X have already told you to pro¬ 
create and be victorious. 

15-16. You have disregarded my words andh ave adhered 
to detachment. You hate your own birth. Hence you do not 

_*Thc text : daragnihotrasamyage mithyamarabhata is obscure Bd. P. reads : 
daragnthotrasambandham vitatya yajaleti ca is better and hence adopted here. 






512 


Vdyu Pur ana 


appreciate (the necessity of) progeny, 't on have abandoned 
all rites in vour ambition to achieve dcathlcssness (Immor- 
taHty) Hence, having dishonoured (me) you will be born 


seven times. 


17 On being urged by Brahma thus, those Devas, the 
Jayas,’ began to propitiate him. “O great lord, forgive us for 
what has been done through ignorance ’. 

18. When they bowed to him and implored, Brahma said 
to them again: “Who deserves (i.e. is capable) to be indepen¬ 
dent' in this world without being permitted by me . 

19. Everything is pervaded by me. As against my will how 
will living beings attain anything auspicious or inauspicious. 

20. Whatever exists in the lvorld or is endowed with 
Sattva (existence) or Asattva (non-existence) has been pei- 
vaded by me with intellect and soul. Who in the world dare to 
deceive me ? 

21. Whatever has been conjectured, decided or considered 
by the living beings is entirely known to me. 


22. The entire Universe consisting of the mobile and the 


immobile beings (created) has been established by me, thanks to 
the principle of hope and expectation. How can I approve of 
cutting it off ? 

23. Since I have transformed myself for the sake of 
creation and not for any other purpose, who will be free 


from my will without beginning the performance of holy 


rites?” 


24. After saying this to the group ofjaya Devas who ac¬ 
cepted his punishment and who were dejected, Prajapati spoke 
again to them (in consolation). 

25. “Since, after open declaration to me, renunciation had 
been adopted by you formerly and since excessive effort, 
though fruitless, had been put in by you, O Devas, your 
future births will result in ultimate happiness. 

26-27. O excellent Devas, your birth will be in accordance 
with your own will. In the six Manvantaras beginning with 
Svayambhuva and ending with Vaivasvata, O Suras, all of you 
will be moving ahead, deluded (by Avidya)”. After knowing 


6.28-39 


513 


them (i.e. their reaction) this ancient verse was recited by 
Brahma. 

28. “Those who perform holy actions such as the study 
of the three Vedas, maintenance of celibacy, procreation of 
progeny, performance of oraddhas, and Yajfias and practice 
of charity become free from sin (Rajas) and are always 
praised by others”. 

29. Aftc” reciting thus the verse he spoke to the Devas, 
Jayas again—“When the Vaivasvata Manvantara is over, 
you w:Ii come here near me. 

30. Then you will attain eternal Siddhi along with me”. 
After speaking thus to them, Brahma vanished there itself. 

al. When the lord had disappeared those Devas who were 
endowed with Yogic power and who possessed Anima and other 
supernatural power*, continued practising Yoga fearlessly. 

32. Thereafter, their bodies turned into twelve lakes. 
They came to be known by the name Jaya and they resembled 
the oceans. 

33. Then, in that Svayaiiibhuva Manvantara, those Suras 
(Gods) were born as the sons Ruci and Ajita. They were twelve 
in number and were known as Ajitas. 1 

34. These mental sons known as the twelve Ajitas were 
\ idhi, Munaya (?), Ksema, Nanda, Avyaya, Prana, Apana, 
Sudhama, Kratu, Sakti and Vyavasthita. 

35. In Yajnas they are proclaimed as the partakers of the 
fruits of Yajnas along with the Suras in the Svayaiiibhuva 
Manvantra. Again in the Svarocisa Manvantara, they were 
born as the sons of Svarocisa and Tusita, 

36-37. They were known by the names Tusitas 2 and 
Pranas. They were the Suras and partakers of Yajnas. Again 
theses Tusitas were born as the auspicious sons of Uttama and 
Satya in the Uttama Manvantara. Then those Devas were 
remembered as Satyas in the Uttama Manvantara. 

38-39. In the Dvapara Yuga of the third Manvantara, 
they became the partakers of Yajnas. When the Tamasa 


1. Only 11 are enumerated. 

2. The groups of gods are named after their mothers—a relic of matriarch- 
cal society ? 







514 


Vayu Parana 


Manvantara arrived, all those twelve Dcvas, -the Satyas, were 
born as the sons of Tamas and Harya P 1 They were known 
by the name Haris and were partakers of Yajiia. 

40. When the Carisnava Manvantara arrived those Devas, 
the Haris, were born as the sons of Vaikuntha and Carisnu. 
In the fifth Manvantara those Devas were known by the name 
Vaikuntha 2 . 

41. In the Caksusa Manvantara, those Devas, the Vaiku- 
nthas were born as the twelve sons of Dharma and Sadhya. 

42-45. When the Caksusa Manvantara elapsed and the 
Vaivasvata Manvantara arrived at the beginning of the first 
Treta Yuga (of that Manvantara), these Sadhyas- were born as 
the twelve Adityas, by means of their parts as the sons of Aditi 
and Kasyapa, the son of Marlci. Thus those who were origin¬ 
ally Jayas were born as Sadhyas in the Svayambhuva Manvan¬ 
tara as a result of the curse of (Brahma). Again they were 
born in the Caksusa Manvantara and were born as Adityas in 
the present Vaivasvata (Manvantara). 

46. He who faithfully reads this story of the seven births 
of the Devas at the bidding of the lord, does not meet with any 
obstacle or sin. 

47. Thus the seven births of Jayas with seven charac¬ 
teristics have been narrated by me. 2 What else do you wish to 
hear ? 

The sages requested : 

48. Narrate to us the origin and death in detail, of the 
Daityas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Serpents, Raksasas, all 
the Bhutas (goblins), Pisacas (ghosts), animals, birds and 
creepers. 

49. Thus requested, Siita told these excellent sages : “We have 
heard that Dili bore two sons to Kasyapa. 

50-51. Those two sons are remembered as the eldest of 
all the sons of Kasyapa. The word Kaiipu means ‘a mat*. 

1. The same set of gods, viz. Jayas is born in the beginning of each 
Manvantara with different names such as ‘Tusita’ in Svarocisa, ‘Satya’ in 
Uttama, Aditya in Vaivasvata. They derived their names from their mothers. 

2. It is noteworthy that these gods also are named after their mother. 



6 . 52-60 


615 


The seat of the chief R.tvik in a Taj ha is a golden mat. Kasyapa 
performed an Asvamedha (horse-sacrifice). In the course of 
that sacrifice, during the performance of Atiratra sacrifice, on 
the day of Sutya (the day meant for extraction of Soma juice) 
the son of Kasyapa came out of the womb of Diti and seated 
himself on the big seat of the Rtvik in the midst of the assembly 
(of the priests). As a result of this action, he is remembered as 
Hiranyakasipu.” 1 

The sages said : 

52. O holy lord, mention in detail to us the name, 
origin and prowess of the noble-souled Daitya Hiranyakasipu. 

Suta said : 

53. Formerly the holy Asvamedha of Kasyapa was per¬ 
formed at Puskara. It was graced by (the presence of) deities 
and Gandharvas. 

54. For the purpose of discourses etc. in accordance with 
the excellent injunctions (in sacred scriptures) there were 
five golden seats kept there. 

55. Three of them were sanctified by means of Kusa grass. 
The (fourth had a) bundle of Kusa grass (over it) and (the 
fifth) a plank (over it). The four seats were intended for the 
chief Rtviks. 

56. The fifth was an auspicious, divine, golden one intend¬ 
ed for the Hotr. It was covered with divine cloth. 

57. Diti who had been pregnant for ten thousand years 
was occupying the seat of Paint (i.e. the wife of the sacificer, 
viz. Kasyapa). 

58-59. The boy in the womb came out of the belly of his 
mother and sat on the golden seat intended for the Hotr . 
Seated there he narrated the verses of the four Vedas and the 
fifth one, the Akhyanas (Puranas) like Kasyapa. On seeing him, 
the sages gave him that name. 

60. Thanks to that act, he became renowned as Hiranya¬ 
kasipu. Hiranyaksa was his younger brother. Simhika was the 

1. The author’s fondness for popular etymologies (similar to that of 
Brahmana-writers) leads him to create such stories as in vv. 53-59. 








516 Vayu Ptirdna 

younger sister. She was the lady who became the mother of 
Rahu after marrying Vipracitti. 

61. Hiranyakasipu, the Daitya (son of Diti), performed 
severe penances for a hundred thousand years without taking 
any food and standing topsy-turvy. 

62. Brahma who was delighted (at his penance) gratified 
him with a boon (whereby he attained deathlessncss from all 
living beings). O leading Brahmanas, conquering Devas 
through his Yogic power he attained the lordship of all {Lit, the 
state of being all Devas). 

63. (He requested further:) “May Danavas and Asuras 
be equal to Devas and attain the greatness of Marut gods. May 
this boon be granted. 55 

64. Thus requested Brahma, granted him what he wished 
and after granting him the divine boons, he vanished there it¬ 
self. Hiranyakasipu, the son of Diti, has been glorified by the 
ancient people by means of verses. 

65. “The Devas along with great sages made obeisance to 
that quarter which is resorted to by King Hiranyakasipu. 55 

66. O Brahmanas, Hiranyakasipu, the lord of Daityas, 
had such prowess. In ancient times, Visnu, in the form of Man- 
Lion, became death unto him (i.e. killed him). He was torn by 
him by means of his claws. Hence the nailsare remembered pure 1 . 

67-68. Hiranyaksa had five valorous sons of great strength. 
Utkura, Sakuni, Kalanabha, the valorous Mahanabha and 
Bhutasantapana—these sons of Hiranyaksa were invincible even 
to Devas. 

69. Their sons and grandsons composed the group (of Dai¬ 
tyas) named Badeya. They were a hundred thousand in number 
and were killed in (the battle?) Tarakamaya 2 . 

70. Hiranyakasipu had four sons of great strength. Prahlada 
was the eldest and the others were Anuhlada, Samhrada and 
Hrada. Understand the sons of Hrada. 


1. Another reading—His nails were neither wet nor dry—Bd.P. 

2. The battle fought after the abduction of Bfhaspati’s wife Tara by 
Candra. In that battle Daityas sided with Ganora. 



6.71-84 


517 


71. Hrada and Nisunda were the sons ofHrada. The valo¬ 
rous Sunda and Upasunda were the sons of Nisunda. 

72. Brahmaghna, Mahaviryaand Muka became the succes¬ 
sors ofHrada. MarJca, son of Sunda, was born ofTadaka. 

73. Tadaka was killed by the powerful Raghava (Rama). 
Muka was killed bySavyasac! (i.e. Arjuna) inKirata (i.e. when 
Mva assumed the form of a hunter to test Arjuna). 

Their descendants purified themselves by means of great 
penance. They were the residents of Manivarta and reached the 
number of thirty million. Invinicible to Devas they were 
killed by Savyasaci (Arjuna). 

75. Anuhlada’s sons were Vayu and Sinivall. Their descen¬ 
dants running to a hundred thousand constituted the group of 
demons remembered as Halahala. 

76. Vairocana, the son of Prahlada, had five sons. GavesthI, 
Kalanemi, Jambha, Baskala and Sambhu (who was the youn¬ 
gest of them all) are remembered as the sons of Prahladi (i.e. 
Vairocana). 

77-78. I shall mention their invincible sons in accordance 
with their importance. Sumbha, Nisumbha and Visvaksena— 
these were the sons of the powerful Gavesthin. Jambha’s sons 
were Satadundubhi, Daksa and Khartda. Those three were 
Jariibha’s sons. 

79. Virodha, Manu, Vrksayu and Kus'alimukha—these were 
the sons of Baskala. Listen to the (enumeration of the) sons of 
Kalanemi. 

80. Brahmajit, Ksatrajit, Devantaka and Narantaka—these 
were the sons of Kalanemi. Listen to the progeny ofSambhu. 

81. Dhanuka, Asiloman, Nabala, Gomukha, Gavaksa and 
Goman—these are said to be the sons of Sambhu. 

82. Virocana’s son Bali alone was very valorous. A hundred 
sons were born to Bali. All of them were kings. 

83-84. Among them, four were very imporant. They were 
valorous and extremely powerful. The thousand-handed eldest 
son Bana was wealthy and honoured (by all). The others were 
Kumbhanabha, Gardabhaksa, Kusi and others. Sakuni and 
Putana were the two daughters of Bali. Bali’s sons and grandsons 
numbered hundreds and thousands. 






518 


Vdyu Purdna 


85. They constituted a group of demons famous by the 
name Baligana. They were valorous and manly. Bana whose 
mind was like that of Indra, had his capital city Lauhitya (Soni- 
tapura in Assam). 

86. Diti who lost her sons gratified Kasyapa. Well-propiti¬ 
ated by her, the delighted Kasyapa asked her to choose a boon 
freely. She chose the boon. 1 

87. The holy lord granted her the boon requested for. The 
son ofMarici, of fierce splendour, asked her, “What do you wish?” 

88-89. She said to her gratified husband, Kasyapa, the son 
of Marici, with palms joined in reverence—“O holy lord, my 
sons have been killed by your sons born of Aditi. I wish for a 
son who will be endowed with penance of long duration and 
who will kill Sakra. I shall perform penance. It behoves you to 
impregnate me.” 

90. On hearing her words, Kas'yapa, the highly brilliant 
son of Marici, replied to Diti who was extremely sad: 

91. “May it be so. Welfare unto you. Be pure, O ascetic 
lady. You will bear a good son who will kill Sakra in battle. 

92. If you (continue to) remain pure for full hundred years 
you will bear a son who will be the foremost in the three worlds”. 

93. After saying this, the holy lord of great brilliance had 
sexual intercourse with her. After embracing her, the holy sage 
went on his tour of the three worlds. 

94. After the departure of her husband, that extremely 
delighted noble lady Diti went to the forest Kusala and perform¬ 
ed a very terrible penance. 

95. While she was performing the penance, the thousand¬ 
eyed Indra, the most excellent among Suras, served her by 
means of his rich attributes. 


1. Verses 86-134 describe the birth of Marut-gods from Diti and her final 
reconciliation with Indra. Indra’s entry into Diti’s womb and splitting of his 
prospective killer into 49 parts and the derivation of the name ‘Marut’ from 
Indra’s threat ‘ma rodih' (Don’t cry) is a Puranic elaboration of a Vedic 
concept where the seven Maruts are said to be seven Pranas, Indra being 
the main Praria controlling the Maruts (Sat. Br. 9.3.1.7). For similar ela¬ 
boration cf. VP. 1.21.32-41, Mt. P. Ch. 7.Bd. P.2.3.5.45-81 is practically 
identical with our text. 



6.96-106 


519 

96. He brought and gave her sacrificial fire and twigs, wood 
and Kusa grass, fruits and roots. The thousand-eyed lord gave 
her whatever else she required. 

97. By massaging her limbs and by assuaging her weariness, 
bakra served her on all occasions. Thus propitiated, Diti spoke 
to Sakra : 

98. “O excellent one among Suras, I am delighted with 
you, O dearson, only ten more years remain ; welfare unto 
you; you will then see your brother. 

_ On getting such a son I will fulfil mydesire for conquest. 
With him, O son, I will conquer the three worlds.” 

100. After saying this to Sakra, and when the sun reached 

midday, the lady was over-powered by slumber. She crouched 

down keeping her head on her kness. 

101. Seeing her impure inasmuch as her hair spread over 
her feet, Sakra laughed and rejoiced on getting that opportune 
moment. 

102. Then Purandara (Indra) entered her open body. After 
entering and seeing the immense (unmeasurable) foetus of great 
power, Indra ofgreat fame pierced the important enemy (?)with 
his thunderbolt. 

103. On being split by the thunderbolt of hundred knots, 
the foetus cried in a high and terrible pitch, quaking again and 
again. Sakra then spoke to the foetus—“Do not cry (Ma Rodih) 1 ." 

104. With his thunderbolt, Indra cut off the foetus into 
seven pieces and split each of the pieces into seven pieces again. 
Then Diti woke up. 

105. “It should not be killed. It should not be killed”, so 
shouted Diti. With due deference to the words of his mother, 
Indra jumped out of her belly. Armed with his thunderbolt, 
Sakra spoke to Diti with palms joined in reverence : 

106. “O noble lady, you went to sleep in a defiled state 
since the hair were spread over your feet. On seizing that oppor¬ 
tunity I have split the foetus that would have been the slayer of 
Sakra in battle. It behoves you to firgive me.” 


I. Cf. VP. 1.21-39, Mt. P. 8.62 for similar etymology of *Marut\ 





520 


Vdyu Parana 


,07 When that foetus became fruitless Dili became extre¬ 
mely distressed. Then she spoke to the thousand-eyed Indra 
these consoling words: 

108 “O lord of Devas, O powerful son of a sage, it is not 
your fault, if the foetus had been rendered incapable as a result 

of my mistake. . . 

109 There is nosin in killing an enemy. Hence, O (Indra) 
I do not curse you. I wish to do what is pleasing to you. Do a 


favour unto my foetus. 

110. May my sons have seven abodes in heaven. Let my 
seven sons roam about these wind-regions (Vataskandhas) ( at i- 
ways of wind). May they be renowned as the seven Maruts, the 

seven sets of seven. 

111. May the first Skandha (region) be on the Earth, the 
second in the Sun, the third in the Moon, audthe fourth should 
be known in the groups of luminaries. 

112. May the fifth Skandha be among the planets, the sixth 
in the sphere of the Seven Sages and the seventh m Dhruva. 
That is the last region of the wind. 

113. May my sons roam about among them on different 

occasions. May my sons walk through these Vataskandhas. 

114 The first Skandha extends from the Earth upto the 
clouds and it is called Avaha. May the first set of my sons move 
therin. 


115. The second Valaskandha extends from the clouds upto 
the Sun. It is called Pravaha. Let the second set (of my sons) 
walk in the second Vataskandha. 

116. Above the solar region and extending upto the Moon 
is the Vataskandha remembered as Udvaha. May the third set (of 
my sons) walk through the Valaskandha. 

117. Above the lunar region and extending upto the stars 
is the fourth Vataskandha which is called Suvaha. O lord, may 
the fourth set of my sons walk therein. 


1. This psuedo-scientific classification of higher space into seven strata 

(vide vv. 114-120) and the assignment of a Marut-god per stratum is 
found in olher Puranas also. 



6.118-129 


521 

• u 8 ; ^ b0VC thC Stellar region and ex tending up to the planets 
is the fifth Skandha which is called Vivaha. O dear boy, may the 
fifth set (of my sons) walk through the fifth Skandha. 

119. Above the planets and extending up to the Seven Sages 
(Great Bear) is the sixth Skandha which is called Parahala (Anu- 

vaha in Bd. P.). May my sons who are in the sixth set walk 
therein. 

120. Above the Seven Sages and extending up to Dhruva 
(Pole Star) is the seventh Vataskandha which is called Parivaha- 
Maymy sons stay therein. 

121. May my sons move about all these on different occa¬ 
sions. There let these be known by the name Maruts.” 

122. Then the mother and the son named them Maruts 
through the actions performed by them. They separately named 
the seven Maruts of each set. 

_ 123-125.The first set is said to consist of these; Sattvajyotis, 

Aditya, Satyajyotis, Tiryagjyotis, Sajyotis, Jyotisman and ano¬ 
ther one. Listen and understand the second set. The second set 
consists of Rtajit, Satyajit, Susena, Senajit, Satyamitra, Abhi- 
mitra and Harimitra. Listen and understand the third set. 

126-128. The following constitute the other sets : Krta, 
Satva, Dhruva, Dharta, Vidharta, Vidharaya, Dhvanta, Dhuni, 
Ugra, Bhlma, Abhiyu, Saksipa. This is known as Ahvayagana*, 
Idpk, Anyadrk, Yadrk, Pratikrt, Samiti, Samrambha, Idrk, 
Purusa, Anyadrk sa, Cetasa, Samita, Asamitadrksa, Pratidrksa 
and others. 

129. These forty-nine are the different Maruts with their 
own separate names. They have been enumerated by Diti and 
Indra. 


♦There are some omissions and scribal confusion in the names and the sets 
of Marudgarias as given here. Bd. P. II. 3.5.96 and 97 state : The fifth set 
(of Marud-ganas) is as follows : (1) Idrk, (2) Anyadrk, (3) Sarit, (4) 
Druma, (5) Vrksaka, (6) Mita and (7) Samita. 

The sixth class is as follows :(1) Idrk, (2) Purusa, (3) Nanyadrk, (4) 
Samaccetana, (5) Sammita, (6) Samavrtti, (7) Pratiharti*. 

Bd. P. does not give the names of the fourth and seventh groups of the 
Marudganas. 

A critical edition is essential for supplying the lacunae. 





522 


Vayu Parana 


130. On hearing their names, Diti said to Indra, “O son, 
may my sons roam about in the Vdtaskandha. May my sons walk 
in the company of Devas. Welfare unto you. 

131. On hearing her words, the thousand-eyed Purandara 
joined his palms in reverence and said: “Mother, be it so. 

132. Undoubtedly all this will happen as mentioned by you. 
These sons of noble souls (shall) become Devas and will be ho¬ 
noured by Devas. Similarly, your sons will become partakers 
of the fruits of Yajiias along with Devas.” 

133. Hence all those Maruts should be known as Devas 
(shining ones), younger brothers of Indra and Amaras (deathless 
ones). All of them, the sons of Diti were ascetics and gods. 

134. After knowing this decisively, the mother and the son 
of ascetic nature went to heaven delightedly. Sakra too went to 
heaven. 

135. He who reads or listens to the auspicious origin of 
Maruts shall become long-lived. He never meets with (he fear of 
drought. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
The Race of KaSyapa : Danu’s Progeny 

Suta said : 

1. Henceforth, I shall recount the sons of Danu. Listen to 
and understand them. The sons of Danu, the great Asuras, have 
been famous in their race, 

2. There were hundred demons of very fierce valour of 
whom Vipracitti was the chief. All of them had performed good 
penances and had been endowed with boons. 

3. They were truthful, valorous, ruthless and expert in 
Maya (illusive power). These Danavas were very powerful, 
unfavourable to Brahmanas and disinclined to perform Yajiias. 
I shall enumerate them all in accordance with their importance. 
(Listen to) and understand. 


7.4-22 


523 


4-13. The chief of the sons of Danu were : Dvimurdha, 
Sankuvarna, Saiiku, Niramaya, Sarikukarna, Mahavisva, 
Gavesthi, Dundubhi, Ajamukha, prosperous Sila, Vamanasa, 
Marlci, Raksaka, Mahagargya, Angiravrta, Viksobhya, Suketu, 
Suvlrya, Suhrda, Indrajit, Visvajit, Suravimardana, Ekacakra, 
Subahu, the powerful Taraka, Vaisvanara, Puloman, Pravlna, 
Mahasiras, Svarbhanu, Vrsaparvan, the great Asura Munqlaka, 
Dhrtarastra, Surya, Candra, Indra, Tapina, Suksma, Nicandra, 
Ornanabha, Mahagiri. Asiloman, Sukesa, Sada, Balaka, Adas'a, 
Gaganamurdhan, Kumbhanabha, Mahodara, Pramodaha, 
Kupatha, the valorous Hayagriva, the Asura Virupaksa, the 
great Asura Supatha, Aja, Hiranmaya, Satamayu, Sambara, 
Sarabha and Salabha. Surya (the Sun) and Candramas (the 
Moon) were the lords of Asuras formerly but now they are the 
lords of Suras. Thus the important scions of the family of Danu 
have been enumerated. Their sons and grandsons are unending 
and innumerable. 

14. Those who are the sons (descendants) of Did and Danu 
are (commonly known) as Asuras. Those mentioned just now 
are the sons and descendants of Danu. Svarbhanu is remembered 
as the son of Did (i.e. a Daitya) and Anubhanuwas the son of 
Danu. 

15-16. Ekaksa, Rsabha, Ari§ta, Prabandha, Naraka, In- 
drabadhana, KesI, Meru, Samba, Dhenuka, Gavesthi, Gavaksa 
and powerful Talaketu—these were the sons of Danu but 
followed human rites and activities. So I remember. 

17-20. The following sons of Vipracitd born of Simhika 
became terrible, valorous in the clashes between Daityas 
and Danavas. They are well known as Saimhikeyas. They are 
fourteen great Asuras, viz. Satagala, Balavan, Nyasa, Samba, 
Anuloma, Suci, Vatapi, Sitamsuka, Hara, Kalpa, Kalanabha, 
Bhauma and Naraka and the eldest of all of them Rahu who 
oppresses the Moon and the Sun. Thus these are the sons 
of Simhika invincible even to Devas. 

21. All of them were of terrible lineage, ruthless and haters 
of Brahmanas. There are ten thousand other Asuras constituting 
the Saimhikeya group. 

22. They were killed by the powerful son of Jamadagni of 


524 Vayu Purana 

the Bhrgu Gotra. Prabha was the daughter of Svarbhanu and 
SacI was the daughter of Puloman. 

23. Upadanavl was the daughter of Maya, Sarmistha was 
the daughter of Vrsaparvan. Puloma and Kalika were the 
daughters of Vaisvanara. 

24. Nahusa was the son of Prabha and Jayanta was the 
son of Sacx. Sarmistha gave birth to Puru and Upadanavl to 
Dusyanta. 

25-26.PuIoma and Kalika, the two who were the daughters of 
Vais'vanara became the wives of Marica. Sixty thousand leading 
Danavas were the sons born of them. There were fourteen 
thousand other Asuras residents of Hiranyapura. 

27. The Paulomas and Kalakeyas were Danavas of great 
strength. They could not be killed by Devas, but were slain 
by Savyasaci (Arjuna). 

28-29. All the sons born of Maya were heroic and valorous, 
viz. Mayavl, Dundubhi, Vfsa, Mahisa, Balika and Vajrakarna. 
A daughter Mandodari was also born to him. Thus the 
creation of Daityas and Danavas has been enumerated. 

30. Five sons of great strength are remembered as born of 
Danayusa, viz. Aruru, Bali, Jarhbha, Virak§a and Visa. 

31. Aruru’s son was a cruel great Asura named Dhundhu. 
It is reported that he was killed by Kuvalasva at the instance 
of Uttanka. 

32. The two sons of Bali were very valorous and unequal¬ 
led in splendour. They were Kumbhila and Cakravarma. (The 
latter) was Kama in his previous* birth. 

33. Viraksa had two sons Kalaka and Varavisa. Varavisa 
had four sons of cruel activities, viz. Sraddhaha, Yajnahk, 
Brahmaha and PaSuha. 

34. The sons of Danayusa have been enumerated. Now 
understand the sons of V r tra who were born of the terrible breath 
of Vrtra while engaged in battle with Indra. 

35. They were Raksasas of great strength and were the 
rulers mentally famous. They were a hundred thousand in 
number and are remembered as the followers of Mahendra. 


•rather “in the future birth”. 




7.36—8.8 


525 

36. AH were knowers of the Veda, gentle, righteous, subtie- 
formed. All were immanent in the subjects. All were very 
righteous. 

37. Thus the creation of Daityas and Danavas has been 
narrated. Pravahi bore sons in the Yajna. They were excellent 
in singnig. 

38-39. Sattvan, Sattvatmaka, Kalapa, Viryavan, Krtavirya, 
Brahmacarin, the seventh one Supandu, Pana, Taranya and 
the tenth one Sucandra: These ten are to be known as Devas 
and Gandharvas. They have been enumerated. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
Dynasties Descended From Kaiyapd 1 

Suta said : 

1-3. The holy Gandharvas and Apsaras-s are glorified as the 
children of Muni, viz. Gitrasena, Ugrasena, Grnayu, Anagha, 
Dhptarastra, Puloman, Suryavarcas, Yugapat, Trnapat, Kali, 
Diti, Citraratha, the thirteenth Bhramisiras, the fourteenth 
Parjanya, the fifteenth Kali and the sixteenth Narada—these 
divine Gandharvas are glorified as descendants of Muni. 

4-8. There are their thirtyfour 2 younger sisters, the aus¬ 
picious Apsaras-s, viz. Antara, Daravatya, Priyamukhya, Surot- 
tama, Misrakesi SacI, Parninx, Alambusa, Marica, MarxcT, 
Putrika, Vidyud, Varna, Tilottama, Adrika, Laksana, Devi, 
Rarhbha, Manorama, Suvara, Subahu, Purnita, Supratisthita, 
Pundarika, Sugandha, Sudanta,Surasa, Hemasara, Suti, Suvrtta, 
Kamala, Subhuja, Hamsapada—these are the worldly 3 Apsaras-s. 


1. This chapter enumerates the prominent members of clans of 
Gandharvas, Apsaras-s, birds, serpents, Yaksas, Raksasas, Pisacas, Y&tudha- 
nas and other species possessing supernatural powers. 

2. Even after splitting Vidyudvarna into Vidyutand Varna the number of 
these Apsaras-s is 32 and not 34 stated here. Bd. P. 2.3.7-5 states twentyfour 
as the number of Apsaras-s. 

3. It is not understood why the sons of Muni are called 'Deoa- 
Gandharvas * (Divine Gandharvas) while their sisters, the Apsaras-s are called 




526 Va y u Parana 

These Gandharvas and Apsaras-s are glorified as descendants 
of Muni. 

9. The daughters of Gandharvas had been (will be) narra¬ 
ted by me. Now listen to my enumeration of their names. 

10. Suyasa was the first among them. GandharvI comes 
next. Then are Vidyavatl, Carumukhx and SumukhI of ex¬ 
cellent face. 

11. The sons of Suyas'a were very powerful and valorous. 
Yaksas were the sons of Pracetas. Listen to their names. 

12. Kambala, Harikesa, Kapila, Kancana and Megha- 
mall are said to constitute the group of Yaksas. 

13. Suyasa’s four daughters are remembered as Apsaras-s. 
Listen to and understand their names, as I recount them. 

14. Loheyi was the eldest; Bharata was the next. Then 
were Krsangl and Visala who were unequalled in beauty. 

15. From them other four groups of Yaksas were procreated 
by the valorous and noble-souled Visala. 

16. Loheya, Bharateya, the renowned Krsangeya and 
ViSaleya were the groups of Yaksas famous in the Purana. 

17. O excellent ones among the knowers of Loka and 
Aloka, (the worlds) have been occupied by these terrible Asuras 
of great strength and prowess. 

18-19. The Gandharvas called Valeyas were procreated by 
the noble-souled Vikranta. They were the leaders of great 
Gandharvas. They possessed great prowess, and were richly 
endowed with valour and liberal-mindedness. I shall mention 
duly and in proper order the names of those highly mighty and 
valorous Gandharvas. 

20. They were : Citrangada, Citravarma of great prowess, 
the highly fortunate Citraketu and the valorous Somadatta. 
There were three daughters also. Their names are being men¬ 
tioned. 

21. The first was Agnika. Kambala was the next. Then 
was Vasumati. All these had unequalled splendour. 


'Laukikyah’ ‘mundane, belonging to this world*. If the reading ca laukikyah 
be emended as calaukikyafr, ‘not of this world, of the heavenly world* the 
equality between brothers (Gandharvas) and sisters (Apsaras-s) will be 
established. 





8 . 22-37 


527 


22-23. Three other important groups of the chief Gandh- 
arvas were begotten of them by Kumara. They were valorous 
and invincible in war. They were Agneyas, Kambaleyas and 
sons of Vasumati. This world consisting of the mobile and the 
immobile is pervaded by these various groups. 

24. They possessed learning and were procreated by the 
noble-souled Vikranta. They were blessed and were richly 
endowed with beauty, learning and wealth. 

25. Listen to the enumeration of the names of those noble- 
souled Gandharvas of distinctive prowess. 

26. They were : Hiranyaroman, Kapila, Suloman, Mag- 
adha, Candraketu, Ganga and the highly powerful Goda. 

27. These were the first among the groups who were 
ascetics, valorous and pure on account of deep learning. 

There were two daughters also of beautiful eyes. 

28-29. They were Siva and Sumanas. The groups Saiveya, 
the valorous and Saumanasa as well were begotten of them by 
the noble-souled Visravas. They practised learning. This world 
is pervaded by these three groups of Vidyadharas. 

30. From these, many hundreds of groups of firmament- 
walkers were born in the world due to the activities of the 
Vidyadharas. 

31. Horse-faced Kinnaras were procreated by the same 
noble-souled Vikranta. They were called Asvamukhas and 
Kinnaras. (Listen to and) understand the Kinnaras. 

32-33. Samudra, Sena, Kalinda, Mahanetra, Mahabala, 
Suvarnaghosa, Sugrlva, the valorous Mahaghosa and others 
are the leading ones of the noble-souled Kinnaras with the 
faces of horses. They are being glorified as extensive (in number) 
by scholars. 

34. O Sarhsapayana, human-faced Kinnaras too were 
similarly procreated by the noble-souled Vikranta. 

35-36. Harisena, Susena, the valorous Varisena, Rudra- 
datta, Indradatta,Candradruma,Mahadruma, Bindu andBindu- 
sara were the Kinnaras of the lunar race. Thus these excellent 
and auspicious Kinnaras have become famous in the world. 

37. O excellent Brahmanas, in this world there are 
hundreds of clans of these noble-souled Kinnaras, very efficient 
in dance and music. 



528 


Vayu Purana 

38. They are Yaksas calmed by Yaksas (?) The beauti¬ 
ful daughter of Loheya, named Suravinda was brilliant and 
honoured by the Siddhas. 

39. (Defective Verse) The groups of Bhutas (goblins) had 
been procreated by the terrible Upayakctana. Listen to their 
names (?). 

40. The groups of Bhutas (goblins) should be known as those 
who haunt from within and without etc. ( avesakas , nivesakas). 
They are declared as being visible in the world. 

41. Those that are the excellent ones among Bhutas 
that move about in the sky are to be known as the leaders of 
these Bhutas in the world. Undoubtedly they move about in 
the sky up to the tops of trees. 

42. Almost all Devas and Gandharvas have been nar¬ 
rated by me. Those famous persons should be known as engaged 
in worshipping Devas. 

43-45. Along with Gandharvas, Devas who are clever 
musicians and experts in dance and music stay in all the worlds. 
They worship Narayana who is lotus-eyed, free from Rajas 
Guna and the foremost of gods, god Brahma who is self-born 
and four-faced, great god Sankara who is Isana and the 
lord of the Universe. (They worship) Rudras and Adityas 
led by Indra, along with Vasus. 

46-48. The blessed Varistha who is honoured by gods, gave 
birth to eight sons. Hariisa was the eldest and the youngest was 
another. The middle ones were Haha and Huhu. The fourth was 
Dhisana. Then Vasiruci (was born). Tumburu was the sixth 
among them. Then Visvavasu. These Apsaras-s(celestial artiste) 
are considered as divine and of auspicious characteristics. 

Arista gave birth to eight (?) daughters,' viz. Anavadya, 
Anavas'a, Anvata, Madanapriya, Arusa, Subhaga and Bhasi. 

49-50. Manovati and Sukesa were the two daughters of 
Tumburu. 

The following ten divine (celestial) Apsaras-s are called 
Pancacudas. They are : Menaka, Sahajanya, Parnini, Punji- 
kasthala, Ghrtasthala, Ghftaci, Visvaci, Purvaci, the one 
well-known as Pramloca and Anumlocantl. 

51. Urvasi who was faultless (exquisitely beautiful) in every 



8 . 52-58 


529 


limb and was born of the thighs of the beginningless and 
endless Narayana is remembered as the eleventh. 

52. Men aka was the daughter of Mena, delightedly engros¬ 
sed in meditating upon Brahman. All of them are expounders 
of Brahman (Vedas) and great Yoginis. 

53. The groups of the holy Apsaras-s are fourteen. Among 
these fourteen gagas Ahutas (is the first) and Sobhayantls is 
the (fourteenth) x . 

54. (Ahutas) are the mental daughters of Brahma and 
Sobhayantls are Manu’s daughters. Vegavantis are the 
daughters of Arista and Agnisambhavas are the daughters of 
fjrja. 1 2 

55. 3 Ayusmantls are shining groups born of the rays of the 
sun. The groups born of water i.e. produced from Amrta (water, 
nectar) are remembered by the name Amrtas. 

56. The Vayu-born groups are named Mudas, those born 
of the Earth are Bhavas, the groups Rues are born of Vidyut 
(lightning) and the daughters of Mrtyu are Bhairavas. 

57. The group Sobhayantls have the attributes of Kama 
(Cupid). Thus the fourteen groups have been narrated. They 
have been created with exquisitely superb beauty by the 
groups of Suras including Indra and Upendra (Visnu). 

58. The divine lady Tilottama is of auspicious features and 
extremely blessed. Thecelestial damselPrabhavatl richly endowed 


1. Our text has given only the names of the first and the fourteenth group. 
Probably some lines missing in our text are found in Bd. P. 2.3.7.18-20a as 
follows : 

“The meritorious groups(£ff/iaj)of Apsaras-s are well-known to be fourteen, 
viz. Ahrtis (Ahuta in Va. P.), Sobhavatis, Vegavatis, Orjas, Yuvatis, Sruks 
Kurus, Barhis, Amrtas, Mudas, Mrgus, Ruks, Bhirus and Sobhayantis”. But 
the list in Va. P. is incomplete and different. 

2. The text needs emendation : ‘The Urjas are born of the Fire-god* as 
Orjas arc a garia of Apsaras-s (vide Bd. P. 2.3.7..21). 

3. Some lines appear to be missing. This translation is of the printed text 
of Va. P. The missing lines are probably the same as Bd. P. 2.3.7.21b and 
22. They mention the classes of divine damsels,viz. Yuvatis, Kurus, Sruks and 
Barhis who are respectively born from the Sun-god, the Moon-god, 
Yajna (Sacrifice) and Kusavati. 

Bd. P. 2.3.7.23 corresponds to v. 55 above (of the Va. P.) 





530 Vfyu Purdna 

with beauty and youth and renowned in the worlds, was born 
from the sacrificial fire-pit of Brahma. 

59. The celestial woman of great lustre, Vedavatl by name, 
was born from the bottom (surface) of the altar of the intelligent 
four-faced lord (Brahma). 

60. Similarly the daughter of Yama, the bright-eyed celes¬ 
tial woman Hema had the lustre of excellent gold and possessed 
beauty and youth..- 

61. Thus there are many thousands of shining groups of 
Apsaras-s. They are the wives and mothers of Devas and Sages. 

62. All the Apsaras-s are equally fragrant with the comple¬ 
xion of Gampa (Mickelia Champacca ). During the . course of their 
intercourse with their lovers, they are inebriated without imbib¬ 
ing wine. By their contact, their pleasure increases. 

63. Vinata had two sons Aruna and Garuda who had thirty- 
six sisters. They are remembered as their younger sisters. 

64. Gayatrl and other chandas (Vedic Metres), birds bom 
of Garuda and also the Havyavaha groups present in the quar¬ 
ters (pertain to Vinata?) 

65. Kadrii 1 gave birth to a thousand serpents both mobile 
and immobile. They are hydra-headed noble souls, capable of 
traversing in the sky, since they are great in number. They 
have many names (but) learn the chief of them. 

66-71. The most important of those serpents are Sesa, 
Vasuki, Taksaka, Karnlra, Jambha, Anjana, Vamana, Airavata, 
Mahapadma,{Kambala, Asvatara,Ailapatra, Sankha, Karkotaka, 
Dhananjaya, Mahakarna, Mahanila, Dhrtarastra, Balahaka, 
Kumara, Puspadanta, Sumukha, Durmukha, Silimukha, Dadhi- 
mukha, Kallya, Salipindaka, Bindupada, Pundarlka, the serpent 
Apurana, Kapila, Ambarisa, Dhrtapada, Kacchapa, Prahlada, 
Padmacitra, Gandharva, Manasvika, Nahusa, Khararoman and 
Mani and many others like them. The sons of Kadru have been 
enumerated by me. Understand those of Khasa. 

72. Khasa gave birth to two sons who were well-known as 


1. Verses 65-67 enumerate the names of most important of Kadru’s 
children, viz. serpents. 






8.73-83 


531 


man-eaters. The eldest was in the latter number and the men in 
the east* (?) 

73-76. At first, Khasa gave birth to a very terrible son of 
the following description : He was excessively red in colour and 
devoid of ears. He had four arms, four feet, two heads and two¬ 
fold gait. He had hair all over the body. He had a huge body 
with a raised-up nose (like a snout) and a big belly. The head 
was big, the ears large and the hair like Munja grass in accor¬ 
dance with his desire. The lips were like those of an elephant. 
The shanks were long. His fangs were like those of a horse. The 
chin was huge; the tongue red and the eyes had matted hair(?) 
The mouth was huge and the nose long. He was a Guhyaka (ke¬ 
eper of secrets (?) ). The ears were variegated (?) in colour. He 
was extremely delighted and had a great face. Khasa gave 
birth to such an extremely terrible son. 

77-80. Khasa gave birth to his younger brother, a second 
son. He had three heads, three feet and three hands. His eyes were 
black. Thehair stood upright. The moustache was green in colour. 
His body was as firm as a rock. He had a huge body (short in 
stature). His arms were mighty and of great strength. His mouth 
was slit up to the ears. The eyebrows were suspended and the 
nose was stout. The lips were big. He had eight fangs and two 
tongues. He was pike-eared. His eyes were red and tawny-colou¬ 
red. His complexion was tawny. He had matted hair. He had huge 
ears and broad chest. He was devoid of hips and the belly was 
slender. She gave birth to the younger brother who had claws 
and whose neck was red. 

81. Immediately after the birth, they increased in size. 
Their bodies became mature and capable of sensual enjoyment. 
With their bodies thus grown up in size, they embellished their 
mother. 

82. The elder one of the two who was ruthless, seized his 
mother. He said : “Mother, I am distressed with hunger. Come 
here as my prey.” 

83. The younger brother, however, forbade the elder one. 
He said frequently, “Save this Khasa, our mother”. Seizing 
him with both the arms, he released his mother. 


♦Obscure. But Bd. P. (2.3.7.38) : “The elder was bom at dusk and 
younger at dawn \ ore f fham pajcima-sandhyaydih purvasyam tu kanlyasamj 


the 



532 


Vayu Purana 


84 At this time their father (sage Kasyapa) appeared there. 
On seeing them hideous in form, he said, “Both of you stay here”. 

85 Those two strong ones, on seeing their father hurriedly 
(shrank in size) and began to lisp, clinging to the lap of their 

mother, by means of their Maya. 

86. Then the sage told his wife, “Tell us at the outset, how 

these two misbehaved. 

87. A son adopts the traits of his maternal uncle and a 
daughter those of the paternal ancestors. A son adopts the same 

conduct of life as that of his mother. 

88. Water certainly assumes the colour of that (bed of) 
earth on which it flows. Children become diffcrnt due to the 
defects as well as the good qualities in the conduct of their 
mothers or through their faculty of discrimination. 

89. Among (my wives), Aditi is interested in righteousness 
with her pious conduct and (inherent) strength 1 . She is endowed 
with piety, good conduct, enlightenment and strength. 

90. Arista is interested in music. Danu is remembered as 
fond of magic and illusiveness. The good lady Vinata loves 
aerial movement. 

91. Surabhi is embellished with the conduct of performance 
of penance. Kadru is of a furious temperament. She is of unple* 
asant conduct due to anger. 

92. The conduct of Danayusa is characterised both by 
enmity and blessing. O blessed gentle lady, you are considered 
as of furious temperament by me. 

• 93. The children adopt or change their character naturally 
or by observing other men. They are different in their activities, 
attempts, intellect, features, strength and patience. Changes 
occur due to the force of the objects conceived. 

94. The forms of the whole Universe are naturally Rajasika, 
Sattvika and Tamasika. Your sons have taken after their uncle 
in their character and activities”. 

95. After saying thus to the incomparable Khasa, he called 
the sons and made them fearless 2 by means of gentle words. 

1. Kasyapa describes the characteristics of his wives like Dili’s fondness 
for fragrance etc. But the line is missing in the text. Hence the apparent 
duplication of adjectives. 

2. cakre somam abhltayah is obscure. Bd. P. 2.3.7.58 reads cakrc tabhyam tu 
nSmani ‘accorded names unto them’. 



8.96-109 


533 

96. Then KhaSa told him what had been done by them to 
her. As the mother narrated their activities severally, the sage 
who saw the truth gave them names according to the meaning 
of the roots. 

97. The root V yaks means “to eat and to seize”. Since he 
said ' Yaksaye' (I will eat), he will be a Yaksa. 

98. The root V raks means “to protect”. Since he said 
“Save my mother Khas'a”, your (second) son will be known 
by the name “Raksasa”. 

99. Then, on seeing them like that and searching (further) 
he was surprised*. The Prajapati assigned to them blood and 
fat as their diet. 

100. On seeing them hungry, the father granted them this 
boon: “Only at night can your hands feel the touch of anything. 

101. You will move about and take your food during the 
night. By day, you will be enjoying sleep. You will be powerful 
during the night and will be sleeping during the day time. 

102. Protect your mother. Let righteousness be practised.” 
After saying thus to his sons, Kasyapa vanished there itself. 

103-105. When their father had gone, those two heroes, 
natu.ally terrible, began to behave (and do) what was exactly 
opposed (to their father’s directions), eating anything they 
pleased and harassing living beings. They had great strength and 
energy. They were invincible and huge-bodied. They possessed 
the illusive mdya power. Sometimes they would be visible and 
immediately they would vanish. They assumed forms as they 
pleased. They were terrible and hideous naturally. Both of them 
became powerful by means of their diet in accordance with the 
forms (they assumed). 

106-107. They used to roam about at night everywhere and 
for their food they were desirous of seizing Devas, Asuras, Sages, 
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Pisacas, human beings, serpents, birds 
and animals. They were given the boons by Indra of not killing 
(not being killed?). 

108-109, Once that Yaksa (Raksasa) (the junior brother) 
was wandering alone at midnight, desirous of getting some food. 
Hearing a sound, he followed it. He met two Pisacas both of 


*A reads: ‘seeing them both hungry, he was surprised.’ 





534 


Vayu Puratfa 


whom were congenitally fierce. Their eyes were round and tawny 
and their hair stood upright. They were very ternb e 

110-111. Their diet consisted of blood, flesh and fat. They 
were man-eaters of great strength. They were accompanied by 
their two daughters with a desire to do what pleased them. The 
two daughters could assume any form they pleased. Though they 
were splendid (in appearance), their behaviour was like that of 
(their father). They were wandering for the sake of food m the 

company of their daughters. , 

112-114. There they saw the highly powerful Raksasa who 
could assume any form as he pleased. As they met one another 
accidentally, they wanted to seize the other and save themselves. 
The father told the daughters, “Seize this young fellow alive- 
this fellow who is throbbing at every step and bring him here 
quickly”. Then the two daughters approached him and seized 
him. Caught by both the hands, he was brought to the presence 

of their father by the daughters. 

115. The two Pisacas asked that Raksasa who was caught 


hold of by the hands by them, “Who are you ? Whose (son) 
are you ?” He told them everything. 

116. His antecedents were known. After knowing him as 
the foremost of Raksasas, Aja and Khanda, the two Pisacas who 
were delighted at his activity, gave him those two girls, their 
daughters. 

117. (Defective Verse) By means of the Paisaca form of 
matrimonial 1 alliance the Raksasa married the bright-toothed 2 
(girls). Aja and Khanda then recounted their wealth. 

118. Khantfa said, “This is my daughter named Brahma- 
dhana. She is devoid of hair. She has Brahmanas (along with 
their wealth) as her staple diet.”- 

119. “This is my daughter beautiful in every limb. Her name 
is Jantudhana. All the animals are her diet ahd wealth”. (So 
said Aja.) Thus both of them narrated the wealth (of their dau¬ 
ghters). 


1. Out of the eight forms of marriage, Paisaca is the lowest form where¬ 
in money is received by the father for the girl. 

2. ‘sudalya buddha-vahanah' in the text is obscure. Bd. P. 2.3.7.83 reads 
rudanlyavudvavaha safi ‘He married them while they were crying’. 




8.120-133 


535 


, I2 °; 1 The d * u S hter Jantudhana had another name Sarvah- 
gakesx (having hair on every limb). The daughter who was cal¬ 
led Brahmadhana was devoid of hair and had no tip of the ears. 

121. She gave birth to a boy Brahmadhana and a girl Dha- 

nana (?) Thus the two daughters of the Pisacas gave birth to 

two twins. Listen and understand even as I recount their oro¬ 
geny. 

122-123. Heti, Praheti, Ugra, Pauruseya, Vadha, Visphurji, 
Vata, Apa, Vyaghra and Sarpa—these were Raksasas, the ten 
sons of Yatudhana. They were the followers of the Sun and they 
whirl along with him. 

124. Lanku was the son of Heti. Lanku had two sons, Mal- 
yavan and Sumali. Now listen to the sons of Praheti. Praheti’s 
son was the glorious and well-known Puloman. 

125. Vadha’s son was Nikumbha who was ruthless Brahma- 
raksasa. Vata’s son was Viraga and Apa’s son was Jambuka. 

126. Vyaghra’s son was Nirananda who caused obstacles to 
all living beings. Thus all the cruel Raksasas have been enu¬ 
merated. 

127-128. Yatudhanas have been mentioned. Now under¬ 
stand the sons of Brahmadhana. They were Yajiia, Pita, Dhuni, 
Ksema, Brahma, Papa, Yajnaha, Svakotaka, Kali and Sarpa. 
They were the ten sons of Brahmadhana. The following are their 
sisters, terrible Brahmaraksasxs. 

129. They were—Raktakarna, Mahajihva, Ak§aya and 
Upaharinl. Brahmaraksasas were born of their families on the 
earth. 

130. Generally they are found on the Slesmataka (Cardya 
Myxia) trees. They live there. Thus Raksasas have been 
enumerated. Understand Yaksas. 

131-132. Yaksa loved the Apsaras Kratusthali other¬ 
wise known as Pancasthula (stout in five limbs). Brooding over 
her and desirous of securing her, he wandered in the parks of 
Nandana, Vaibhraja, Surabhi and Caitraratha. In the park of 
Nandana, he saw her seated along with Apsaras-s. 

133. He did not know of any means of acquiring her despite 
his pondering, because he was defiled (ugly) in form and defiled 
and corrupt in his activities. 



536 Vfyu Parana 

134. He thought, “All living beings are afraid and disgus¬ 
ted with me who am noxious and hurtful. So how shall I secure 
this lady of beautiful limbs?’*. 

135. He thought of a plan and hastened to put it into ac¬ 
tion. The Guhyaka (Yaksa) assumed the honoured form of a 
Gandharva. Then he seized Kratusthali from the midst of (other) 
Apsaras-s. 

136. Knowing him to be beautiful in form, she followed him 
with emotional attachment. Even as he was being observed by 
the group of Apsaras-s, he was embraced by her. 

137. When he achieved his cause (i.e. desired object), a son 
of full-fledged sense-organs and height was born to him imme¬ 
diately. New-born though he was, he (as if) blazed in his 
glory. 

138. He spoke to his father—“I am a king. I am Nabhi” 
The father replied, “Since you are born, there is no fear” 

139. When the son emulated his mother in beauty and father 
in valour, Yaksa was overjoyed and due to that exultation 
regained his original form. 

140. Big Yaksas and Raksasas regain their own form while 
dying, when asleep, angry or frightened and when extremely 
delighted. 

141. Then that Guhyaka smilingly spoke to the Apsaras— 
“O lady of beautiful hips and excellent complexion, come to 
my house along with your son.” 

142. On seeing him who regained his form suddenly after 
saying this, all the Apsaras-s were furious, perplexed and 
frightened and they fled. 

143. Kratusthali followed the Apsaras-s who were fleeing. 
But the son consoled her with his words. He took her to the 
middle ofGandharvas and Apsaras-s and returned. 

144. On seeing the birth of Yaksa, the group of Apsaras-s 
spoke to Kratusthali—“You are the mother of Yaksas”. 

^ 45. Then, accompanied with his son, Yaksa went back 
to his abode named Nyagrodharohinah (growing on the holy fig 
tree) where Guhyakas used to lie down. Hence the Nyagrodha 
tree is always a favourite place of residence to the Yaksas. 

146-148. The Yaksa Rajatanabha was the grandfather of 
Guhyakas. He married Bhadra, the excellent daughter of the 


8.149-163 


537 


Da, 7 a ^ nuhrada ’ She g^e birth to two sons-Manivara of 

f°ploif Th ’ and r Ma ' ibhadra Wh ° was «l ua l to'Sakra in 
exploit. The wives of these two brothers were sisters-two 

auspicious daugh ters of Kratusthali. Their names were Punyajani 

“ 15k. unyajanI bore th ' fo,,owi " 8 — 

149-152. (They were) Siddhartha, Suryateja, Sumanta, 
Nandana, Kanyaka, Yavika, Manidatta, Vasu, Sarvanubhuta, 
Sankha, Pmgak§a, Bhiru, Mandarasobhi, Padma, Candrapra- 
bha, Maghapurna, Subhadra, Pradyota, Mahaujas, Dyutiman 
Ketuman, Mitra, Mauli and Sudarsana. Thus there are twenty- 
four auspicious Punyajanas born to Manibhadra. All of them 
were characteristically meritorious. Their sons and grandsons 
were the auspicious Yaksas and Punyajanas. 

153-157. Devajanani (Devajani) bore to Manivara the fol¬ 
lowing sons—Purnabhadra, Heraaratha, Maniman, Nandivard- 
hana, Kustumburu, PiSahgabha, Sthulakarna, Mahajaya, Sveta, 
ipula, Puspavan, Bhayavaha, Padmavarna, Sunetra, Yaksa, 
Bala, Baka, Kumuda, Ksemaka.Vardhamana, Dama, Padmana- 
bha, Varanga, Suvira, Vijaya, K r ti, Purnamasa, Hiranyaksa, 
Surupa, and others. These sons of Manivara are remembered as 
Yaksas and Guhyakas. Some are handsome and some are ugly. 
They are garlanded and very pleasing to see. They had hundreds 
and thousands of sons and grandsons. 

158. There were other sons of Khasa who be came Raksasas 
who could assume forms as they pleased. Listen to and under¬ 
stand the important ones among them as they are being 
enumerated. 


159-162. They were—Lalavi, Kuthana, Bhlma, Sumali, 
Madhu, Visphurjita, Vidyujjihva, Matanga, Dhumrita, Cand- 
rarka, Sukara, Budhna, Kapiloman, Prahasaka, Krida, Paras'u- 
nabha, Cakraksa, Nisacara, Trisiras, Satadamstra, the Raksasa 
Tundakesa, the Yaksa Akampana, Durmukha and Silimukha. 
These excellent Raksasas were valorous. In the form of groups, 
they move about in all the worlds. They have the ability to move 
on equal footing with the Devas. 

163. She (Khasa) had seven otherdaughters. Listen to them 
(their enumeration) in order, their progeny and the groups 
formed by them. 







538 Vayu Purarta 

164. Alarhba, Utkaca, Krena, Nirrta, Kapila, Siva and the 
blessed KesinI are the seven sisters remembered. 

165. The following auspicious groups of Raksasas were born 
of them. They are the devourers of people, meat-eaters, killers 
and invincible in war. 

166. The group called Alambeya was cruel. Similarly the 
group Utkaceya was also cruel. The groups of excellent Raksa¬ 
sas were the Karsneyas and Saiveyas. 

167. The group of Raksasas called Nairrta comprised the 
progeny created by leading Ganesvara who was the follower of 
Siva. 

168. These Yaksas and Raksasas were procreated by the 
powerful (Ganesvaras). They were valorous and endowed with 
heroism. These Devaraksasas, the Nairftas had the renowned 
Virupaka as their leader. 

169. Many hundreds of these proud and noble-souled groups 
mostly follow Sankara, the lord of the Universe. 

170-173. TheKapileyas, .IieDaityaraksa.-as of great prowess, 
of huge body and of great strength and exploit were procreated 
by the noble-souled king of Daityas, Kumbha. The Yaksa Kam- 
pana begot of KesinI, very powerful Yaksas and Raksasas. 
Kesini’s daughter Nila bore to Alambeya Surasika many Raksa¬ 
sas of petty mentality. They are called Nailas. They were invin¬ 
cible and were terrible in their exploits. 

174. Endowed with divine and worldly power, they move 
about on the entire earth. Since they are innumerable, the 
details of this creation cannot be recounted. 

175. The same Nila had a daughter, the demoness Vikaca, 
naturally devoid of hair and possessing mediocre strength and 
exploit. 

176. The same (Vikaca) bore terrible Asuras by the contact 
of the ugly Nairrta. Listen to them in order. 

177-178. They are Harakas, Bhisakas, Kramakas, Vainakas, 
Pisacas, Vahakas and Prasakas. All of them are hideous with 
their terrible fangs. They have huge ears and bellies. These are 
Bhumi-raksasas (Earthly Demons). They possess manly exploit 
though slow-witted. 

179. They assume multifarious forms and move about here 
and there unseen by others. Those whose strength and energy 



8.180-191 


539 


(Sffissr*"* are rcmembcrcd - Kh — 

:^r r if Mmir ^ k ^ esr ^ td ™ 'Id 

(Raksasas). S ° Wn ctan * <S™ups) ° f *«« 

183 Some constitute lha Bhadraka group (Born of Btad. 
raka). The cause of then origin is Yajfla* (?). They are in 

torw' dSand th0USa ' ldSaI ' <i ' hey m ° Ve about in thc human 


184. There are many terrible Bhutas having the same traits 
as their mother Putana. They harass children in the human 
world like the evil planets, causing dejectedness. 


_ 5. The Skandagraha and other groups, the Apakas, the 
irasakaand other groups—all these are to be known as Kaum- 
aras ill-disposed towards children like evil planets. 


186-187. There are hundreds of the groups of these evil 
(Raksasas) like the deceitful types of Skandagrahas and Bhutas 
named Pu tanas, lakhs and lakhs of them roaming about in 

the human world. They wander over the earth annoying the 
people. 


188-190. There are Yaksas called Punyajanas and others 
called Guhyakas. There are still others called Devajanas. All 
these are included in the group of Guhyakas. There are Raksa¬ 
sas called Agastyas, Paulastyas and Visvamitras. The great king 
Kubera, the ruler of Alaka, is the king of all these Yaksas and 
Raksasas including Paulastyas and Agastyas. 

191. Yaksas drink blood, and swallow flesh and fat of men 
by merely looking at them. Raksasas do so by entering the 
body and Pisacas by crushing and harassing. 


*JBd. P.V. 157 reads ajna —(born of) the ignorant ones. 






540 Vayu Parana 

192-194 * 1 . There are some beings of the following characteris¬ 
tics : They are endowed with all good qualities. They are 
equal to Devas in the matter of sphere of activities. They are 
brilliant and strong. They are masterly ones who can assume any 
form they please. Awe-struck, no one will dare to speak to them 
directly. They are valorous. They are bowed to by all the 
people. They are subtle and very powerful. They are pure and 
worthy of Yajnas. They are granters of boon. All these having 
the same characteristics as Devas are remembered as Asuras. 2 
Gandharvas are inferior to Devas by three-fourths of their 
prowess. 

195. All Guhyakas are inferior to Gandharvas by three- 
fourths. All Raksasas should be known as equal to Yaksas in 
prowess. Pisacas are three times less powerful in their AUvarya 
(prosperity and glory) than Yaksas. 

196-197. Thus in wealth, beauty, longevity, strength, righ¬ 
teousness, affluence, mastery, intellect, penance, learning and 
exploits, the four Devayonis, beginning with Gandharvas and 
ending with Pisacas are (consecutively) three-fourths inferior 
to Devas and Asuras. 

Suta said : 

198. Welfare unto you. Henceforth, hear about the proge¬ 
ny of the family of Krodha. Krodha gave birth to twelve 
daughters. They became the wives of Pulaha. Understand them 
by name. 

199. They were—Mrgi, Mrgamanda, Haribhadra, Iravatl, 
Bhuta, Kapisa, Damstra, Nisa, Tirya, Sveta, Svara and Surasa. 
They are well-known. 

200. The sons of Mpgi were the different types of deer, viz. 
Karinas, Nyankus, Rurus and Prsalas as well as such other animals 

as hares and Sarabhas (a fabulous eight-footed animal). 

^ * The Puraija-writer deserves credit for recording the greatness of 
Asuras and their equality with Devas. 

2. Verses 192-197 describe the gradation (in descending order) of the 
divine and semi-divine beings as follows : 

(i) Devas and Asuras 

(ii) Gandharvas and Apsaras-s 

(iii) Guhyakas (Yaksas) and Raksasas 

(iv) Pis'acas. 



8.201-211 


541 


_ - The kmg of ^beasts (lion)was the son of Mrgamanda 
as well as such other animals as Gavayas (blue cows), buffaloes, 
camels, boars, rhinoceros and Gauramukhas (a kind of black 
monkey with white face). 

202 Han’s (Bhadra’s) sons were Haris (lions), bears, tig¬ 
ers, hyenas, different varieties of monkeys, Kinnaras and Kim- 

purusas and many other animals. Now understand the sons of 
Iravatl. 

203-205 Bhauvana (i.e. Visvakarman) brought two egg-' 
hke skulls of Surya. Keeping them in his hands, he sang the 
athantara hymn. Suddenly an elephant arose out of the 
baman hymn. 1 Bhauvana presented that elephant to Iravatl as 
her son. Being thus the son of Iravatl, the elephant was called 
Airavata. Since it was thevehicle of the king ofDevas, it became 
the first king of elephants. It had the lustre of a pure cloud. 
The glorious elephant Airavata has four tusks. 

206. (Defective Verse) Only this elephant has the strength 
of being a vehicle, since it is born of water, has a single root 
six teeth and the lustre of gold. It is of the Bhadra variety of 
elephants. 


207. Airavata had four sons, viz. Anjana, Supratlka, Va- 
mana and Padma. His mate was Abhramu. 

208. Sveta gave birth to four swift-footed sons who 
became the elephants of the quarters. They belonged to the 
varieties such as Bhadra, Mrga, Manda and Samklrna. 

209-210. Anjana, though belonging to the Sanklrna variety 
is the vehicle of Yama. Supratlka who belongs to the Bhadra 
variety and is green in colour is the vehicle of the Lord of Waters 
(Varuna). Padma which belongs to the Manda variety and is 
of white colour is the vehicle of Ailavila (Kubera). (Vamana) 
which was dark-coloured and belonged to the Mrga variety 
was the vehicle of the Fire-god (Agni). 

211. 2 (Defective) He has eight sons, viz. Padmottara 


^* Verses203-235 contain the Puranic “Elephantlore”; the geographical 
location of forests assigned to dil..erent types of elephants probably indicates 
that that type was found in that particular forest-area. 

2. The text is very corrupt and is translated tentatively in the light of 
Bd. P. vv. 332-33a. 





542 Vayu Purdna 

(Padma+Uttara?), two Gajas (Agata and Gajas ?), Varuna 
Gana, Upalepaname§a (Upalepana and Mesa ?). 

212. In his race elephants possessing lofty stature, white 
nails and hair, yellowish colour'are born. I shall recount Mata- 
ngaja and other (types) of elephants in due order. 

213. The elephant Pundarlka was grey-coloured and 
Rathanara had a flowery colour. Their sons were Supratistha 
and Pramardana. 

214. (Defective Verse) Other types of elephants—spear- 
shaped, stout, with raised heads, having white (?) hair and 
nails, strong and energetic. They are called Akulika elephants. 

215. Puspadanta, Brhatsaman, Saddanta, Dantapuspavan 
and Tamra varna were his sons and companion tuskers. 

216. * 1 In his family are born elephants beautiful in appeara¬ 
nce having protruding lips, dark-coloured, fierce and able to 
endure diverse kinds of ordeal (?) 

217. Vamadeva was as dark as collyrium. From Saman 
was bom Vamana. His wife was Angada and the two sons were 
Nilavan and Laksana. 

218. These elephants were fierce. Their necks and heads 
were beautiful. Their chests were broad and they were swift¬ 
footed. If they are bound by men, the elephants born become 
deformed. 

219. There is no other elephant equal to Supratlka in 
beauty. He had three sons, viz. Praharl, Sampatl and Prthu. 

220. The animals with long palate and lips and with 
symmetrical portions of head and belly, of gentle birth (?) bom 
in his family, become Matangajas. 

221. Anjana was bom to Anjana and Anjana vatl to Saman. 
The mother of both of them is reputed to be the daughter (s) of 
Ayurajas. 

222. In his family were bom elephants with (distinctly 
divided) symmetrical heads, resembling the smooth clouds. 


The verse enumerates the eight sons of that elephant the names of which 
are as follow!: Padma, Uttama, Padmagulma, Agaja, Vatagaja, Gaja, Capala 
and Arista. 

1. Pidapatdnanah in some editions is obscure and should be emended as 
Piidyaiananah ‘with large and stout (big) faces (heads)as in Bd. P. V. 338. 




8.223-230 


543 

beautiful to look at, of well-built body having the lustre of 
lotuses and globular in shape. They are stout and have large, 
yellow faces. 

223. From Candramas and Saman were born Pingala and 
Kumudadyuti. Pihgala’s sons were Mahapadma and Ormi- 
malin. 

224. Know that the elephants born of his family have 
equal and unrivalled tusks. They are fierce. Their strength is 
enormous. Their belly is large. They are fond of elephant 
fights. 

225. In the course of wars between Devas and 
Asuras, Suras used them for the purpose of victory. When 
they achieved their object, those elephants were let off by them 
and they went to different directions as mentioned before. 

226. Devas gave unto Lomapada, the king of Anga 
and author of a Sutra work, elephants born in these families 
and well-trained. 

227-228. (The various names of elephants are to be etymo¬ 
logically derived as follows :) 

Since it has two tusks it is called Dvirada ; the word Haslin is 
derived from hast a (a trunk or hand) ; from the word kara (a 
trunk or hand) the word Karia is derived. Vdr anal (since it protects) 
it is called Varana. Since it has dantas (tusks) (prominently 
displayed) it is called Dan tin. It is called Gaja because it trum¬ 
pets ( garjandt ). Since it roams about in the hedges (Kuiija) it is 
called hunjara. It is called Nag a because it is antagonistic to 
Naga (tree or mountain). Since it is born of Matanga it is 
called Matanga. Since it drinks with two (i. e. trunk and mouth) 
it is called Dvipa. It is called Samaja because (the first ele¬ 
phant Airavata) was born of a Saman hymn. 

229. The curvedness of their tongues and their muteness 
are due to Agni’s curse. The fact that they are unaware of their 
strength and that the scrotum is concealed—these two are due 
to the curses of Svayambhu and Suras. 

230. Elephants of diverse inherent strengths are born 
of girls of Deva, Danava, Gandharva, Pisaca, Uraga (Ser¬ 
pent) and Raksasa tribes through their union with the ele¬ 
phants of the quarters ( Dih-nagas ). 







544 


Vayu Purdna 

231. The story of the origin, development and derivation 

of the names of elephants whose king is Vibhavasu, should be 
known. 

232. (Defective Verse) The forest in the east bound by 
the rivers Kausiki and Ganga and the sea belongs to Anjana 
and the family of elephants of which he is the founder (or of 
one tusk ?). 

233. The forest of Supratlka is situated north of Vin- 
dhya, south of Ganga and in between the land of Karusa 
and the source of Ganga. 

234. The fifth forest west of Utkala and extending upto the 
land of Vedi is remembered as the forest of Vamana who is the 
sole Atman (?) 

235. The forest to the west of Lauhitya extending west¬ 
wards upto the sea, is said to be the forest of Yama. It is near 
a mountain. 

236-248. Bhuti gave birth to Bhutas (goblins) who are the 
followers of lord Rudra. They were stout, lean, longish, dwar¬ 
fish, short-statured and normal. The ears of some were hang¬ 
ing down. The lips of some were suspended. Some had tongues, 
breasts and bellies hanging down. Some had single form, some 
double form. The hips of some hung down. Some had stout 
calves of the leg. They stayed on the banks of rivers, lakes or seas. 
They were of all colours, black, white, blue, grey, red and pink. 
Some were smoke-coloured and some had variegated colours. 
Some were terrible like Raksasas and Kadrus (?). Some had 
dishevelled hair like the Munja grass. Some had hair standing 
up. Some wore serpents as the sacred thread. Some had eyes 
removed; some had hideous eyes. Some had small eyes. Somehad 
only a single eye. Some had many heads. Some had no head. 
Somehad a single head. Some had the head cut off. They were 
fierce and hideous. Some had no hair. Some had plenty of it. 
Some were blind. Some had matted hair. Some were yellow. 
Some were dwarfish. They resorted to the banks of rivers, lakes 
an oceans. Some had a single ear, some had large ears. Some 
were spike-eared, some had no ear. Some had fangs. Some had 
claws. Some had no teeth. Some had two tongues. Some had a 



8.249-256 


545 


single hand. Some had two hands. Some had three hands. Some 
had no hand. Some had a single foot. Some had two feet. Some 
three and some even more. Some were great Yogins. Some were 
highly dignified. Some were very strong. Some were sutapakvas 1 
{Sutapaskas ? ‘of good penance’). They could go everywhere. 
They were unimpeded. They were the knowers of Brahman 
and could assume any form they wished. Some were terrible and 
ruthless. Some were pure, holy and auspicious. Some disputed 
and argued. Some had the Kus'a grass in their hands. Some had 
huge (long ?) tongues, long ears and large faces. Some ate with 
their hands, some with their mouths and some with their heads. 
Some wore skulls (round their necks). Some held bows. Some 
had iron clubs, swords or spears. Some had radiant faces and 
bright eyes; some wore garlands of variegated flowers and un¬ 
guents. Some ate cooked food; some raw flesh. Some had many 
forms. Some had handsome appearance. Some roamed about 
at night or at dusk. Some were terrible. Some were gentle, 
roaming about during the day. Some were night prowlers, who 
were very terrible (or difficult) to look at; some were terrible 
night-wanderers. 

249. All of them directed their minds towards lord Bhava 
(Siva) as the greatest god. They had no wives or sons. All of 
them were celibate with sublimated sexuality. 

250. These Bhutas, the great Almayogins, numbered a hund¬ 
red thousand. Thus all these noble-souled sons of Bhuti have 
been recounted. 

251. Kapisa, Kusmandl bore to Kusmanda twins of Pis¬ 
acas who were tawny-coloured. Because they were brownish, 
they were called Pisacas. 2 All of them were flesh-eaters. 

252. There are sixteen other twins. Their descendants are 
living now. I shall mention by names the man-eaters belonging 
to their family. 

253-256. They are Chagala and Chagall, Vakra and Vakra- 
mukhi, Sue! and Suclmukha, Kumbhapatra and Kumbhl, 

1. Bd. P. 2.3.7.367 reads sumanaska ‘of very good minds*. 

2. The Purana distinguishes between Bhutas and Pisacas. Bhutas are 
noble-souled sons of Bhuti, celibate yogins and devotees of God Siva. Pisacas 
arc the progeny of Kusmandl. The superstitions about Pisacas current at 
the time of this text are recorded in vv. 251-282. 





546 


Vayu Puranct 


Vajradarnstra and Dundubhi, Upacara and Upacara, Ulukhala 
and Ulukhall, Anarka and Anarka, Kukhanda and Kukhandika 
Panipatra and Panipatrl, Pamsu and Parhsumatl, Nituncla and 
Nitundi, Nipuna and Nipuna, Chalada and Ucchesana, Pras- 
kanda and Skandika. The sixteen clans of Pisacas have been 
narrated. 

257-259. These are the sixteen families born of Kusman- 
das : Ajamukhas, Vakramukhas, Purins, Skandins, Vipa- 
das, Angarikas, Kumbhapatras, Prakundakas, Upacarolukha- 
likas, Anarkas, Kukhandikas, Panipatras, Naitundas, Ornasas, 
Nipunas, and Sucimukhocchesanadas. 

260. Those who are born as Sukalpas 1 (?) should be known 
as Pisacas. There are infinite number of sons and grandsons of 
hideous nature and ignoble activities. Hence, understand the 
characteristics of Pisacas. 

261. Pisacas have hair on all their limbs. Their eyes 
are round. They have claws and fangs. Their limbs are crooked. 
They are man-eaters and their faces are turned down. 

262. The Pisacas called Kusmandikas are devoid of hair 
on their heads or bodies. Skins and hides constitute their 
garments. They always eat gingelly seeds and flesh. 

263. Some Pis'acas have curved limbs, and feet. They walk 
in a zigzag manner. They should be known as Vakrapisacas. 
They are of crooked gait. They can assume any form as they 
please. 

264. Some Pisacas have protruding bellies. Their noses 
are like snouts. Their bodies are short. Their heads and arms 
are small. These are called Nitunflakas. Gingelly seeds form 

their diet. (They are fond of hearing pleasing things— 
PriyaSrav&k?) 2 

265. Some Pisacas have dwarfish forms 3 . They are 
garrulous. They go about galloping. They are Anarkamarka 

types of Pisacas. They are fond of staying on trees or taking food 
there. 

266. Some Pisacas keep their hands lifted up (always). 


i' ??'. P ' ,b l dV - 384 reads Sakulyas -belonging to the same family (?)’ 

^*389 reads Priyasrjah ‘fond of (drinking) blood’. 

3. Bd.P. V. 390 reads Vanardhtayah -having the form of monkeys’. 




8.267-278 


547 


Their hair stands upright. Their abodes are high up on tall 
trees. They shed dust from their bodies. These Pisacas are called 
ParhSus. 

267. The Pisacas called Upaviras are very considerate 
about their veins*. Their bodies are dry. They have plenty of 
moustache. They wear bark garments. Cremation ground is their 
abode. 

268. The Udukhala (Ulukhala) types of Pisacas have 
stable motionless eyes and long tongues with which they lick 
their lips. Their heads are as large as those of elephants and 
camels. They move about severally or jointly. 

269. Those Pisacas are called Kumbhapatras, who take 
cooked food without seeing it (invisibly ?). They are small 
and yellow-complcxioned with hairy bodies. They move about 
visibly and invisibly. 

270. The Pisacas called Nipunas enter and infest those 
persons who go alone. Their mouths extend upto their ears. 
The eye-brows are long and the noses are thick. 

271. (A line is missing from the text.) The Pisacas called 
Baladas (devourers of children) are short-statured and they 
attack people with their hands and feet. Their eyes are turned 
towards the earth. They resort to lying-in-chambers. 

272. Those Pisacas called Pisitadas (flesh eaters) drink blood 
from the battlefield. Their hands and feet are turned back¬ 
wards. They are short and are as swift as wind. 

273. The Pisacas called Skandins are naked and have no 
fixed abodes. They are globular in shape with long hair. 
There are other types of Pisacas eating leavings of food. Thus 
the sixteen types of Pisacas have been narrated. 

274. On seeing these types of Pisacas deficient in intellect 
and in a dejected condition among his progeny, Brahma sym¬ 
pathetically granted them the boons of vanishing and assuming 
forms as they pleased. 

275-278. He permitted them to move about at the time of 
the two junctions (viz. dawn and dusk). (I shall mention) 
their abodes and way of maintaining themselves. Houses in 

*dhamam-matakdh, but Bd. P. V. 392 reads Bhramari-sannibhah ‘like black- 
bees’. 





548 


Vayu Puratfa 

ruins, vacant or with very few people or completely dilapidated 
are their abodes. They live in those houses also where people 
do not follow rules of good conduct, which are not scrubbed 
and cleaned properly or not whitewashed or painted well. 
They live in the highways, sidelanes, kitchen gardens, quadrang¬ 
les, portals, attics, paths of exit, sidewalks, pathways, rivers, 
holy centres, trees in the monasteries, trunk roads (these 
are assigned as their abodes). Pisacas occupy all these 
spots. 

279-280. Unrighteous persons, those who violate the dis¬ 
cipline of castes and stages of life and artisans and masons 
constitute the livelihood of these Pisacas as ordained by 
Suras. These Pisacas will be the presiding deities where holy 
rites are performed by means of money earned by unjustifiable 
means such as breach of trust and theft of nectar-like articles. 

281-282. The oblations to Pisacas consist of honey 
(wine), flesh, cooked rice mixed with curds, powdered gingelly 
seeds, toddies and similar (intoxicating) beverages, incense, 
turmeric, Krsaras (i.e. balls of gingelly seeds in treacle), 
oil, rice mixed with jaggery, black cloths and flowers. At the 
junctions of Parvans, these things must be offered to Pisacas. 
Brahma, the lord, ordained thus. 

283. He made the trident-bearing Girisa the lord of all 
Bhutas and Pisacas. 

The lady Damstra bore as sons tigers and lions. 

284. Panthers, pythons and beasts of prey are also her 
sons. 

Now listen to the progeny and procreation of Rsa wholly. 
She had five daughters. Listen to their names : 

285. Mina, Mata, Vrtta, Pari vrtta and Anuvrtta are to be 
known (as her daughters). Listen to (the enumeration of) her 
children: 

286. Sharks and crocodiles with a thousand teeth, the 
types of fish known as Pathina, Timi and Rohita and other 
groups are called Maina (born of Mina) groups. They are 
extensive. 

287. The four types of Grdhas (crocodiles) —Anujyestha- 
kas, Niskas, Sisumaras etc. were born of Mata. 


8.288-298 


549 


288. Vrtta gave birth to different types of tortoises and 
other aquatic animals as well as varieties of conches. 

289. Anuvrtta gave birth to different types of toads and 

frogs as well as different varieties of snails and Aneyas (black 

does) and Sambukas (shells and noxious insects) 

290. Parivrtta gave birth to different varieties of oyster- 
shells, cowrie-shells and conchs. 


291. She produced the varieties of Kalakuta poison and 
leeches as well. Thus the race of Rsa consisting of five branches 
has been enumerated. 

. 292 ) The description of the first and early animals and 

insects is very extensive 1 2 . The varieties of sweat-born insects 
are a part of them. 

293. O Brahmanas, these insects are born of the bodies of 
Svastipika 2 (?). The producers are human beings. The insects 
known as Usanas are born of dirt and sweat of men. So also the 
other insects and groups of ants moving about in rows. 

294. There are varieties of insects born of conchs, pebbles 
which work like nails. 3 These and many others are the earthly 
groups of sweat-born creatures. 

295. Similarly, these creatures are born out of water 
heated by the sun as well as of the rain water. Many of these 
insects are born of the bodies of other animals. 

296-298. The following tiny creatures are born both of 
water and of sweat : Small shrimps (minaka), ants, (mosquito¬ 
like) biting or stinging creatures (darhia) , Tittira-pulrikas (tiny 
partridge-like creatures?). The Alakas (hair) are bluish or 
variegated in colour (nila-citrah) and very massive. 

The insects called Nalada which are many-faced are born 
in water (stagnating) near the Kasa grass. They are stated to 
be of three kinds— Simhalas , Romalas (Hairy) and Picchalas 
(Slimy). These and other groups of species are remembered as 
born of water as well as of sweat. 


1. The line is corrupt. The corresponding line in Bd. P. V. 421 reads 2 
lirydhetukam apydhur bahulam uamia-vistaraml ‘They say that there is an extensive 
line of living beings procreated by Tirya’. 

2. This obscure word is a misprint for ‘ Svtda-Klinna ‘born of bodies mois- 
stened by sweat' (vid Bd. P. V. 422). 

3. Kilakdcarakdni ‘which work lik nails’ in the text is rather obscure. Bd. 
P. V. 423 b reads kilakavaranani ‘Pebbles smaller than pins’. 




550 Vayu Puravta 

299. Some creatures are born of ghee, black gram and 
green gram. Some are born of the fruits of Jamb u (Rose apple) 
Bilva, mango and arecanut. 

300. Creatures are born of the dry hollows of trees and 
also of green gram, jack fruits and rice grains when kept (for a 
long time). 

301. Creatures are born of other things also when kept 
for a long time. Germs and worms are born of horses and other 
(animals) and even from poison etc. 

302. When cowdung is kept for a number of days, O 
Brahmanas, creatures are produced from them. White ants and 
other creatures are born of (putrefying) wood. 

303. Various kinds of blue flies are born of trees in due 
course. The creatures Putrikas (white ants ?) are born of drying 
and withering things. 

304. Everywhere serpents are born seasonally from 
Satikas (?). Scorpions and sweat-born creatures are produced 
from dry cow-dung. 

31)3. O lord, many worms are born of the bodies of cows 
and buffaloes. Different types of fish etc. are born of eggs. 

306. Different types of leeches are born of eggs such as 
Caivtrikas and Gajas and many other subtle creatures too. 

307. Different types of flies etc. are born of eggs. These 
are laid generally on the leavings of food, water and sloughs. 

308. Different types of mosquitoes and black bees are also 
born of eggs. The creatures known as nits {Putrikas and Putra- 
bhasakas) are produced from grass. 

309. The insects Manicchedas and Vyalas are said to be 
produced from foetus with no enveloping membrane ( potajas ). 
Varieties of Salaveri (?) are born of dry cow-dung. 

310. Thus innumerable groups of sweat-born creatures have 
been enumerated by me in brief. It is to be remembered that 
these are born as a result of their actions in a previous birth. 

311-312. There are other beings of Nairfta nature (i.e. 
born of Nirpti). They are remembered as Upasargajas (born of 
paroxysm due to possession by devils). Some beings are born 
of womb {Tonijas) and some are Autpaltikas (born spontaneously). 
Generally all Devas are to be known as Autpaltikas. Some 


8.313-329 


551 


Devas are born of a womb (2W/a).Only someareborn without 


313. The children of Sarama are the sons Tulalagha and 

Kola and a daughter Siva. They are known as Saramadi 
group. 

314. TheKadrukas (?) are Sydma (dark-coloured), Sabala 
(ofvariegated colour), Arjuna (white), Harita (green-coloured), 
Krsna (black), Dhumraruna (smoke-coloured and pink-coloured— 
Aruna), Tulalagha (?). 

315. Surasa gave birth to a hundred (serpents) with 
nectar in their heads (Siro'm T tam). The king ofSarpas (serpents) 
is Taksaka and that of the snakes is Vasuki. Thus this group 

belonging to the family of Krodhavasa is mostly of Tamasa 
quality. 


316. Now understand the bosom creation of Pulaha from 
Tamra. Many well-known daughters were born of Tamra. 

<5 i- 1 *' T hey are— 'Syeni, Bhasi, Kraunci, Dhftarastri and 
Sukl. SyenI who was the wife of Aruna gave birth to two 
excellent birds of great strength and prowess, viz. Sampati and 
Jatayu. 

318. Sampati procreated one son and one daughter. 
Crows, vultures and ASvakarnins (a variety of vultures?) were 
the sons of Jatayu. 

319. The wives of Garutman (Garuda) were Bhasi, Kraunci, 
Sukl, Dhrtarastri and Bhadra. Their sons are being enumerated. 

320-322. Suki bore six well known sons to Garutman, 
viz. the sweet-faced Tris'ira, Bala, Pr?tha of great strength,* 
Trisahkhanetra, Susukha of good form and Surasa the power¬ 
ful. The sons and grandsons of these ruthless descendants of 
Garuda, the noble-souled serpent-eaters, numbering fourteen 
thousand. By procreation of sons and grandsons their family 
became extensive. 


323-329. I shall mention in due order the lands where they 
spread themselves—the whole of Salmall Dvipa, the mountain 
Devakuta, the leading mountains Maniman, Sahasra-sikhara, 
Parnamala, Sukesa, Satasniga, Kauraja, Pancasikhara and 
Hemakuta—all these mountains were occupied by the noble- 
souled descendants of Garuda. They were brightened with ruby 
stones and (while flying) they produced gusts of violent winds. 



Vayu Purana 
552 


Bhasas (the bird vulture) Ulukas (owls), crows and cocks 

were the sons of Bhasl. r _ A 

Peacocks, Kalaoiiikas (sparrows), doves and Lavas and 
Tittiris also were born of Bhasl. Krauncigave birth to Vardhinasa 
birds (black birds with red legs, head and eyes). Syem gave 
birth to ospreys, Sarasas (a kind of crane) and cranes; she 
gave birth to other birds of prey also like these. 

The beautiful lady Dhrtarastrl gave birth to Hamsas 
(swans) and Kalahamsas, Cakrav'akas and other types of 
(acquatic) birds too. These were the birds given birth to and 
their sons and grandsons were infinite. 

330. Garutfa’s children have been enumerated. Listen to 
the progeny of Ira. Ira gave birth to three daughters with eyes 


like lotuses. 

331. They were Lata, Valll and Vlrudha. They are the 
mothers of all types of plants, trees and creepers. 

332. Lata gave birth to Vanaspalis i.e. the non-flowering 
plants growing on the banks of rivers etc. She herself gave birth 
to Vfksas or trees with flowers and fruits. 

333. Valli gave birth to hedges, grasses and bamboo etc. of 
the-same species. Vlrudha gave birth to Virudhas i.e. creepers 
spreading all round. The description of the race is concluded 


here. 

334. Thus the mobile and the immobile progeny of Kas- 
yapa have been enumerated. The whole Universe is filled with 
their sons and grandsons. 

335. Thus a portion of the entire creation has been enumerat¬ 
ed. The Prajasarga of Marica (KaSyapa) has been succinctly 
narrated. O Brahmanas, it cannot be explained (in details) 
even in hundreds of years. 

336. Aditi was of righteous, pious temperament. Diti is -re¬ 
membered as strong-minded. Surabhi was inclined towards the 
performance of penance. Danu was of a deceitful nature. 

337. Kadru was of ruthless mind. KrauncI was disposed 
towards learning. Ira had the receptive capacity. Danayu was 
interested in taking food. 

338. Vinata was capable of bearing burdens. Tamra was 
habituated to use nooses and strings. These are the natures and 
temperaments of the mothers of the worlds. 




8.339—9.2 


553 


i ^ Ct J’ coa ^ uct ) intellect, patience and strength they 

had the traits of qualities Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Hence 
they were both righteous and unrighteous. 

340. The bosom-born progeny of Kasyapa were born with 

the traits of their mothers. (They were) Devas, Asuras, 

Gandharvas, Yaksas, Raksasas, serpents, Pisacas, animals, deer, 
birds and creepers. 

341. Since these were born of the daughters of Daksa who 
were human beings, hence human beings are the most excellent 
in all the Manvantaras. 

342. Human beings are the aspirants of Dharma (Virtue) 
Artha(Wealth), Kama (Love) and Moksa (Salvation). There- 
fore, Suras and Asuras are born as Adhah-srotas (downward 
flow). 


343. They are born again and again among human beings 
for the purpose of achieving their object. Thus the origin of the 
race of ascetics has been recounted. 

344-346. The meritorious story of Suras, Asuras, Gan¬ 
dharvas, Apsaras-s, Yaksas, Raksasas, Pisacas, Suparnas, ser¬ 
pents, birds, pythons, peacocks, all medicinal herbs, worms, 
germs, insects, insignificant creatures born in water, animals and 
glorious Brahmanas, is conducive to longevity and wealth. It is 
pleasing and beneficial. It is meritorious. It must be heard 
always and retained by one who is devoid of malice and jealousy. 

347. He who regularly reads this story of the race (of 
ascetics) of noble souls in the assembly of Brahmanas and physi¬ 
cians will attain children, abundant wealth and prosperity and 
the glorious goal after death. 


CHAPTER NINE 
The Race of Sages 

Siita said : 

1-2. Thus when the entire mobile and immobile crea¬ 
tions had been created and established by the noblc-souled 
Kasyapa, he the chief Prajapati, crowned (the chiefs of them) 



554 


Vayu Purana 


as 


their Lords and began to assign them their respective domains 

in due ^ C c r - Qwned Soma (the Moon) in the kingdom of the 
twice-born Brahmanas, Ksattriyas andVaisyas, creepers, cons¬ 
tellations, planets, Yajnas and penance. , t f 

4 He made Brhaspati the lord of all the descendants of 
Ahgiras. He crowned Sukra as the ruler over the realm of 

Bh THe made Visnu, the lord of Adityas; Fire-god the 
lord of Vasus; Daksa the lord of Prajapatis; and \ asava 

(Indra) the lord of Maruts. r 

6. He made Prahlada, the delighter of Diti, the king of 
Daityas : Narayana the king of Sadhyas; and the Bull- 
bannered lord (Siva) the king of Rudras. 

7. He directed Vipracitti to be the king of Danavas. He 
ordered Varuna to be the king of waters. He made Vaisravana 
(Kubera) the lord of Yaksas, Raksasas and the wealth of 
(worldly) kings. 

8. He coronated Yama, the son of Vivasvan (the Sun), in 


the kingdom of Pitrs, and the trident-bearing Girisa in the 
kingdom of all the Bhutas and PiSacas. 

9. He made Himavan the ruler of mountains; ocean, 
of the rivers; and Citraratha the ruler of Gandharvas. 

10. He crowned Uccaissravas as the king of horses, tiger as 
the king of deer and cows, and bulls the lords of quadrupeds. 

11. He made Garufla the most excellent among flying be¬ 
ings, the lord of all birds. He made Maruta the lord of scents 
and unembodied beings. 

12. He made Vayu, the most excellent among strong be¬ 
ings, the lord of sound, sky and strength. He made Sesa, 
the lord of allfanged (reptiles), and Vasuki the lord of serpents. 

13. He made Taksaka, the lord of vipers, serpents and 
reptiles. He crowned Parjanya, one of the Adityas, as the lord 
of oceans, rivers, clouds and rains. 

14-15. He crowned Kamadeva the king of all groups of 
Apsaras-s. 


1. Verses 1-20 enumerate the heads of different categories of creation. 
Here one is reminded of the Vibhutiyoga (BG.X). 







9 . 16-26 


555 


He made Samvatsara (Year) the lord of Rlus (seasons), 
months and groups of seasons, fortnights (Artavas), Vipaksas 
(the day of transition from one half of a lunar month to 
another), Muhurtas, Parvans, Kasthas, Kalas and their 
magnitudes, the movements and the transits (of the Sun), 
of mathematical calculations and Yogas (astronomical 
divisions of time or combinations of Stars). 

16. The Prajapati crowned Sudhaman, the famous son of 
Rajas, as the king in the eastern quarter. 

17. In the western quarter, he crowned the noble-souled 
Ketuman, the unerring son of Rajas, the king. 

18. He made Vaivasvata Manu the lord of human beings. 
The entire earth consisting of seven continents along with the 
towns therein, is being ruled righteously by them in their res¬ 
pective areas. 

19. They had been crowned formerly by Brahma in the 
Svayambhuva Manvantara. Only those who become Manu are 
consecrated as kings. 

20. In the Manvantaras that have passed, these kings (had 
ruled and) passed away. When the Manvantaras occur again, 
others will be crowned again. All the kings, past and future, are 
proclaimed as Lords of Manvantaras. 

21. Prthu was crowned by these excellent men at the time 
of Rajasuya. The valorous king was made so in accordance 
with the injunctions of the Vedas. 

22-23. The lord of Prajas, Kasyapa, procreated these sons, 
for the purpose of the continuity of the progeny. Thereafter, 
desirous of his own lineage, he performed a severe penance. He 
contemplated—“May sons, the founders of the lineage, be born 
to me”. 

24. As Kasyapa, the noble soul, contemplated, two power¬ 
ful sons born of Brahma’s part were born to him. 

25. They were Vatsara and Asita. Both of them were pro¬ 
pounders of Brahman. Nidhruva and Raibhya of great fame 
were born of Vatsara. 

26. The Raibhyas should be known as the (descendants) of 
Raibhya. Understand (those) of Nidhruva. Gyavana begot 
Sumcdhas of Sukanya. 



556 


Vdyu Pur an a 


27. Nidhruva’s wife 1 was the mother of Kundapayins. 
Brahniistha (Devala in Bd.P.) was born of Ekaparna and Asita. 

28. On hearing (i.e. paying heed to) the words of 
Sandilya, Devala became excessively famous. Nidhruvas, 
Sandilyas and Raibhyas all these three formed the Kas- 
yapa Gotra later 2 . 

29. Vara (Vajri i.e. Indra in Bd. P.) and other Devas are 
the progeny of Devala. These subjects function in Dvapara 
Yuga that remains (i.e. occurs) after eleven cycles of the sets 
of four Yugas have passed. 

30. Carisyanta (Nairisyanta in Bd. P.) was the son of 
Manasa and his son was Dama. Manasa who was well-known 
as Tfnabindu, was his heir and successor. 

31. In the beginning of the third Treta Yuga, he became 
the king. His daughter Idavida was unrivalled in her beauty. 
The saintly king gave her to Pulastya. 

32. The sage Visravas was born of Idavida. He had four 
wives who made the family of Pulastya flourish. 

33. Brhaspati, the preceptor of the Devas, had a famous 
daughter named Devavarnini. He (Visravas) married that 
girl. 

34. He (Visravas) married Puspotkata and Vaka, the 
daughters of Malyavan as well as Kaikasi, the daughter of 
Malin. Listen to their progeny. 

35. Devavarnini gave birth to his eldest son Vaisravana 
who had divine fate and saintly learning, (but) had the form of 
a Raksasa and the strength of an Asura. 

36-37. He had three feet, a huge body, stout head, a large 
chin 3 , eight fangs, green moustache, pike-like ears and red com¬ 
plexion. His arms were short and long (i.e. one short, one 
long). He was yellowish in colour (?) and very terrible to look 
at. He had the knowledge of the illusory world. He was enlight¬ 
ened with knowledge. 

1. Sumcdhas as per Bd. P. 

6 _ j" Bd ' 2.3.8.33 reads pakjdh for paUdt here. It means ‘Nidhruvas, 
Sandilyas, Raibhyas are three branches of Kasyapa Gotra' 

3. iMn in the text is a tautology. It should be maM-hanum as in 












9.38-48 


557 


38. On seeing such a son assuming a cosmic form, the 
father himself said—“This is Kubera (ugly-bodied one) ”. 1 

39. The word 'Ku' is used to indicate contempt. The body 
is mentioned by the word Bera. Hence he is called Kubera be¬ 
cause his body was deformed. 

40. Since he was the child of Visravas and he appeared 
like Visravas, he will be known in the world by the name 
Vaisravana. 

41. Kubera begot of Rddhi the famous (son) Nalakubara. 
Kaikasi gave birth to four children Ravana, Kumbhakarna and 
Vibhlsana (the three sons and) a daughter Surpanakha. 

42-45, (Ravana) had pike-like ears and ten necks. 2 He was 
yellowish in colour with red hair. He had four feet and twenty 
arms. He was huge-bodied and very powerful. From his very 
birth, he resembled collyrium. He had fang-like teeth. His 
neck was red. He was like Rajascna (?) and was endowed with 
good features and strength. He was intellectually truthful. He 
had a firm body. He (was surrounded) by Raksasas. Naturally 
he was terribe and ruthless. He was called Ravana because he 
roared. 

That king was HiranyakaSipu in his previous birth. That 
Raksasa king ruled for thirteen cycles of four Yugas. 

46-48. His span of life as reckoned by Brahmanas, experts 
in calculation, extended to five crores and sixtyone lakhs of 
years. For sixty lakhs of years 3 , this Ravana made Devas 
and Sages terribly sleepless (by means of his atrocities). In 
the twenty-fourth Tretayuga, when his merit of penance declin¬ 
ed, he met Rama, the son of Dasaratha, (in battle) and was 
slain along with his followers. 


1. Etymology of‘Kubera*, the god of wealth. 

2. The Purana-writer entertained fantastic ideas about Ravana. Jaina 
Raraayanas give a sober and a more realistic picture of Ravana, e.g. Ravana 
was one-headed but due to the reflection of his face in the nine precious 
stones of his necklace, he was (poetically) called ‘ten-headed*. 

3. Ravana’s harrasment is not thus delimited elsewhere. It should be a 
part of his span of life. Bd. P. 2.3.8.53 correctly reads Satfim caiva sahasrayi 
‘sixty thousand years’ as a part of Ravana’s total life. For, a set of the four 
Yugas=4320000 years, thirteen such sets=56160000 years. Ravaria is credited 
with this span. 





558 


Vayu Purana 


49. Mahodara, Prahasta, Mahapariisu and Khara were the 
sons of Puspotkata and Kumbhlnasl was her daughter. 

50. Trisiras, Dusana, the Raksasa Vidyujjihva and the 
daughter Asalika are remembered as the children of Vaka. 

51. These are the ten Raksasa descendants of Pulastya. 
They were cruel in their activities. All of their followers were 
terrible and unassailable even by Devas. 

52-55. All of them had secured boons. All of them were 
endowed with sons and grandsons. 

Aidavida (i.e. Kubera) whose left side was yellowish in 
colour and who was the descendant of Pulastya was the king of 
all these—all the Yaksas, all the Raksasas belonging to the 
family of Pulastya, the cruel Brahmaraksasas of the families of 
Agastya and Visvamitra, who were engaged in the study of the 
Vedas and who performed penance and holy rites. 

Then, there were the other Raksasas called Yajnamukhas. 
Hence there are three groups of Raksasas: Yatudhanas, 
Brahmadhanas and Vartas. These are Divacaras (moving about 
during the day). There are four groups of NUacaras (those 
who wander in the night) who have been remembered (by 
wise sages). 

56. Thus, there are seven classes of Raksasas (including the 
above three and the following four groups) : Panlastyas, 
Nairrtas, Agastyas and Kausikas. 

57-63. I shall describe the natural features of all these* 
(Raksasas) 1 : They had round eyes. They were yellowish in 
colour. They had huge bodies and bellies. They had eight fangs; 
pikelike ears and hairs standing upright. They had their mouths 
extending (as if) upto the ears. Some had hair like the Munja 
grass. Some had smoke-coloured upright hair. Some had stout 
heads shedding white lustre. Some were short-statured. Some 
had long arms. Some had copper-coloured faces. Some had long 
(dangling down) tongues and lips. Some had long eyebrows and 
stout noses. Some were blue-bodied with red necks and majestic 
eyes. They were terrific. They were excessively terrible-voiced 
and hideous. They went in groups. They were stout with promi- 


1. Superstitions about Raksasas 


current at the time of Va. P. 











9.64-73 


559 


nent protruding noses. Their bodies were sturdy like rocks. They 
had terrible kinsmen and generally they were cruel, indulging 
in painful activities. They used to wear (ornaments like) ear¬ 
rings, bracelets and coronets. They wore crowns and turbans. They 
had diverse garments and ornaments. They wore garlands of 
variegated flowers. They applied fragrant scents and unguents. 
Some were flesh eaters and some ate cooked food. They are reme¬ 
mbered as man-eaters. These attributes of Raksasas, common 
to many of them, have been enunciated by scholars. The full 
extent of their strength is not known because it is effected by 
Maya. 

64-65. The deer, all the fanged beasts of prey, Bhutas, 
Pisacas, serpents, bees, elephants, monkeys, Kinnaras, 
Yamakimpurusas 1 (?) and all those mentioned by me as born of 
Krodhavasa—all these were Pulaha’s sons. 

66. In that Vaivasvata Manvantara, Kratu is remembered as 
childless. He had neither a son nor a grandson. He remained 
with fully controlled splendour (semen) (i.e. He was celibate). 

67. I shall now recount the lineage of Atri 2 , the third Praja- 
pati. He had ten chaste and beautiful wives. 

68-69. Bhadrasva begot of Ghftacl the Apsaras, ten daugh¬ 
ters. They were:Bhadra, Sudra, Madra, Salada, Malada, Vela, 
Khala, these seven and Gocapala, Manarasa and Ratnakuta. 

70-71. The founder of the lineage of Atri was famous by 
the name of Prabhakara (the originator of lustre). He was 
their husband. He begot of Bhadra, the famous son Soma (the 
Moon). When the Sun, struck by Rahu, was falling down to¬ 
wards the earth from the sky, the whole world was enveloped 
in darkness and it was he (the sage Atri) who spread light every¬ 
where whereby be got the name Prabhakara. 

72. While the Sun was falling the words ‘welfare unto you’ 
were addressed to him. At these words of the Brahmana sage 
Atri (the Sun) did not fall on the earth from heaven. 

73. Atri who was the performer of great penance founded 
excellent Gotras. Among Yajnas (the one called) Atrighana (?) 
is initiated by Suras. 


1. Mayu-Kirhpurisas in Bd. P. 

2. The race of Atri is described in vv. 67-78. 





560 


Vayu Pur ana 


74-76. He begot of them ten sons, all equal to him. They had 
no names. All the ten were purified by great penance. They were 
the sages famous by the name ‘Svastyatrcyas. They were mas¬ 
ters of Vedas. Among them, two were very famous, powerful 
and expounders of Brahman the eldest was Dattalreya and 
Durvasas was his younger brother. The youngest daughter was 
Abala who expounded Brahman. In this connection, the for¬ 
mer (ancient) Pauranikas cite this verse. 

77. Those who arc conversant with Puranas say that Atri’s 
son Dattatreya is embodied Visnu. The noble-souled one is free 
from sins and tranquil in mind. 

78. Four persons born in his spiritual lineage were famous 
on the earth. They were- Syamas, Mudgalas, Balarakas and 
Gavisthiras. These are remembered as the groups of very power- 
fill men. 

79. From Kasyapa Narada, Parvata and Arundhati were 
born. O excellent ones, (listen to and) understand (thesons)of 
Arundhati. 

80. Narada gave Arundhati (in marriage) to Vasistha. 1 
Due to the curse of Daksa, the brilliant Narada (was compel¬ 
led to be) celibate. 

81. Formerly when there was a great battle between 
Devas and Asuras, called Tarakamava, the whole world was op¬ 
pressed by drought and Sakra was aggrieved along with 
Suras. The intelligent Vasistha sustained all the subjects by 
means of his penance. 

82. Making use of the medicinal herbs, fruits and roots (the 
sage) sympathetically enlivened them. 

83. (Defective Verse) O Brahmanas, Vasistha begot Sakti 
of Arundhati. Ad r syanti (wife of Sakti) bore Par^ara to Sakti on 
the seashore (?) 

84. Kali bore K r ?nadvaipayana, the holy lord, to Parasara. 
FromDvaipayana, Suka, endowed with good qualities, was born, 

at the Arani {the sacrificial twig with which fire is produced bv 
attrition). 


t , ,ineagc ofVasi?lha is described in vv. 80-90. A comparison of 

the race of sages as g.vcn in other Puranas e.g. Malsya Purina shows 

c7Z“ nt,eSm ,hCnameS ° f dKCCndantS * h -Sb7me names are 










9.85—10.1 


561 


85-86. The following six children were born of Plvar! to 
Suka: five sons, viz. Bhurisravas, Prabhu, Sambhu, Krsna and 
Gaura and a daughter Kirtimati by name. She was firm'in her 
holy rites and a Yogic mother. She was the wife of Sattvaguha 
and the mother of Brahmadatta. 

87. 1 here were eight groups (spiritual lineage) of Parasaras 
of noble souls. They were Svetas, Kfsnas, Gauras, Syamas, 
Dhumras, Samfilikas, Darakas, the imbibers of hot ’ (drinks?/ 
(Osmapas) and Nilas. 

88. Henceforth, understand the progeny of Indrapratima. 
Kusiti, who was bom of Kapinjall-GhrtacI to Vasistha is called 
Indrapratima. 

89. Vasu was his son born of Pflhu’s daughter. Upamanyu 
was his son whose (descendants) were these Upamanyus. 

90. Kundins who were famous as descendants of Mitra- 
Varuna have one spiritual lineage. Others are well-known as 
Vasisthas. These are the eleven Gotras of Vasisthas. 

91. Thus these eight renowned mental sons of Brahma have 
been recounted. They were blessed brothers and their spiritual 
lineages have been established. 

92. They sustain these three worlds consisting of groups of 
Dcvas and sages. Their sons and grandsons are hundreds and 
thousands. By them the entire Earth is pervaded as with the rays 
of the Sun. 


CHAPTER TEN 
The Procedure of Sraddha 1 

1. After hearing this narrative of Su ta, the knower of Atman, 
the Brahmanas, subsequently asked him as follows : 

1. Sraddha is a form of ancestor worship. It is based on the belief in 
after-death survival of the deceased ancestors and their residence in a parti¬ 
cular region called Pitr-loka. It is an important topic and forms an integral 
part of Hindu Dharmasastra. This belief is pre-Vcdic as it dates back 
to the Indo-Iranian period {vide S.B.E. IV, p. 262). Ancestor-worship 
was regarded essential for the continuation of one’s race and prosperity to 




Vayu Purana 


562 

SamSapayana said : 

2. How was BhavanI who was formerly Satl, born for the 
second time ? She was DaksayanI at first. How did she become 

Uma? , J , 

3 _ The king of mountains begot her of Mena, the daughter 

of Pitrs. Who were these Pitrs whose mental daughter was 
Mena ? 

4-5. (Who are the Pitrs) whose grandson was Mainaka and 
whose grand-daughters wei'e Uma, Ekaparna, Ekapatala and 
Gaiiga, the most excellent one among rivers as well as the eldest 
of them all ? Even before this, all this has been already desired 
to be pointed out (by you). Please listen to all my requests. 

6. Are there many Pitrs P * 1 And then where do they stay ? 
Welfare unto you. I wish to hear the great procedure of Sraddha. 

7. Whose sons are they (Pitrs) remembered to be ? How are 
they the Pitrs ? How were the Pitrs born and whose sons were 
they ? Of what nature are they ? 

8. Are there other Pitrs who are deities (i.e. worthy of wor¬ 
ship) unto the Devas in heaven ? Thus I wish to hear the 
excellent creation of Pitrs and how the Sraddha performed by us 
(as per prescribed injunctions) propitiates Pitrs. 

9. What is regarded (in the Smrtis) as the reason of their 
being not visible ? What types of Pitrs stay in heaven and what 
types in hell ? 

10-11. What Sraddhas are to be offered (to Pitrs) ? 
How do these Sraddhas reach Pitrs—the Sraddhas that are 
offered uttering the names of father, father’s father and great¬ 
grandfather against the three ricc-balls (Pintfas) ? How are they 
(Pitrs), if stationed in hell, competent to grant benefits ? 

12. Who are these called by the name' Pitrs ? Whom shall 
we worship again ? We have heard that even Devas in 
heaven worship Pitrs. 


one s family. The Grhya Sutras and old Smrtis like Manu and Yajnavalkya 
prescribe the procedure of Sraddha which is generally followed in Puranas 
such as A.P. 163.2-42, G.P.I-210, K.P. II. 22.20-62, N.P. Ch. 28., Bd.P. 
2.3-Chs. 9-20. 

I. Verses 6-13 record all questions, doubts etc. about the performance 
of Sraddha. 





10.13-23 


563 


13. O extremely learned one, we wish to hear this in de¬ 
tail. It behoves you to explain the significance of this clearly. 

14. On hearing the words of the sages, Suta, the seer of 
reality, said in accordance with the questions and the 
desire in the minds of the sages. 

Suta said : 

15. I shall describe to you (in detail) what I have heard 
(regaxding Sraddha), in accordance with my intellectual ability. 
In every Manvantara, Pitrs are born as the sons of Devas.' 

16. In the past and the future Manvantaras, they are 
respectively the eldest and the youngest. I shall precisely recount 
the Pitrs who have gone in the past Manvantaras along with 
Devas and who exist at present, 

. 17. A Sraddha of the human beings is what is offered with 

faith. Brahma created Devas but they did not worship him. 
They forsook him and desirous of fruits for themselves created 
themselves* (?) 

18. They were cursed by Brahma—“O deluded ones! 
You will all become devoid of sense.” They did not know 
anything. Then the whole world became deluded. 

19. All of them bowed to god Brahma and implored him. 
In order to bless the worlds, the lord spoke to them again. 

20. “Perform expiatory rites for the transgression which 
has been committed. Ask your sons and therefrom you will 
attain knowledge.” 

21. Desirous of knowing (the procedure of) expiatory 
rites, Devas controlled themselves duly and asked their own 
sons mutually. 

22. Those sons who were conversant with real Dharma 
and possessed self-control, explained to them the various modes 
of expiatory rites—verbal, mental and physical. 

23. The heaven-dwellers who regained their senses became 
delighted and spoke to their sons—“You are our fathers (Pitrs), 
since we are enlightened by you. What boon should be granted— 
virtue, knowledge or love?”. 


*Bd. P. 2.3.9.16 reads ayajan ‘They worshipped themselves (instead of 
god Brahma) ’— a better reading than asjjan of our text. 




564 


Vayu Pur ana 


24. Then Brahma spoke to them—“You are the speakers of 
truth. Hence what is spoken by you shall be so and not 
otherwise. 

25. This is what is uttered by you—your own sons have 
been mentioned by you as your Pitrs (fathers;. They will be 
your Pitrs. Let this boon be given to them.” 

26. On account of the words of Brahma, Paramesthin, the 
sons (Pitrs) attained the status of fathers (of Devas) and 
Devas, the real fathers, the status of sons. 

27. Hence it is declared (in Dharma-Sastra) that the sons 
(of Devas) are Pitrs and the status of Pitr-hood is proclai¬ 
med about them. 

After declaring in this manner that the fathers are the sons 
and the sons as Pitrs (fathers), god Brahma addressed to them 
again for the development of their own selves. 

28. “If anyone will perform any holy rite without worship¬ 
ping Pitrs in a Sraddha, Raksasas and Danavas will obtain 
the fruit (good results) thereof. 

29. The Pitrs propitiated and developed by means of 
Sraddhas (develop) the imperishable Soma. Propitiated and 
developed by you all, they will always increase. 

30. Soma (the Moon-god) strengthened and developed 
by means of Sraddhas, will develop the people and the entire 
world, along with mountains and forests surrounded ( = inhabi¬ 
ted) by mobile and immobile beings. 

31. Those men, who, desirous of nourishment, perform 
Sraddhas are always granted development and progeny by 
Pitrs. 

32-33. Those (Pitrs) to whom they (the performers of 
Sraddha) offer three balls of rice ( Pinzas ) mentioning their 
names and Gotraupto great-grandfather, they (Pitrs) who are 
present (everywhere), strengthen and develop their progeny 
by that offering of Sraddha.” 

Such a behest has been declared formerly by the supreme 
god ( Paramesfhi ) Brahma. It is by their grace that Dana{ charit¬ 
able gift), Adhyayana (Vedic Study) and Tapas (Penance) 
fructify. J 





10.34-43 


565 

34. There is no doubt in this that Pitrs grant you perfect 
knowledge. 

In this manner Pitrs are Dcvas and Devas are Pitrs Deva 
and Pitrs are reciprocally Pitrs. 1 


35. After hearing these words of Suta possessing self- 
knowledge, the sages asked him again subsequently : 

The Sages said : 

36. How many are the groups of these Pitrs ? At what 
time did those groups (come into existence)—Pitrs who were 
the excellent ancestors of Devas and who developed and 
strengthened Soma? 

SRla said : 

37. I shall recount to you the most excellent creation of 
Pitrs. This is the same question which had been formerly 
put to his father Brhaspati by Sarhyu. 

38. As Brhaspati, the great expertin all fields of knowledge, 
was seated, his son Sarhyu endowed with humility, put this 
question. 

39. “Who are these Pitrs? What are their names? How 
were they born? How did they attain Pitr-hood? 

40. What is the reason for which Pitrs are worshipped 
at the outset in every Yajna? All the holy rites of noble souls 
begin with the performance of Sraddhas. 

41. To whom all these Sraddhas are to be offered? What is 
the great benefit when they are offered? In which of the holy 
centres and sacred rivers does the Sraddha performance yield 
ever-lasting benefit? 

42. What are those holy centres in Which excellent 
Brahmanas (ought to) perform Sraddha to obtain all (desired) 
benefits? What is the (proper) time for Sraddha? What is the 
procedure to be followed? 

43. O holy sire, I wish that what has been enquired by 
me be explained in detail in the proper sequence.” 

1. Verses 20-34 explain the paradox why Pitrs who were the sons of 
Devas became the fathers of their own fathers ? Manu III. 201, however, 
differs and states that Pitrs sprang from Sages and from Pitrs were born 
Devas (gods) and human beings. 




566 


Vaya Purana 


44. On being asked thus clearly and specifically, the 
highly intelligent Brhaspati, the most excellent of those who 
understand (the implications of) questions, answered all the 
questions in the proper order. 

Brhaspati said : 

45. O dear one! I shall explain the solemn excellent 
question which you ask me with due propriety and proper 
humility. 

46-47. At that time, there was neither the heaven nor the 
firmament, neither the earth nor the stars nor the quarters, 
neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the day, nor the night. O 
dear, the whole Universe was in complete darkness. Brahma 
alone performed an austere penance difficult for others to 
perform. 

48. Samyu again spoke to his father who was the most 
excellent among the knowers of Brahman, who always performed 
holy ablutions in the form of rites and who was the most ex¬ 
cellent of all knowers of perfect knowledge. 

49. “What sort of a penance did Prajapati, the lord of all 
living beings perform?” 

Thus addressed, Brhaspati of excessive refulgence, spoke 
to him. 

50. Of all types of penance, Yukti i.e. Yoga penance is 
the most excellent. Meditating on it, the lord then created all 
the worlds by means of that Yoga. 

51. The past and future (items of) knowledge, the entire 
worlds and Vedas were created after practising Yoga by Brahma, 
by means of his Yogic vision. 

52. The worlds, the heaven are named * Santanikas * where 
the shining deities of the Devas well-known as ‘Vairajas* stay. 

53. Even at the outset then, the lord Brahma, endowed 
with Yoga and penance, had created Devas after practising 
the eternal Yoga. 

54. They are well known as Adidevas (the primordial Devas). 
They have great splendour and energy. They are the bestowers 
of all desires. They are worthy of being worshipped by Devas, 
Danavas and human beings. 






10.55-65 


567 


55. There are seven groups of those Devas. They are 
worshipped by aJl the three worlds. Three of them are Arnurtis 
(devoid of forms) and four of them have splendid forms. 

56. The three sets which have conceptual forms (Bkava 
murlis) are stationed above. The four Suksmamurlis (having 
subtle forms) are stationed beneath them. 

57. Thereafter, the (common) Devas are stationed and 
then the earth. This is the situation of the series of worlds. 
They (the groups of Devas) are stationed in this world The 
clouds take their origin from them, rain-showers are due to 
them and, thanks to rain-showers, the worlds (and people) are 
created again. 


58. Since they develop and strengthen the moon and the 
food-grains and make them flourish by means of Yogic power 

they called them the Pitrs of the world. They (Pit r s) are the 

most excellent ones in the world. 

59. They are as speedy as mind. Svadhd constitutes 
their diet. They have every requisite they desire. They are 
devoid of greed, delusion and fear. They are certainly devoid 
of sorrow. 


60. After giving up Yoga, they have attained the worlds 
beautiful and pleasant to look at. They become divine, merit¬ 
orious and sinless noble souls. 

61. At the end of a thousand Yugas, they become expoun¬ 
ders of Brahman. Regaining the Yogic power once again., they 
attain salvation in a bodiless state. 

62. They forsake both the manifestand unmanifest (bodies) 
by means of their great Yogic power and perish (vanish) like 
a meteor or like the fading flash of lightning in the sky. 

63. By abandoning all the bodies (and other adjuncts) by 
means of their great Yogic power, they attain the state of 
namelessness like rivers merging into the ocean. 

64. Engaged everyday in holy rites and the worship of 
preceptors, Pitrs develop their Yogic power and satisfyall (make 
them flourish). 

65. Propitiated in Sraddha, Pitrs nourish Soma (the 
Moon) making use of their Yogic power whereby the three 
worlds sustain their lives. 



568 


Vayu Purina 


66. Hcncc Sraddhas must always be offered to Yogins 1 with 
(special efforts). Indeed, the mainstay of Pilfs is Yoga and 
from (thanks to) Yoga the Moon functions. 

67. One may feed thousands of Brahmanas or as many as 
do come, but listen that one knower of Yogas, if delighted, 
deserves all (propitiating a Yogin is as fruitful as feeding 
thousands of Brahmanas). 

68. What is taken in by a thousand invited (ordinary 
Brahmanas), or by a hundred Sndtakas (Brahmanas initiated 
into householder’s life) or by one master of Yoga saves 
one from great fear. 

69. One Yogin excels a thousand householders, a hundred 
Vdnaprasthas (Forest-hermits) and a thousand Brahmacarins 
(celibate students). 

70. Prajapati has ordained : “(One may be) an atheist, an 
evil-doer, a person of mixed caste or a thief, (but) he cannot 
have redemption 2 ( Tdranam ) from anything else, except (by 
offering) a charitable gift unto those who have Yogic power. 

71. His ancestors are delighted like the husbandmen by a 
good timely rain, even if his son or grandson feeds a (Yogic) 
meditator. 

72. If meditating mendicants are not available, one should 
feed two Brahmacarins. When they too are not available, one 
should feed a householder not much engrossed in worldly 
affairs.” 

73. It is the injunction of Brahma that a meditating Yogin 
is greater than one . who (performs penance) for a hundred 
years standing on one leg and taking in nothing but air. 

74-76. The Siddhas roam over the Earth in the guise of 
Brahmanas. Hence one should approach the in-coming guest 
with palms joined in reverence. He should honour him with the 
vessel containing materials of worship. He shall offer him place of 
residence and food. The masters of Yoga assume diverse forms 

I. Verses 66-64 emphasize the importance of feeding a Yogin at the time 
of Sraddha. This is specifically re-iterated in a later chapter. It shows the 
deep regard for Yogins in ancient times. 

Cf. VP. 15.23-24, Varaha P. 14.18-19. 

2. Karanam in the text is irrelevant and obscure. Hence Tarariam, the 
reading in Bd. P. ibid V. 71 is accepted. 






10.77—11.4 


569 


and always roam over the ocean-girt earth. They are (no less 

than) Devas. They protect the people righteously. Hence every 
man should offer charitable gifts to a Brahmana guest. I shah 
recount those charitable gifts and the fruits thereof 

hor S 7 e 7 ' 79 '-fi HOU l inS j h '7° gi " Sisfarb " Kr tblM 'housan* of 
horse-sacrifices, hundreds of RSjasuya sacrifices and rhousands 

of Pundanka sacrifices. The first of those seven groups of Pirrs 

o unmeasured brilliance, has been recounted. This group 

exists always with the conception of Time* (?) Henceforth 

I shall narrate again all the groups of Pitrs, their progeny, 

to situation and their Bhavrnl (conception) in the pr„p£ 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 1 2 3 

The Birth of Skanda : 

Rules Prescribed for Sraddha 

Suta said: 

1. In heaven, there are seven excellent groups of 
highly intelligent Pitrs. Four of them have forms and three are 
formless (Amurta) A Understand as I shall recount their creative 
activity in the world. 

2-4. (I shall describe) those who are proclaimed (in 
Smrtis) as their daughters and daughters’ sons. There are three 
excellent groups of those who assume Dharmic bodies and 
forms. I shall briefly recount their names and creative activity. 
The disembodied groups of Pitrs, the sons of Prajapati, abide in 
the shining worlds named Virajas. O Brahmanas, they belong 
to Virajas. Hence they are famous as excellent Vairajas. I have 
thus mentioned the first group of Vairajas. 


1. ‘Sanctifying the worlds’—Bd. P. V. 76. 

2. This chapter is textually similar to Bd. P. 9.3,10. Reference are given 
to verses in that chapter. 

3. For similar seven divisions of Pitrs vide Pd. P. V.9.2-3, Bd. P. V-l, 




570 


Vdyu Purana 


5. Their fair-complexioned mental daughter Mena is the 
wife of the great mountain Himavan. From her the son Mainaka 
was born. 

6. The mountain Mainaka, the holder of all medicinal 
herbs, the mine of all gems, the holy leader of mountains, was 
born of her. Kraunca was his son. 

7. The king of mountains procreated three daughters of 
Mena, viz. Aparna, Ekaparna and the third Ekapatala. 

8. Two of them had support (They had their permanent 
abodes). But Aparna performed penance without an abode. 
Ekaparna had a Nyagrodha tree as her abode and Ekapatala had 
Pa tala (trumpet flower) tree as her abode. For a hundred 
thousand years, they performed such a penance as was difficult 
to be performed even by Devas and Danavas. 

9. A single leaf was the diet of Ekaparna and a single 
Patala flower (trumpet flower) was the diet of Ekapatala. 

10. Both of them took their food once, (when) a thousand 
years had been completed. One of the daughters (viz. Aparna) 
remained without taking food. Their mother spoke to her 
thus. 

11-12. Out of affection, the distressed mother forbade her 
with the words “U” <c Ma ” (O daughter ! do not). Since she 
was addressed thus by her mother, the blessed gentle lady per¬ 
forming the difficult task (penance) became famous as “Umd”. 
The auspicious lady got the name derived from her action. 1 

13. The world of (supported by ?) these three ladies will 
survive for ever. It will be proud of (drptam) their penance, 
while the earth lasts. 


14. All the three, endowed with Yogic power, sustained 
their bodies by means of their penance. All those blessed gentle 
ladies possessed permanent youth. 

15. All of them were expounders of Brahman. All of 
them were celibate. Uma was the greatest (eldest), the most 
excellent (girl) of the fairest complexion. 


J. Kalidasa refers to this in Kumarasambhava 1.26 
umeti mdtra tapaso nisiddhd / 
pakdd umdkhydm sumukhi jagdma // 






11.16-26 


571 


16 Endowed with great Yogic power, she attained Maha- 

deva (as her husband). Her adopted* son was Usanas, the son 
of Bhrgu. 

17. Ekaparna was the wife of Asita. She was chaste and 
firm m her holy vows. She was given to that intelligent master 
of Yoga by Himavan. She gave birth to the mental son Devala 
who was engrossed in meditation on Brahman. 

18. Ekapatala, the third of these daughters, wooed Jaigi- 
savya, the son of Satasilaka, as her husband. 

19 His sons Sankha and Likhita,* are remembered as not 

born of the womb. Thus (these) are the blessed and auspicious 
daughters of Himavan. ^ 

20. Rudrani was the best among them. She excelled others 
by her good attributes. Between Uma and Sankara the 
mutual love (was ideal). 

21. On realising that they were in close embrace, the slayer 
<5f Vrtra (i.e. Indra) became apprehensive. (Fire-god) was 
sent near them by Indra who was afraid of the birth of a child 
from them engaged in sexual intercourse. 

22. (He said to Agni) “O Fire-god, create an impediment in 
their sexual intercourse. You are present everywhere. So there 
cannot be any blame (on you in your going there)”. 

23. When he was told thus, Fire-god acted accordingly. 
Forsaking (i.e. aside from) the body of Uma, the semen virile 
was discharged on the ground (by Siva). 

24. O Samsapayana, then Fire-god was cursed by the 
infuriated goddess. With words choked with anger, she spoke 
to Fire-god thus: 

25. “O Fire, since you have caused an impediment in 
sexual intercourse even before I had been satisfied, therefore you 
have committed an action which you should nothave committed, 
you evil-minded one ! 

26. Since the lustrous semen virile of Rudra has not been 
retained (in my womb), you should hold the foetus yourself by 
way of punishment (for this act)”. 


1. The reading danla-kanvoiana is obscure. Bd. P. 2.3.10.18 reads dattakaSco- 
Sanas etc. is clear and is supported by Puraijas. Hence its acceptance here. 

2. Smrti works are attributed to them, though the antiquity of those 
works is doubtful. 




572 


Vayu Parana 


27. Fire-god, who, due to the wrathful curse of Rud- 
rani, had to carry the foetus within himself, retained it for a 
number of years, O Brahmanas. 

28. Approaching (the river) Ganga, he said—“O excellent 
river, may this be heard. Excessive distress is caused to me by 
the retention of the foetus. 

29. O river, for my relief and welfare, please carry this 
foetus. Due to my gracious favour, your trouble will be less”. 

30. Saying “So be it”, the highly delighted great river held 
the foetus (although) with a mind burning (as there was burn¬ 
ing sensation within her). 

31. Distressed by the great pain though she was, she retain¬ 
ed the foetus for a long time. 

32. The foetus was dropped into an auspicious crevasse of 
Himavan by her. There is an auspicious forest named Saravana 
where diverse trees were in bloom. It was there that she depo¬ 
sited the foetus that was blazing like fire. 

33. It was there that the son of Rudra, Agni and Ganga 
was born. He had rosy lustre. He was valorous and brilliant 
like hundreds of suns. 

34. When that blessed son (Kumara) of Jahnavl (Ganga) 
was born, the sky was covered (crowded) with aerial cars, as if 
by birds. 

35. Celestial drums produced sweet sound in the sky. 
Siddhas and Caranas moving about in the sky discharged sho¬ 
wers of flowers. 

36. The chief Gandharvas, Yaksas, Vidyadharas and all 
the Siddhas and Kinnaras sang (laudatory songs) everywhere. 

37. Thousands of great serpents and excellent birds 
approached with reverence the son of Sankara born through 
Agni. Daityas, Danavas and Raksasas were struck (down) 
by him by means of his prowess. 

38. Even at the very outset, the son of Agni was observed 
by the wives of the Seven Sages (excepting Arundhati) who had 
come there for their ablutions. 

39. The lordly ^on of Rudra, resembling the rising sun, was 
surrounded by those ladies who were very affectionate (towards 
him), as though they were his.real mothers. 









11.40-50 


573 


40. Desirous of seeing all those ladies simultaneously, out 
of affection for them, the extremely lustrous son of Jahnavi 
created six faces and he was very glorious. 1 

41. He was glorious and he resembled the midday sun 
He had eyes like the petals of lotus. When he was born, the 
lustre of all the worlds was bedimmed. 

42. The groups of Danavas who could not brook 
Devas, had a purge ( Skandita ) when that great (deity) was born 
and (hence) that valorous (deity) became known as ‘Skanda.’ 2 

43. Because the ancient (deity), the slayer of Asuras, had 
been nourished (breast-fed and) nurtured by the Krttikas, he 
became famous as Karttikeya. 

44. While that enemy of Daityas was yawning, his (we¬ 
apon) Sakti (spear) called Aparajita (unvanquished) came out 
of his mouth, blazing with flames of fire. 

45-46. For the purpose of Skanda’s play, two birds named 
Prabhadrakas, a peacock and a cock, were created out of 
Garutfa by Visnu, the powerful god. A banner was given by 
Vayu (Wind-god). A great Vina (lute) of loud sound was 
presented by Sarasvati. A goat was given by the self-born 
(deity) (i.e. Brahma) and a ram was given by Sambhu. 

47-48. O Brahmanas, when the (mountain) Kraunca was 
felled down in his sport out of Maya (his illusive power), when 
the rising leader of Asuras, Taraka was also struck down, the 
lordly son of Agni, the valorous enemy of Daityas was crowned 
as commander-in-chief (of their army) by the blessed Devas 
including Indra and Upendra. 

49-50, The commander-in-chief of the army of Devas 
is also called Naranayaka (the leader of men), the harasser of 
the enemies of Devas, Skanda and the lord and master of 
all the worlds, by Pramathas, the different kinds of Devas 


1. Mbh. AnuS&sana chs. 85 & 86 give a different version of Skanda’i 
birth and the cause of his six faces. 

2. According to Mbh. Anu 86.14, the child came to be known as Skanda 
due to the casting off of the semen of £iva by Agni and Ganga (skannatvdt 
skanda tam prdptah) 






574 Vayu Pnrana 

and the groups of Bhutas, by the various mothers and the 
groups of Vinayakas. 

[ 1 Some lines are missing from the text.] 

51. (While) Slipping from heaven and falling down, 
she saw the aerial chariots as small as a mote and in them 
she saw the fallen Pitrs. 

52. They were very subtle and unforsakcn 2 (?) (a-parityak- 
tan). They were like sparks of fire imposed on sparks of fire. 
Falling down topsy-turvy, she appealed to them, “Save, ye 

53. She was consoled by them—“Do not be afraid 55 . When 
thus urged, she became steady. Then she propitiated those 
Pitrs with pitiable words. 

54. Those Pitre spoke to the girl who fell down from her 
glory due to her transgression : “O lady of sparkling smiles, 
you are fallen from your prosperity due to your own fault. 
(Hence) you fall. 

55. Deities (god) attain (experience) the fruits of their 
actions by means of the same bodies with which they perform 
those actions. 

56. In the case of Devas, the actions fructify immediately. 
In the case of human beings, they fructify after death. Hence 
you will attain the status of the child of Amavasu after death 
and will attain the fruit 55 . 

57. On being told thus (by her Pitrs), she again propitiated 
Pitrs. After meditating (for a while), they took pity on her 
and became pacified and pleased. 


1. The missing lines are traceable to Bd. P. 2.3.10. w. 53-b to 58. They 
are translated here to supply the lacuna: 53b-54. “It is heard that the 
Pitrs named Barbisads are somapas (imbibers of Soma). The mental daughter 
of the Pitrs was the river named Acchoda. 

55. Those Pitrs had never before been seen by her. She was born as 
their mental daughter. Hence she did not know her Pitrs. 

56-57. Transgressing those real Pitrs, she chose Amavasu as her father. 
He was traversing the sky accompanied by the Apsaras named Adrika. He 
was seated man aerial chariot. in the firmament. But due to her trans¬ 
gression (of her real father), she was unable to move about in the sky. 

58. After seeking another father (viz. Amavasu) she slipped from her 
Yogic power and fell down.” 

After this comes verse 51 in our text. 


n , 2 * apanvjaktdn ‘not clearly visible or manifest’ is a better reading 
Bd. P. V. 59, as it describes their subtlety. 












11 . 58 - 6 ? 


575 


58-59. On foreseeing what is surely destined to happen, 
Devas, the Soma-imbibing Pitrs spoke to the girl, “You will 
become the daughter of the noble-souled king Amavasu who is 
born on the earth as a human being and thereafter attain these 
worlds of your own. 

60. In the twenty-eighth Dvapara Yuga you will be born 
of the womb of a fish; you will be the daughter of this very 
same king Amavasu and (the celestial damsel) Adrika. 

61. You will give birth to the successor of the sage Para- 
Sara. That Brahmanical sage will divide the single Veda into 
four parts. 

62-63. You alone will give birth to two sons who will 
heighten the glory of Mahabhisa (?) Santanu—the sons 
Vicitravlrya, the knower of Dharma, and Citrangada, the king 
endowed with the attributes of brilliance and strength. After 
giving birth to these sons, you will regain your own worlds. 

64. Due to your transgression towards the Pitrs, you will 
attain that despicable birth. You will become the daughter of 
the very same king and Adrika. 

65. After becoming (his) daughter, you will regain these 
worlds.” 

Thus addressed, she was born as Satyavati, the daughter of 
a fisherman. 

66. In the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, she was born 
of the fish Adrika, She was born as the daughter of Amavasu 
in Adrika the fish. 1 

67. Indeed, she was the daughter of that king (being bom 
of) the semen virile of the king. 

The worlds named “Virajas” are in the firmament. There 
those groups (of Pitrs) shine. 

68. There the Pitrs are the Agnisvattas of shining lustre. 
With a desire for (attaining) excellent fruits, groups of 
Danavas, Yaksas, Raksasas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Bhutas, ser¬ 
pents and Pisacas worship them. 

69. Thus, these sons of Pulaha, the Prajapati, have been 
recounted. These groups are said to be three. They are 
auspicious and assumers of Dharma-form. 

1. In the missing lines in the text supplemented from Bd. P. (w. 55- 
58) and w. 51-66, the Purana writers have used the curse-motif to explain 
the unusual matrimonial life of Satyavati. 




576 


Vayu Purana 


70. Their mental daughter is (will be) famous by the name 
of Pivarl. She was (will be) reputed to be a YoginI, a Yogic 
wife and a Yogic mother. 

71. In the (future) twenty-eighth Dvaparayuga (a sage) 
of great penance named Suka will be born in the family of 
Parasara. 

72. O excellent Brahmanas, he will be a glorious and 
great Yogin. Yoga (will spread) from him. He will be born of 
Vyasa, from the AranI (a piece of wood used for the production 
of fire by attrition) like the smokeless fire. 

73. In the (mental) daughter of the Pitrs, he will beget 
these well-known Yogic preceptors, viz. Krsna, Gaura, Prabhu, 
Sambhu and Bhurisruta. 

74. He will beget a daughter Klrtimati who will be a 
YoginI and a Yogic mother. She will become the queen of 
Anuha and the mother of Brahmadatta. 

75-76. After begetting these children and attaining great 
Yogic power, he will become a great Yogin and ascetic. He will 
attain that goal from which there is no return. Like the rays of 
the sun, he will attain the status of no rebirth. The great sage 
will become omnipresent and liberated. 

77. These three are the disembodied Pitrs who assume 
Dharmic forms. There are four others. (Listen and) understand. 

78. O excellent Brahmanas! The Pitrs whom I shall 
describe assume forms of great lustre. They are Kavyas*, sons of 
Agni, Kavi (the wise one ?) born of Svadha. 

79. These are the Pitrs shining i n the worlds of Devas 
with their lustre amidst the luminaries. They are richly 
endowed with all desirable objects and the -Brahmanas revere 
them. 

80. Their mental daughter was famous in heaven by 


*The reading in our text is 
utpannas te svadhdyds tu. kanyd 
hyagneb kave(i j Utah, 

Here the nom. pi. Kvaya (k) cannot be construed cogently as the Pitrs 
arc men (xnascuhne). Bd. P. 2-3.10.85 reads Kdvyi* -sons of Kavi* (a wLc 
person or Sukra?) and appears plausible. 






11.81-88 


577 


the name of Gau. Kumara bestowed an army on her 1 . She 
became the beloved queen of Sukra. 

81. There were thirty-one Pit r s who heightened the glory 
of Bhrgus. Their worlds were known as Maricigarbhcs (having rays 
within) which envelop the heavens. 

82. Those sons of Angiras, nourished along with 
Sadhyas, are remembered as the Pitrs Upahutas. They shine in 
heaven. Looking up to them, the Pitr Groups of Ksatriyas, 
those who are desirous of benefits, revere them. 

83. Their mental daughter is well known by the name of 
Yaioda. She was the wife of Visvamahan and the daughter-in- 
law of Visvasarmin. 

84. 2 The gentle lady was the mother of the saintly king 
Khatvanga of noble soul, in whose Yajna Gatha (a laudatory 
verse) was sung formerly by great sages. 

85. After seeing the birth of fire (in the Yajna) of the 
noble-souled Sanqlilya, the deathless Devas conquering 
heaven with purity of mind observe the Yajamana (under 
whose auspices the Yajna is performed) Dilipa, the noble soul 
of truthful rites. 

86. Ajyapaswere the Pitrs of Kardama, the Prajapati, 
who was born of Pulaha. They were born of him again. 

87. Moving about in the sky, they are stationed in these 
worlds that go about as they please. Groups of Vaisyas who are 
desirous of benefits, revere these in Sraddha. 

88. Their mental daughter is famous by the name of 
Viraja. The chaste lady was the wife of Nahusa and the mother 
of Yayati. 

1. This is the translation of *Datlasend Kumareria .* The absurdity of the 
text is obvious. 3d. P. ibid V. 87 reads Dattd Sanatkumareria ‘She was given 
by Sanatkumara*. The reading in Bd. P. deserves adoption here as the 
next line reads “She became the beloved. ..of Sukra”. 

2. The combined verses can be constructed as follows: 

That saintly lady was the mother of the noble-souled royal sage 
Khatvanga. On seeing the birth of the noble-souled Sandilya from (sacri¬ 
ficial) lire at his sacrifice, the great sages sang the (following) laudatory 
verse {Gatha). : 

“Those immortals who see the Yajamana (the sponsor of the sacrifice) 
Diljpa with full concentration (become) the conquerors of heaven--so much 
is noble-souled Dilipa truthful in the observance of his vows”. 




578 


Vdyu Purana 


89. Sukalas are the Pitrs of Vasistha, the Prajapati. 
They are the sons of Hiranyagarbha. 

90. There are the worlds named Manasas where these are 
stationed. Their mental daughter is Narmada, the most 
excellent of rivers. 

91. Flowing in the southern region, she sanctifies 
living beings. She was tiie wife of Purukutsa and the mother 
of Trasadasyu. 

92. Manu became the lord of Manvantara by adopting 
these (Pitrs). In the beginning of Manvantara, he initiates 
all types of Sraddhas. 

93. O excellent Brahmanas, (I have recounted), all the 
Pitrs in their proper order. Hence Sraddha is to be* offered 
with faith in accordance with one’s Dharma. 

94. A Sraddha offered in silver vessels or those of silver 
alloy, after proferring Svadha, propitiates Pitrs. 

95. By the propitiation of Soma, Agni and Vaivasvata 
(Manu) and by the performance of Homo, in the sacrificial fire 
during the northern transit (of the sun), one shall attain the 
fruit of an Asvamcdha (a Horse Sacrifice). 

96. Pitrs delight him who propitiates Pitrs with devo¬ 
tion. There is no doubt in this that Pitrs bestow nourish¬ 
ment or progeny. 

97. The rites of pitrs are always far superior to the 
rites of deities. It is ordained that the propitiation of Pitrs 
must be given priority over that of deities. 

98. The subtle movement (or goal) of Yoga or the 
satiation of Pitrs is not visible through the physical eye. 

Only by achieving special Siddhi by means of penance are they 
to be seen. J 


99. Thus Pitrs, their worlds, their 
grandsons, their Yajamanas and those who 
been recounted. 


daughters, their 
revere them have 


100. (Out of the seven classes of Pitrs) four hav< 
and three are formless. Devas honour them ar 
oraddhas to them devoutly and assiduously. 1 


forms 

offer 


, I \, The d r™ ab0U ‘ thcSeven classes of Pitrs, their mental daughters 
and other particulars may be tabulated as below : S 







11.101-108 


579 


101-104. All the Devas including Indra concentrate their 
minds on them. They join their palms in reverence and de¬ 
votedly worship them. Visvedevas, Sikatas, Prsnijas, Srrigins 
Krsnas, Svetas and Ajas worship them duly. Desirous of 
benefits, the subjects Vatarasanas, DivakJrtyas, Lekhas 
Maruts, Brahma and other heaven-dwellers, Atri, Bhr«n/ 
Angiras and all other sages, Yaksas, Nagas, Suparnas, Kinnaras 
and Raksasas always worshipped Pitrs. 

105. These noble-souled (Pitrs), if duly honoured and 
worshipped in Sraddha, grant all desires hundred-fold and 
thousand-fold. 

106. These grandfathers (Pitrs) bestow Yogic Power (and 
prosperity) and liberation (from Samsara) after one has aban¬ 
doned the three worlds of normal existence involving old age 
and death. 

107. Pitamahas, the deities of subtle bodies, grant the 
means of salvation, AiSvarya (prosperity), complete detachment 
and infiniteness. 

108. Practised Yoga is AiSvarya', and Ativarya is the excellent 
wealth. Without Yoga and Aisvarya liberation (from Sarhsara) 
is impossible (to be achieved). 


Class of Pitts 

1. Vairajas 

2. Barhisads 


3. Agnisvattas 

4. Kavyas (sons of Agni 
and Svadha) 

5. Upahutas (sons of 
Angiras) 

6. Ajyapas (sons of 
Pulaha) 

7. Sukala (sons of 
Vasisfha 

Out of these groups (5), 


worship to Ksattriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. 
differs in the assignment of Varoas to Pitrs. 


Names of their daughters and other particulars 
Mena, wife of Himavan. mother of Uma, 
Siva’s consort. 

Acchoda, adopted king Amavasu as father; 
cursed by Pitrs; became Satyavati, mother 
of Vyasa and queen of Santanu. 

Pivari, married to Suka, Vyasa’s son. 
Yogotpatti alias Ekasrhga married Sukra. 

Yascda, queen mother of king Khatvahga. 

Viraja, married to king Nahusa, mother of 
Yajati. 

Narmada (the river), wife of Purukutsa and 
mother of Trasad-dasyu. 

(6) and (7) are specially recommended for 


Manu III. 193-198 slightly 




580 


Vayu Parana 


109. It (Moksa) is as impossible as the movement of a 
wingless bird in the sky. il4bA/a-Dharma is the greatest of all 
Dharmas and eternal. 

110. Pitamahas (manes) grant thousands of aerial 
chariots attended by groups of Apsaras-s and richly equipped 
with all desirable things. 

111. Intellect, nourishment, power of memory, brain, 
kingdom and health can be attained only through the grace 
of the noble-souled Pitrs. 

112. Pitamahas grant crores of gems, pearls, lapis 
lazuli , garments and thousands of horses and elephants. 

113. Pitamahas always bestow on men chariots fitted 
with swans and peacocks, studded with pearls and lapis lazuli 
and decorated with tinkling bells and provided with perpetual 
flowers and fruits. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


The Procedure of Sraddha ( Continued) 


Brhaspati said : 

1. It is said (in Dharma-Sastra) that the vessels of (meant 
for) Pitrs should be made of gold, silver or copper. A silver or 

silver-coated vessel is said to be befitting Pitrs. 1 

2. Showing or gifting away of silver is proclaimed to be 

a suitable Dana for Pitrs and it is conducive to the 

attainment of infinite and everlasting heaven. Good sons enable 
Pitrs to cross (hell) by means of this Dana (religious 

3. O dear one, it was in silver vessel that Svadha was 

formerly milked by Pitrs seeking to get Svadha. O dear 

one, if that is gifted, it yields everlasting benefit. 


1. Cf. V, 5 ouDh.S 79.14-15. Yajnavalkya I. 236 specially recommends 
silver vessels. Cf also Mt. P. 17.19-22, Bd.P. 2.3.11-1. 







12.4-10 


581 

** r Th ?, n f rby P resence > sight or gifting away of the 
hide of a black antelope is conducive to the destruction of 
Raksasas. It increases Brahmanical splendour and enables Pitnj 
to cross (hell). * 

5. Vessels made of gold, silver or copper, gingelly seeds 
Kutapa (i.e. the eighth muhurta of the day) or Kusa grass’ 
sesamum seeds, garments and Tridanfi Toga (i. e . the Yoga 
of mind, speech and body)—all these are holy, objects. 

6. In the holy rite of Sraddha, the following ritual 
prescribed by god Brahma is the most excellent and eternal. 
It is conducive to increase in fame, longevity, progeny,' 
intellect and lineage. 

7. In the south-east direction, especially at the intermedi¬ 
ate point (corner) between them, (should be the place—altar 
inBd. P.—for Sraddha). It should be well-situated and square 
shaped with sides equal to an Aratni (the distance between the 
tip of the fist and the elbow). 

8. I shall mention the proper spot for the holy rites of 
Pitrs in accordance with the injunctions of the scriptures. It 
is conducive to the attainment of wealth, health and longevity. 
It enhances strength and brightness of complexion. 

9. At the place (intended for Sraddha), three pits (should 
be dug) and three sticks of Khadira wood should be placed. They 
(the sticks) should be an Aratni (distance between the tip of the 
fist and the elbow) in length and should be embellished with 
silver (bands). (The pits) should be a Vitasti (the span or the 
distance between thumb and little finger when they are extend¬ 
ed on either side) in depth* and the four sides should be four 
Angulas (fingers) each. 

10. The sticks should not be hollow and they must be plac¬ 
ed on the ground with their faces pointing to the south-east. 
(The performer of Sraddha) should be pure and should 
wash them with holy waters or water rendered holy by the use 
of the ring of Darbha grass (called Pauitra ) worn by the per¬ 
former of Sraddha. 


*Kajyd in the text but gartdh from Bd. P. 2.3.11.10 is better. 




582 


Vayti Purdria 


11. The purification (Sodhana) may be carried out with 
goat’s milk or cow’s milk and water. By means of this Tarpana ( holy 
water-offering) the satisfaction (of Pitrs) will be permanent. 

12. He will be prosperous here and hereafter. He will be 
(blessed with the fruits of) all holy rites. If a person always 
takes bath three times a day and worships Pitrs with Mantras 
as per prescribed procedure, he gets the fruit of (performance) 
of a horse-sacrifice {Asvamedha '). 

13. On the New Moon day, the Sraddha materials should 
be placed in the pit in the ground four Angulas square. These 
rituals are called Trih-sapla-yajna (Three-times seven Yajiia). 
All the three worlds are sustained by them. 

14. He will attain nourishment, prosperity, longevity and 
progeny. Various types of fortune will resort to him and he 
will gradually attain liberation (from Samsara). 

15. It removes sins. It sanctifies. It has the same fruit as 
a horse-sacrifice. I shall mention that Mantra composed by 
Brahma. It is the Amrla (immortal or nectarine) and it is 
honoured and worshipped by Brahmanas and grants (the fruit 
of) Asvamedha. 

16. The Mantra: “Obeisance to all the deities, to Pitrs, 
to the great Yogins, to Svadha. Obeisance for ever to Svaha.”. 1 

17. At the beginning and the conclusion of the Sraddha, 
this Mantra shall always be repeated three times. The devotee 
shall repeat tins with purity of mind, when he offers the balls 
of rice also. Pitrs arrive quickly and Raksasas flee. 

18. ' Regularly repeated at the time of Sraddha by expoun¬ 
ders of Brahman, this Mantra enables Pitrs to cross (hell) 
in the three worlds. 


19 A person desirous of kingdom, should always repeat 
this Mantra with alertness. It increases virility, purity, wealth, 
sattvic qualities, prosperity, longevity and strength. 

20. I shall mention the Mantra Saptarcis that is auspicious 
and that bestows all desires. By repeating it regularly, Pitrs 
are propitiated. 6 1 1 


Aaii, ThJZr M “' ta : "f a “ m H‘ CmtSmni, 

m; 114-116., GP. (&£?; “ *“' PKd in Stai * P - VIL >- 








12.21-32 


583 

21. The Saptarcis 1 Mantra: “I always make obeisance to 
those who are engaged in meditation by means of the yogic 

vision, to the embodied and unembodied Pitrs of brilliant 
splendour. 

22. I bow to the Seven Sages and Pitrs who fulHl all 
desires and who are the progenitors of Indra and other (Dcvas) 
and of Bhrgu and Marlca (Kasyapa). 

23-24. After bowing to all the Pitrs who bestow welfare on 
Manu and other lords of Suras and on the sun and the moon, I 
bow down with palms joined in reverence to Pitamahas, the 
progenitors of the constellations, the mobile (and the immobile 
beings) and of the heaven and the earth. 

25. With palms joined in reverence I bow down to those 
who bestow fearlessness, to those who are revered by all the 
worlds and to the progenitors of the divine sages. 

26. With palms joined in reverence, I bow down to Praja- 
pati, Kasyapa, Soma, Varuna and to the lords of all Yoga. 

27. Obeisance to the seven groups of Pitrs in the seven 
worlds. Obeisance to the self-born Brahma of Yogic vision.” 

28. Thus the Mantra honoured by the groups of Brahmar- 
?is along with the Seven Sages has been mentioned. It is highly 
holy and sanctified. It is conducive to prosperity and destruc¬ 
tive of Raksasas. 

29. The man who (performs Sraddha) according to these 
injunctions attains three boons. Pitrs grant food, longevity 
and childern (to the people) on the earth. 

30. He who is endowed with great devotion, who has faith, 
who has controlled his senses and who always repeals this Sap¬ 
tarcis Mantra with purity, becomes the sole Emperor on the 
earth consisting of seven continents and oceans. 

31. If any thing is cooked in the house, whether a dainty 
or ordinary eatable, it should never be eaten in that house with¬ 
out first offering it (to deities). 

32. Henceforth, I shall describe in the proper order, the 
vessels intended for oblations to Pitrs. Even as I mention listen 


1. These seven verses 21-27 are called 'Saptarcis Mantra Gf. Bd. P. 2.3.11 
23-29. As against Hemadri our text calls this 'saptarcis' Mantra. 





Vayu Parana 

to the respective benefits (in using oblations) in the different 
vessels. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

The Procedure of Sraddha Performance 
( Continued) 

Brhaspati said : 

1. It is cited (in scriptures that) a leaf of the Palasa tree 
(Buteafrondosa ) is conducive to Brahmanic splendour. 1 That 
kingdom is conceived (as the fruit, if leaves of) the ASvattha 
tree (are used) : The lordship of all living beings is mentioned 
(in using the leaves of) Plaksa (citron-leaved Indian fig 
tree) [i.e. the materials of oblations must be placed in cups 
made of these leaves or the wood as in the case of some of the 
following] . 

2. Those who are desirous of prosperity, wisdom, intellect 
and power of memory (shall use the leaves of) the banyan 
tree.* The vessel of the leaves of Kasmari (a large tree called 
Gambhari also) is conducive to fame and destructive of 
Raksasas. 

3. That which is offered in Madhuka (the tree Bassia 
lalifolia ) is considered excellent and conducive to good fortune. 
One who performs Sraddha in the vessel of Phalgu (a kind of 
fig tree) attains all desires. 

4. The performer attains supreme lustre, particularly all¬ 
round brilliance (if the sun-plant is used—Bd. P.). By using a 
Bilva vessel, riches, intellect and longevity are always attained. 

5. If Sraddiha is performed in Bamboo vessels, Paijanya 
(cloud or the lord of rain) always showers in his fields, parks, 
lakes and all crops. 

6. It is said (in Sastras that) those who make Sraddha 


1. Verses 1-6 enumerate the different trees, the leaves (i.e. cups of the 
leaves) of which (if used for giving oblations to Pitrs) confer different 
benefits. The Sraddha Sutra of Katyayana recommends the use of (cups 
of leaves of) sacrificial trees for Arghya. 










13.7-17 


585 


offerings even for once in these excellent vessels, attain the 
fruit of all Yajnas. 

7. He who always offers fragrant garlands to Pitrs 

becomes endowed with riches and glory, and shines brilliantly 
like the sun. 7 

8 . He who offers incense, fragrant gum-resin and other 
things to Purs, along with honey and ghee obtains the 
fruit of a horse-sacrifice. 

9. One who offers shining fragrant Dhupa (incense) to 
Pitrs begets children of his wife (beneficial to him) here and 
heieafter. Hence he shall always offer it to Pitrs 

10 -11. He who always offers lamp to Pit r s assiduously, 
obtains unequalled auspicious power of vision in the world. 
He becomes brilliant on the earth. He shines in Heaven 
with splendour, fame, refulgence and strength. He rejoices in 
the aerial chariot surrounded by Apsaras-s. 

12. He should offer scents, flowers, incense and ghee. After 
propitiating at the outset, Pitrs with fruits, roots and obeisance 
with purity of mind and body, the devotee should later worship 
Brahmanas with food and wealth. 

13. Always at the time of Sraddha, Pitamahas (manes) 
assume aerial forms and on seeing Brahmanas, they enter 
them. Hence I am saying this. 1 

14-15. Excellent Brahmanas should be honoured with 
garments, foodstuffs, charitable gifts, food and beverages, (gifts 
of) cows, horses and villages. If Brahmanas are honoured, 
Pitrs become delighted. Hence, one should honour excellent 
Brahmanas duly. 

16. In the holy rite of Sraddha, Brahmanas should 
perform diligently the ritualistic scraping, digging and sprink¬ 
ling of water (with Darbha) (Ullekhana and Proksana) by means 
of the left and the right hands. 

17. A learned man should keep ready for libation, 
Darbhas, balls of rice, foodstuffs, different kinds of flowers, 
scents, charitable gifts and ornaments. 


1. Hence Brahmanas are to be worshipped, fed and gifted at the time 
of Sraddha. The belief that Pitrs assume gascousform and enter the bodies 
of the invited Brahmins is found in AuSanasa Smfti V. 4-5. Gf. Manu III. 189. 




586 


Vayu Purana 


18 After propitiating the persons present duly, the 
Brahmanas shall perform the VaUvadcva rite and then perform 
the rites with Abhyanga (oil bath) with Darbha (leaves of the 
Kusa grass) in accordance with the injunctions. 

19. The excellent food-offering to Pitis should be made with 
reverse wearing of the sacred thread. After pronouncing (the 
names of Pitrs) the tliread must be offered to all of them 
in lieu of garments. 

20. The rites of Khanjlana, Posana and Ullekhana are to be 
performed only once in the case of Devas, and thrice in the 
case of Pitrs. 

21. Wearing a single Pavitra (a ringlike loop of Kusa 
grass worn round a finger) in the hand and reciting the 
Cailamantra , the balls of rice are touched once for each of the 
Pitrs. Then the benefit of showing (is attained) ( ?). 

22. Always the balls of rice must be offered on the ground 
along with ghee and gingelly seeds. The devotee performing 
Pitr-Sraddha, kneels on the ground with the left knee touching 
it. 

23. He invokes the fathers, grandfathers and great¬ 
grandfathers and all ancestry of yore and properly sprinkles 
all round the balls of rice, by means of the holy water (Pitrtirtha) 
carefully from the right to the left (in anticlockwise manner) . 

24. Some men desire a separate Sraddha for maternal 
grandfathers by means of food, water, flowers and foodstuffs 
of various kinds. 

25. He should offer three Pinzas in the proper order (press¬ 
ing them) with the thumb. They are conducive to the en¬ 
hancement of nourishment. He should offer the Pindas (by 
means of both hands placed) between the knees. 

26. (In offering the Pinzas) the left hand should be placed 
over the right, repeating the Mantra 1 c Namo vah pitarah 
Suksmaih 1 2 (?) always carefully in this manner. 

1. The Text dharme mantre ca paryayaht is obscure and the sentence remains 
incomplete. Bd. P. 2.3.11.62 reads dhdrdrtham mantram uccaran ‘should repeat 
the mantra (as follows for the sake of pouring water in the form of a thin 
current)*. 

2. A reads Susmai and not Suksmaih. 

The Mantra in A is recorded in Bloomfield’s Vedic Concordance , p. 538 but 
no mantra with ( Sukfmaih is found. It is obviously a scribal error. 








13.27-37 


587 


„J 7 ' ( ? Cf ! C ,' iVe , Ve,Se) Caref " 11 >’ re P' a * in S '■>« Mantra 
Namo m '- 1 P liara b saumydh” (Obeisance to ye , O eentle 
Pitrs) he should offer the first Pinqla with both the hands and 
place it in the southern quarter. 

28*. (Defective Verse) With both the hands, he draws the 
outline (.) of a mortar using the water from the water pot. He 
must be careful in the practice of piety. 

29. He should offer a fresh thread of silk or jute or a cotton 
thread. Woven silk such as coloured cloth and Kauseya should 
be avoided when offering thread to Pitrs. 

30. In the sacrifice, the thread taken even from a freshly 
woven cloth shall be avoided. These do not please Pitrs. 
Those who give cannot flourish (?). 


31. The collyrium obtained from the Trikuta mountain, 
they say, is always excellent. So also is the oil extracted from 
black gingclly seeds. 


32. Sandal, Agaru (fragrant aloe wood), Tamala, Usira 
(fragrant root of the plant Andropogon Muricatus ), lotus, fragrant 
incense, gum resin and (white) Turuska—all these are excellent 
articles (for use in Sraddha). 

33. White flowers are the most excellent. So also the red 
and blue lotuses. All other flowers can be used if they are frag¬ 
rant. 


34. The flowers China Rose, Bhantfira, Upakama and Kur- 
andaka should, always be avoided in the Sraddha rite. 

35. Odourless flowers and flowers of obnoxious odour should 
be avoided at that time by one who seeks prosperity. 

36. The Brahmanas invited on that occasion should inva¬ 
riably face the north while sitting. The performer of the Sraddha 
should duly face the south. 

37. He should face them and offer the Darbhas and the 


*Bd. P. 23.11-63-64 states that the first Pirtda is to be moved to the south 
with the mantra : namo so$dya and the other two Piridas with the mantra 
namo saumyafi . 

A comparison with the text in the Bd. P. 2.3-11.6 ff. shows that though 
the text in Va. P. and Bd. P. is common, the lines are differently dis¬ 
tributed in the verses of these texts. 




Vayu Purana 


588 

Pi$4as. He should worship his own grandfathers by means of 

this rite. .j 

38-39. The following objects are said to be essential (in a 

Sraddha): Green Pinjalis (leaves of Kusa grass) as smooth and 
soft as flowers, about a Ratni in size, softened and straightened 
by the holy water (Pititlrtha), blue near the root and not defiled 
by pebbles etc. (should be used). So also Syamaka and Nivara 
kinds of rice. 

40. This (story) has been narrated by the excellent Praja- 
pati. 1 His hairs fell down through the path of the sky on the 
earth. 

41. Hence the KaSa grasses are holy. They are always 
honoured in the Sraddha rite. The Pinzas are to be offered on 
them by one who wishes prosperity, 

42. Those who do so become free from sins and defects.. 
Their children become nourished with splendour, fame and 
refulgence. 

43. The devotee should sit facing the south and spread the 
Darbha grass once for the Pinzas. The tips of the Darbhas should 
be pointing to the south-east. The procedure shall be mentioned 
as follows : 

44. A learned man should always perform Sraddha 
with concentration of mind. He shall neither be dejected nor 
angry. His mind should not be distracted or diverted elsewhere. 

45. (The following Mantra is to be repeated.) “I annihilate 
everything that has impurity in it. All Asuras and Danavas 
have been killed by me. All Raksasas, Yaksas, groups of 
Pisacas and all Yatudhanas (demons) have been killed 
by me.” 2 

46. All Asuras avoid him who offers food to Piters by 
repeating this Mantra. Raksasas avoid the place where this 
Mantra is recited. 


1. There issome lacuna. Bd. P. 2.3.11.79-80 state that formerly Praja- 
pati assumed the form of a horse and his hair fell on the ground and became 
Kusa grass. 

2. Quoted in Srdddha Tattva, p. 235. Verses of the same import and 
textual similarity are quoted by Apararka but he adds the Vedic mantra 
Apahatdff (Vaj. Samhita II. 29) here. 











13.47-58 


589 


47. ABrahmana should always perform Sraddha accord¬ 
ing to this procedure. The manes ( Pitamahas ) will grant whatever 
is desired in the mind (by him). 

48. If Sraddha is always performed assiduously, Pit** 
become delighted in mind and Raksasas become dejected. 

49. Sudras should always avoid the following in Srad- 
dha: Ksiracdiu 1 (trees yielding white juice?), trees called Balvaja 
(Eluesine Indica, a species of coarse grass not liked by cattle) and 
other kinds of grasses such as Varana, Lava, Lava-varsa. 

50. They shall avoid applying collyrium, oil and unguents 
as well as wearing garlands. Their rites should be performed 
with Kasas which grow again (when cut). All the benefits 
accrue (to them thereby). 

51. Kas'a (grass) and the regrown Kas'a (grass) are (like) 
peacocks tail and its regrowth 2 . (So) Pitrs are Devas and 
Devas are Pitrs. 

52-53. This is the Mantra intended for flowers, incense, 
scents etc. Pulling (the vessel of materials of worship) towards 
the south assiduously for the sake of Homa, he (performer of 
Sraddha) should repeat the mantra “Svadha unto Soma, 
thePitrman (having Pitrs). Obeisance to Angiras”. He should 
perform the Homa of non-heavenly or the worldly type for the 
purpose of the fructification of the holy rite. 

54-55. Homa is to be performed after placing Samit 
(sacrificial twig) within. The devotee should keep the mind 
perfectly pure and keep the holy fire scrupulously pure, repeat¬ 
ing the Mantra, “Svadha unto Agni, the bearer of Kavya . Obeis¬ 
ance to Angiras. Svadha and obeisance unto Yama and Angiras”. 

56-58. These are the Mantras in order intended for 
Homas. Homas shall be performed everyday from the 
southern direction to Agni and to Soma in the middle 3 . In 
between these two Homas, a Homa should be performed to 
Vivasvan (the Sun or his son Yama ?). Upacaras (ways of render- 


1. avi-kfiram ‘milk of a variety of sheep called Avi* in Bd. P. 3 ibidW . 87 

2. barhatia ‘a peacock’ is rather inapplicable. Hence barhi (n) ‘fire; 
husa grass’ may be the probable reading. 

3. uttaratafr ‘to the north’ in Bd. P. ibid V. 95. 




590 


Vdyu Purdna 


ing homage),repetition ofSvadha mantra, Ullckhana (i itualistic 
scrubbing), Homas, Japas, obeisance, particularly Profoana 
(sprinkling), applying collyrium, oil bath and offering 
pintfas—(all these must be performed). 

59. If they are performed with Mantras, they have the same 
benefit as a horse-sacrifice. All holy rites mentioned above shall 
be assiduously performed. 

60. In the blazing fire plenty of ghee must be offered. 
Particularly Homa must be performed in a smokeless fire 
with curly leaping flames, for the fructification of the holy rite. 

61. We have heard that if a Yajamdna performs Homa in a 
weakly burning smoking fire, he becomes blind and issueless. 

62. If there is deficiency of fuel, if the flames are scattered 
all round and dried up or if the flames are defiled by smoke, the 
fire is not conducive to good results. 

63. If the fire emits bad odour, if the flames are bluish or 
particularly black, or if the fire makes the ground crack, know 
that there is failure (in the holy rite). 

64. The resplendent fire with a single globular flame, yel¬ 
lowish (golden) in colour, produced by the ghee, is conducive 
to the fructification of the rite. The flame shall be smooth and 
curling clockwise. 

65. (That fire) is perpetually honoured and worshipped by 
both men and women. Thereby, the everlasting pitrs become 
honoured and worshipped. They give everlasting benefits. 

66. Mud-pots, vessels made of the leaves or wood of the 
Udumbara ( ficus glomerata ) tree, its fruits and Samits , all these 
are considered very holy in Sraddha. They are very pure. 

67-69. The different benefits of the various kinds of vessels 
that I have mentioned as regards the Sraddha rite, O excellent 
Brahmanas, are also true in regard to the holy rites of nativity. 
With regard to the Samits also, the same should be known. The 
devotee keeps the mind pure and says ‘I am performing the rite 
in fire\ Then, after being permitted by excellent Brahmanas, 
saying Do 55 , he should perform the Homa in the fire, accompa¬ 
nied by his wife and sons. 

70. The following trees are equally sacrifice-worthy: Palasa 
(Bd. P.), Plaksa, Nyagrodha, Asvattha, Vikankata, Udumbara, 
Bilva and Candana. 








13.71—14.5 


591 


71. The following trees are particularly recommended for 
the purpose of Samits (sacrificial twigs) : Sarala, Devadaru, 
Sala and Khadira. 

72. Rural thorny trees are also sacrifice-worthy. Some of 
them are honoured for the purpose of Samits in accordance with 
the words of Pitrs. 

73. Even as I recount, listen to the fruit of the holy rite to 
those who perform Homa with the Samits of the Kalkaleya 
(pomegranate) tree. 

74-75. The Aloe wood is to be desired by all. It has the 
same benefit as that of a horse-sacrifice. The following trees 
should be avoided-Slesmataka, Naktamala, Kapittha, Salmali, 
Nlpa, Vibhltaka and the creepers also. Similarly the trees on 
which birds reside must be avoided. Those trees which are consi¬ 
dered unworthy of sacrifice should also be avoided. 

76. In the course of the sacrificial rite, the word Svadha is 
used at the end of the Mantra pertaining to Pitrs and Svaha 
is used in the case of Devas. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

The Procedure Regarding Performance of Sraddha: 

The Five Mahayajhas 

Silt a said : 

1. Brhaspati declared (in reply) that as per (injunctions 
of) the Atharva Veda, Devas are Pitrs but there are also other 
Pitrs. 

2. One should especially worship Pitrs before Devas. 
(People) in the world do worship Pitrs before Devas. 

3. Daksa had a daughter famous in the world by the name 
of Visva. O knower of Dharma, she was given duly and 
righteously to Dharma. It is well-known that her sons are the 
noble-souled Visvedevas. 

4-5. They were very famous throughout the three worlds. 
They were revered by all the people in the world. On the 



592 


Vayu Purana 


beautiful peak of Himavan resorted to by Devas and 
Gandharvas, all those noble souls performed a very severe 
penance, performed by all the Apsaras-s and resorted to by all 
the Devas and Gandharvas. 

6. The delighted Pitrs spoke to them with a pure (frank) 
m ; n d—“We are delighted. Request for a boon. What desire 
(of yours) shall we fulfil?” 

7. When this was mentioned by Pitrs, Brahma, the 
creator of the three worlds, the lord of the subjects, spoke to 
theVisvas (Visvedevas). 

Brahma said: 

8. “(Even) Mahadeva of great brilliance, has been 
scorched by them by means of the great penance. I am well- 
delighted by that penance. What desire of yours shall I ful¬ 
fil?” 

9. Thus urged by Brahma, the creator of the world, all of 
them simultaneously spoke to Brahma, the creator of the 
worlds. 

10. “May we have a share in Sraddha. This is the 
boon desired by us”. Then Brahma spoke to them who were 
worshipped in the heaven. 

11-13. “What you desire will take place”. Pitrs said “So 
be it”, and continued, “There is no doubt about it. What¬ 
ever is performed here shall be for you too along with us. In 
the Sraddha intended by men for us, you will get the priority 
in being seated. We are telling you the truth. They will 
worship you at the outset by means of garlands, scents and 
food offerings. 

14. Everything will be offered to you first and then to us. 
Our ritualistic farewell will occur first and the Devatas (i.e. 
you) will be ritualistically dismissed later. 

15. The protection of Sraddha and (according) of 
hospitality—these are the two ceremonial acts to be performed 
in the rite oi Sraddha offered to Pitrs and Devatas and 
Bhutas. If it is done duly according to injunctions, everything 
shall be all right.” 

16. After granting them the boon thus, lord Brahma, the 









14.17-26 


593 


benefactor of all living beings, went away happily along with the 
groups of Pitrs. 

17. Five great Yajnas have been prescribed in the Vedas. 
A Man shall always perform these five Mahayajnas. 

18. (Listen to) and understand where the performers (of 
those five Yajnas) go and where their abode is. They attain 
the abode of Brahman that is fearless, devoid of egotism, 
free from sorrow, strainless and free from pain. It yields all 
desires. 

19. These five Yajnas are to be performed by a Sudra also, 
but without reciting the Mantras. He who eats (enjoys) other¬ 
wise (without performing them), eats debts everyday. 

20. He who cooks for himself is a sinful soul and he eats 
debts. Hence a sensible man shall perform the five great 
Yajnas. 

21’. Some wish that Naivedya (food-offering) should be 
assiduously offered even when Pitrs are alive. Oblation 
should be offered along with libation of water. The watcr-pot 
also shall be offered. 

22. The oblation should be made well announced. It 
shall be scattered by throwing it far above. Small oblations 
shall at first be offered on the horns of cows (?) 

23. The Pintfa cannot be offered as Naivedya to Pitrs. They 
should be duly fed by offering palatable foods and edibles. I 
am emphatically mentioning this as the procedure laid down in 
the Vedas. 

24-26. These groups of Pitrs are noble souls and lords 
of Devas. Some preceptors wish that Brahmanas should be 
worshipped first everyday, and then the Pin4a should be 
offered. (But) Brhaspati* says to those who are experts in 
matters of Dharma (practice of rituals), that he (the per¬ 
former of Sraddha) should offer the Pintfa first and then feed 

♦These verses give two different views about the precedence of Brahmanas 
to offering of Piri^as. 

tad hi dharmdrthakufaldn ityuvdca Bfpaspalihf 

should better be emended as.. .dharmarthakuSalo netyuaaca .as in Bd. P. 

2.3.12.25 and would mean : “Brhaspati who is an expert in affairs of Dharma 
(ritualistic practice) has said that it (the precedence of Brahmana- 
worship to offering of Pi^a) should not be so’*. 




594 


Vayu Parana 


Brahmanas later. (For) Pitrs arc born of Yoga (Yogic 
Power) and are (themselves) Yogic souls and great ones. 
Pitrs strengthen and develop Soma (the Moon). 

27. Hence he (the performer ofSraddha), remaining pure 
and devotedly attached to Yogins, should offer the Pindas to 
Yogins. This shall be the Havi offering directly to Pitrs. 

28. If a single Yogin be in the scat of priority among 
thousands of Brahmanas, he will enable the Yajamana and the 
Brahmanas partaking of the food, cross (the ocean of worldly 
existence) like a boat in water. 

29. Where the wicked are accepted and honoured and 
where the good are disrespected, a terrible punishment meted 
out by the Devas befalls them immediately. 

30. If a pious (Brahmana) who has come as a guest is left 
out and a foolish one is fed, the householder forgoes his prior 
holy rites and perishes (i.e. despite his merit in a previous birth 
he is faced with ruin). 

31. He who seeks enjoyment (of worldly pleasures) should 
assiduously consign the Pinda to the sacred fire. 1 Pie who seeks 
progeny shall give the middle Pinda to his wife but after per¬ 
forming all the intervening rites and mantras . 

32. Pie who wishes for excellent refulgence always offers it 
(the Pinda) to cows. So also he who wishes for intellect, 
honour, fame and renown, offers it always to cows. 

33. He who seeks long life gives it to crows. One desirous 
of comeliness offers (oblations) to the fowl. 

34. Thus the benefit of offering Pindas has been recounted. 
Or the devotee shall stand facing the south and pacify the sky 
(scatter the oblations in the sky) 2 . The abode of Pitrs is 
the sky and their quarter is the south. 

35. (Defective) Further, Brahmanas mention one 
procedure of lifting up the Pinda. After being permitted by 
Brahmanas who say %et it be taken up dry” 


1. Verses 31-34 prescribe the disposal of Pindas and the benefits accru¬ 
ing from it. Cf. Mbh. Anuiasana 1 25.38-40, BM.P. 220.150-52 for similar 
views. 

2. ‘or scatter them in the water’ (in Bd. P.) for ‘Slhitau' hereof be 

accepted. 








14.36-42 


595 


36. The upper layer or the tip of flowers, fruits, edibles and 
cooked food shall be taken up and offered as oblation in the 
sacred fire. 

37. After consigning the edibles, cooked food, beverage 
and the excellent fruits to the fire, he should face the south 
and offer the Pindas. 

38. He shall propitiate (them) with oily edibles, sweet 
scents and juices. With concentration and purity of mind, he 
should serve them standing (there) with palms joined in 
reverence. A man devoted to them and full of faith, obtains 
the desires. 

39. The grandfathers (manes) bestow the (following) 
qualities on him : the state of not being mean and low (non¬ 
pettiness), gratefulness, chivalry, hospitality and the (ability 
for performance of) sacrifices and religious gifts. 

40. Henceforth I shall recount the Saumya* (belonging 
to Soma) procedure after the Brahmanas have taken food, in 
order. Listen to it, even as I recount it. 

41-42. The devotee attached to Pitrs should sprinkle 
the ground and scrub it at the outset. Then he should scatter 
(auspicious materials) in accordance with the injunctions. He 
shall request the excellent Brahmanas to chant the Svadha 
mantra and offer them plenty of Daksinas. He shall get the 
permission from them (as to what should be done with) the 
remnants of the food. With palms joined in reverence, he shall 
follow them after honouring them duly. He should then bid 
farewell. 


*As there is no ‘Lunar procedure* herein, this should be taken as 
vocative case, * Saumya * ‘O gentle one*, instead of the accusative as in the 
text. 





596 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
Sacred Places 1 for Sraddha 


Vayu Purdna 


Bfhaspati said : 

1. Pitfs worshipped even once become delighted. 
They are imperishable Yogic souls. They are noble souls of 
great power and free from sins and evils. 

2-3. O gentle ones, I shall recount the holy lakes, rivers, 
sacred spots, places of pilgrimage, mountains and hermitages 
for performing Sraddha, at which Pitrs bless him (the 
performer) with fulfilment of desire for profuse riches (in this 
world), attainment of heaven after death and liberation from 
Samsara in due course. 

4-5. The mountain Amarakantaka 2 is the holiest and the 
most excellent in the three worlds. It is a sacred mountain 
resorted to by Siddhas and Caranas. Formerly, holy lord 
Angiras performed very severe penance (difficult for others to 
do) on it, for thousands of years, say, millions and crores of 
years. 

6. As long as the earth holds (lasts), the god of death, 


1. Due to their association with the founders of faith or with some 
great persons or events certain places have been regarded holy by all 
peoples of the world, e.g. Mecca by Muslims, Jerusalem by Christians, 
Bodha Gaya by Buddhists. These holy places have a deep psychological 
effect on religious-minded persons. Sraddha is to be performed in one’s 
own house. But as K.P. II. 22.17 states, holy places arc the common 
property of all and not of a particular person. A list of such holy places 
is recommended in different Puranas like KP. II. 20-32-36, Mt, P. Ch. 22, 
Bd. P. 2.3.13. There is some divergence in the lists but there is a great deal 
of overlapping as a number of holy places like Prayaga, Varanasi, Gaya, 
Puskara are deeply respected by all Hindus. 

Tkk age-old tradition of Tirtha-yatra claimed the fruit of certain sacri¬ 
fices. The case of ablution in a sacred pond or river and its claim of equiva- 
ence with the performance of a sacrifice adversely affected the popularity 
of and tendency to perform sacrifices—an onerous job. 

« i, 2 ’m A r°c ntai u in BiIaspur D « tr >ct of Madhya Pradesh. Vifnu Dh.S. 85- 

° f Sr5ddha ° n ^ ™u°tain. Our text 
Afit'ras 2 ' 3 ' 3 PVe ' CredU ° f ils sanct!t V » the penance of 





15.7-16 


597 


Asuras and Raksasas have no access there, nor is there any fear 
or misfortune there. 

7. That excellent mountain shines with brilliance and 
renown, just as Samvartaka fire (Fire at the time of the annihila¬ 
tion of the world) blazes on the peak of mount Malyavan. 

8-9. The Kusa (growing there) is famous as soft, sweet¬ 
smelling, pleasing to the eyes and golden-coloured. They are 
well known as ‘calm and quiet’ Darbhas. Drinking the waters* 
of Narmada to the south of it, the holy lord Angiras of 
great brilliance formerly performed Agnihotra after spreading 
those excellent Kusas round the altar and he saw the steps 
leading to the heaven. 

10. I shall recount the benefit attained by that intelligent 
man who offers Pindas even once, on the Darbhas on the 
mountain Amarakantaka. 

11. That Sraddha becomes everlasting, increasing the 
pleasure of Pitps. On reaching that holy centre, they vanish 
for ever. 

12. Even today the holy “ Jvalarasa ” is seen there every¬ 
where. The river thereof (called Visalya—a branch of 
Narmada) makes all living beings free from darts and thorns 
(sins and miseries). 

13-14. To the south-east of that excellent mountain, there 
is a tank with a whirlpool in that part contiguous to the 
land of Kalinga. O excellent sages, there . is that great holy 
centre Siddhaksetra which increases the delight of Pitrs. It 
is the greatest on the earth, approved of by both Devas and 
Daityas. Usanashas sung a verse on it. 

15. “Blessed are those men in the world who being devoted 
to Pitrs propitiate them in Sraddha after reaching Amara¬ 
kantaka. 

16. There is no doubt in this that they will attain Siddhi 
with very little penance. If they are worshipped even once on 
Amarakantaka, Pitrs attain Heaven”. 


* piban-daksipa-narmadam • but here ‘drinking’ is strange. Bd. P. 2.3.13.8. 
reads ‘pari-dakfina-nannadam 'to the south of Narmada’. 




598 


Vayu Pur ana 


17. On the beautiful Mahendra 1 mountain, there is a holy 
centre resorted to by Sakra. If one mounts it, Pitrs are 
delighted. The Sraddha (if performed) there, yields great 
fruit. 

18. If one practises Yoga on its lower peak named Bilva 
(Vailata in Bd.P.), one gets divine vision. I-Ie becomes 
invisible to all living beings and roams over the earth like a 
Deva. 

19. If a man takes his holy ablution in the Saptagodavara 2 
and in the penance grove Gokarna 3 , he attains the benefit of a 
horse-sacrifice. 

20. A man becomes sanctified after taking his holy dip in 
Dhutapapa. 4 Rudra, Mahesvara, the lord of Devas, performed 
a penance there. 

21. In the holy place Gokarna, a proof has been cited by 
Brahmanas for (convincing?) the atheists. If a non-Brahmana 
recites the Gayatrl mantra, he perishes. 

22. Those who regularly ascend the peak, the abode of 
Devas and sages, resorted to by Siddhas and Caranas, 
attain heaven. 

23-24. Since the place is embellished with divine sandal¬ 
wood and other trees and since the water mixed with the 
flavour of sandal flows continuously, a river named Tamraparni 5 
originates from them. It slowly winds its way to the southern 


1. Although this name is applied to the mountain range from Orissa to 
Madura, here it is specially applied to the range of hills separating 
Mahanadi from Ganjam District. It is regarded as the resort of 
Parasurama. 

o c —De 119, HD. IV. 177 

2. Sapta-Godavara: (1) The seven “mouths” (branches) of the 
Godavari falling into the sea; (2) Solangipur, sixteen miles from Pitfiapur 
m the Godavari District. 

rp . 3 ‘ Gokarpa: A place sacred to Siva on the western coast in Kumja 
Tehsil of North Kanara District. 

. .... —HD IV. 753 

4. A tributary of Gaiiga near Varanasi. 

5 ' Ti * e " Ver nscs “ the Agastya-Kuta—mountain Malay. Flowing 

ptlrl-Shery ^ ^ ^ the Gulf of Manar famous *r 


—De 203, HD. IV. 812 






15.25-35 


599 


ocean like a young woman extremely distressed (while going to 
her husband’s house for the first time?). 

25. The waters of that river in confluence with the great 
ocean become conchs, pearls and pearl-like conchs. 

26. People bringing its waters containing conchs and 
pearls, become free from mental agonies and physical ailments 
and go to the heavenly city of Amaravatl. 

27. According to Sruti (Veda), the charitable gift of 
sandal, conchs and pearls enables Pitrs to cross (hell) even 

though they be perpetrators of sins. 

28-29. So also is the case of Candratlrtha, (Kanya) 
Kumari, the peiennial source of Kaverl, the holy centres of 
Silparvata 1 , the mountain Vaikrta, and the mountain 
Osiraparvata where the trees Palasa, Kliadira, Bilva, 
Plaksa, Asvattha and Vikankata are seen growing in one 
place. (The people taking ablutions and performing holy rites 
there attain heaven.) 

30. O excellent Brahmanas, this zone of holy centres is 
sacrifice-worthy and is conducive to great achievements. A 
person who casts his mortal coil here, quickly reaches the 
heavenly city of Amaravatl. 

31. Holy rites performed by oneself fructify in the subse¬ 
quent birth. Rites of Pitrs (though) performed with defects 
become as beneficial as duly performed rites. 

32. The holy river Narmada, the most excellent of all 
rivers, is the daughter of Pitrs. Sraddhas offered there, become 
everlasting (in yielding benefits). 

33. In the holy forest of Mathara, resorted to by 
Siddhas and Caranas, they do not vanish because they are 
attached to that great mountain. 

34. There is a proof (test) for discrimination between 
the pious and the impious on the holy mountain of Vindhya. 
Sinners do not see the current (waterfall ?) Good men see 
the current. 

35. The sins of some sinners are seen in its current. Us- 


1. Srisailam in Kurnool District in Andhra Pradesh. It is one of the 
twelve J yotirlingas. 





600 


Vayu Purdna 


ually the current is visible in the case of those of meritorious 
activities. 

36. In KauSala there is the tank of Matanga named 
PapanisudinI (Remover of Sins). Even stray birds, flying 
as they please, go to heaven after bathing (casually) in that 
tank. 

37-39. (Ablution) in the Kumarakosala Tirtha on the 
mountain Palapanjara 1 and on the hanks of Pantfu near the 
sea, in the Pantfaraka forest, performance of good actions in 
the Abhaya Prabhava which is pure and sinless, daily visit 
to Srrvrksa, Grdhrakuta, and Jambumarga and in the holy 
centre of Asita, the intelligent preceptor of Yoga—performance 
of Sraddha (at these holy places)—gives everlasting benefits. 

40. Sraddha in Puskara 2 is ever-lasting. Penance there 
yields great fruits and the same is true of the holy centre 
Prabhasa 8 on the great ocean. 

41. In Devika 4 , there is a well named Vfsa resorted to by 
Siddhas. Its water always gushes up on hearing the sound 
of cows and bulls. 

42. It is always resorted to by masters of Yogas who are 
beyond all sorts of sins. I shall mention the benefit resulting 
from the performance of Sraddha therein. 

43-44. The Sraddha (there) yields all desires and is ever¬ 
lasting. It delights Pitjrs. There is a rock of Agni there 
called Jatavedahsila. He who enters the fire there rejoices in 


1. Palamaiijara in Bd.P. near Surparaka or Sopara near Bassein in 
Thana district of Maharashtra. 

'• »<■»«. f« th , -Pi, 

, 3 ' New known a, Somanatha Patta*a in Saurashtra. Somanatha is a 
fornous JyjhrLnga W h,ch was attacked by Muslim rulers from the days of 

soot by U Ah i a T r w°,f UrangZCb - A nCW tem P lc was built near the original 
Soln- t ? h y n ^ m A ' D - 1783 and itis stm recognized as orig^al 

Punjab » accepted by Pargiter and Kane (HD. IV. 746; De 55). 






15.45*53 


601 


heaven. Once the fire is tranquil, he is reborn. Anything 
offered there gives everlasting benefits. 

45. There is no doubt in this that the sacrifices performed 
at the holy centres called Dasasvamedhika and Pancasvame- 
dhika yield the benefits as indicated (in their names, viz. fruits 
of ten horse-sacrifices and of five horse-sacrifices). 

46. The holy centre named Hayasiras is famous as 
granter of boon immediately. Sraddha performed there yields 
everlasting benefits. The devotee rejoices in heaven. 

47. Sraddha is said to be everlasting. So also are Japas, 
Homas and penances. 

48. One should always propitiate the Pitrsin the auspicious 
holy centre of Ajatunga. There the shadow of the heaven-dwel¬ 
lers is always seen on Parvan days. Whatever is given here 
becomes everlasting in the world. The Pantfavas became free 
from ailment here. 

49. It is always resorted to by masters of Yogas free from 
all sins. I shall mention the benefit of performance of Sraddha 
there. 

50. Pitrs worshipped there always become delighted. He 
who keeps his sense-organs under control in this world shall 
rejoice after death in heaven. 

51. The lake named Siva is the most excellent. Vyasa- 
saras and the divine lake Brahma-saras there are also holy. 

52. The mountain Ujjanta 1 of the noble soul Vasistha 
is also holy. Centres called Kapota, Puspasahvaya, (and 
those named after the Vedas) Rg, Yajus, Samanand (Atharva-) 
Siras have been created by god Brahma. After the creation 
of these the fifth Veda, viz. Puranas have been narrated by 
him. 

53. After going there a Brahmana becomes free from sin 
like the eternal Fire-god Agni. Sraddha, Japas, Homas and 
penances are of endless benefits. 


1. In Aparanta as per HD. IV. 815. If identified with Ujjayanta, it 
is Mt. Girnar—De 211; but it is not associated with Vasistha but with Datta 
and Neminatha. Hence identification in HD probable. 






602 


Vayu Purarta 


54. In the great holy centre Pundarika, one attains the 
benefit (as sweet and fragrant) as lotus. One gets the fruit 
of a horse-sacrifice in the great holy centre of Brahma Tirtha (by 
performing Sraddha there). 

55. In the confluence of the Sindhu river and the ocean 
and in Paf^canada, the benefit is everlasting. Klrakatma 1 
(in Bd. P. Viraja) and Mandava on the mountain are sacred 
spots (?) 

56. Sraddha has to be performed in the holy centre 
Saptahrada and particularly in Manasa. 2 On the mountains of 
Mahakuta, Vanda and Trikakuda also (Sraddha should be 
performed). 

57. In MahavedI (Mahanadi in Bd. P.) a great miracle is 
seen. It does not appear to one who has no faith (but).it does 
appear to a person who is firm in his religious vows. 

58. The eternal rock of Agni himself is there. It is called 
Jatavedahsila. Sraddhas and holy rites in the fire performed 
there, have never-ending benefits. 

59. Going there everyday in the evening, one who seeks 
never-ending benefits should always offer Sraddha to Pitrs there. 


60. A man of purified mind or otherwise is known in the 
holy centre called Svargyamargaprada (that which shows the 
path leading to heaven). It grants boons immediately. 
Casting off their mutual enmity in it, the Seven Sages went to 


61. Even today signs of their extinct enmitv 



next verse vairani ‘enmity’ i s sa id to be ‘visible 
abstract things is doubtful. 


1. Vairapi, but cirdpi ‘garments* in’Bd. P. V. 2 3 61 i< 

*■ r..' < _•, «... * *' 


.3.61 is preferable for in the 
even today. Visibility of 


2. Lake Manas-sarovar situated in Kailasa 


mountain in Tibet. 

—De 123 







15.64-72 


603 


heaven (or they-the golden posts-disappear and go to 
heaven when devotees complete their circumambulation ?). 

64. The (land) all over Kuruksetra* is especially an ex¬ 
cellent holy place of Sanatkumara, the noble-souled lord of the 
Yogic cult. It is glorified as yielding ever-lasting benefit if 
Pitrs are offered gingelly seeds (there). 

65. Sraddha performed in the residence of Dharmaraja is 
conducive to brilliance and it is never-ending (in yielding bene¬ 
fit). Sr add ha offered on the New Moon day in accordance 
with injunctions and in the proper order also yields never-ending 
benefits. 

66. Moreover, to those who are near about Kuruksetra it 
is particularly efficacious. A dutiful son who worships Pitrs 
there, becomes free from his indebtedness to them. 

67-69. Sraddha should be performed with the repetition of 
Oriikara by persons who wish for ever-lasting benefit, at the 
following places : Vinasana, 1 2 on the Sarasvatl river, Plaksa- 
prasravana 3 , Vyasatlrtha on the Sarasvatl and especially at 
Brahma Ksetra, everywhere on the (banks of) Ganga and on 
the excellent mountain Mainaka and at the source of Yamuna. 
One gets absolved of sins (thereby). The proof for the same is 
the excessively hot and extremely cold water there. 

70. (Yamuna) is Yama’s sister and the daughter of Mar- 
tanda (the Sun-god). It is holy. Sraddha performed there is 
everlasting. It'was so glorified by Pitrs formerly. 

71. One taking ablutions in the lake Brahmanuga be¬ 
comes a Brahmana immediately. Sraddha, Japas, Homas and 
penances performed there are everlasting. 

72. Vasistha of great penance performed penance standing 
still like a stump. Even to-day trees are seen there studded 
with gems. 


1. The famous sacred place in Haryana—the country round 
Thaneswar. Some of the holy places, e.g. Vyasa-tlrtha or Dvaipayana Hrada 
are in this area. Sarasvati flowed through it. 

2. The spot in the sandy desert in Sirhind district where Sarasvati 

disappears. —De 37 

3. The source of the river Sarasvatl in the hills of Sirmur in the 
Siwalik range of the Himalayas. 


■De 180 





604 


Vayu Pur ana 


73. There a weighing balance that indicates piety and 
impiety, is seen. People who get themselves weighed by Brah- 
manas in it derive excellent fruits. 

74-75. The daughter of Pitrs, the great Yogini, is 
famous by the name of Gandhakali. It is she who will give birth 
to the great Yogin, the noble souled Vyasa, who will divide the 
single Veda into four, who will be an intelligent great sage, the 
great scion of the family of Parasara and who is a fourth part 
of Brahma. 

76. There is the lake Acchodaka 1 from which she origina¬ 
ted as the river Acchoda. Again she (Gandhakali) was born of 
the womb of a fish at the instance of Varana 2 . 

77. The place where she has a holy hermitage, is resorted 
to by meritorious persons. Sraddha offered there once, is 
said to be everlasting. If Sraddha is offered there even once, 
it causes the attainment of Yoga and Samadhi (Trance). 

78. He who offers Sraddha in Kuberatunga, Vyamocca 
and Vyasatlrtha is a holy Brahmana. The Sraddha yields ever¬ 
lasting benefits. 

79. In the north-eastern quarter there is Nandavedl. It is 
resorted to by Siddhas for ever. It is not visible to non-self- 
possessed souls. (Those who perform Sraddha there) do not 
return (i.e. they attain liberation from Samsara). 

80. In the holy centre Mahalaya, 3 the intelligent Maha- 
deva had imprinted his foot. It is a Siddhaksetra resorted to 
(by Siddhas). People who go there do not return (i.e. attain 
Moksa). 

81. (Partially defective) On (the peak called) Umatunga, 
in the shrine of the goddess (Uma) has performed penance 
standing on one foot for the period of a divine yuga, without 
taking any food 4 . And the water (also) stood (for that 
period?). 


flows out 1 KH™^ e i f00 ‘,if f .? lt k G ? 1< ? aprabha from which river Acchoda 

3. The same as Omkaranatha or Amaresvara in M.P. _Dc 117 

•withouP^kfni ‘ S | n ° W ’ Which is obscure - Bd * p - ibid reads anahara 

g . It is relevant-to penance, hence accepted tentatively. 








15.82-92 


605 

82-83. One becomes sanctified by visiting Umatunga, 
Bhrgutunga, Brahmatunga, Mahalaya, Kadravati, Sandili and 
Vamana’s cave. Sraddha performed there yields ever-lasting 
benefit. Japa, Homa and meditation—everything performed 
there becomes meritorious. 

84.Those who observe Brahmacarya (celibacy), those who 
perform sacrifice and those who are devoted to their preceptors 
for a hundred years (enjoy good benefits). These and other 
similar benefits are attained immediately by taking a dip in 
those holy waters. 

85- (The holy river) Kumaradhara 1 there removes all sins 
(at its very sight). If one goes and settles there, one attains 
immediately what is attained when it is seen. 

86. By regularly visiting Sailaklrtipura, one attains all 
cherished desires. Like Devas he remains invisible to all living 
beings and roams in the earth. 

87. Sraddhas should be offered everyday by one who 
seeks everlasting benefits at the great holy centre of Kasyapa 
well known as Kalasarpi. 

88. Sraddha performed all round Salagrama 2 becomes 
ever-lasting. It is not directly visible to sinful persons, 

89-90. The place is forbidden to the evil-minded and the 
good ones are allowed entry, since the pure divine king of 
serpents dwelling in the holy lake accepts the Pintfa of thegood 
and not that of the bad. Even by the highly illuminated ser¬ 
pents, the food cannot be eaten (if offered by the bad). 

91. In these two holy centres, Dharma is directly seen. 
In Devadaruvana 3 too the same proof can be seen. 

92. The sins shaken off are visible to the meritorious soul. 
InBhagirathi and Prayaga 4 (the Sraddha performed) is said to 
be of ever-lasting benefit. 


1. Near Vyasa’s seat for dhyana and Kantipuri or ancient Kathmandu 

in Nepal. —De 89 

2. A place near the source of Gandak, the place where Sage Pulaha 
and Bharata performed penance. 

3. Its site is on Ganga near Kcdar in Garhwal; Badarikasrama is 
situated in this ‘Vana’. 

4. Modern Allahabad, U.P. 







606 


Vayu Purana 


93. Sraddfaa should be offered with efforts at Kalanjara, 1 
DaSarna, Naimisa, Kurujangala and the city of Varanasi. 

94. In that city, Yogesvara is present for ever. Hence 
what is offered there is ever-lasting. Offering Sraddhas in these 
holy places, one becomes sanctified. The Sraddha yields ever¬ 
lasting benefits. 

95. Penance, Homa, meditation, nay anything performed 
in Lauhitya, 2 Vaitaranx and SvarnavedI, becomes meritorious. 

96. Only once, is (Sraddha) seen (performed) near the 
sea-shore by men of meritorious actions. So also in Gaya, 
Dharmaprstha and in Brahma’s lake. 

97-98. The Sraddha offered in Gaya and Grdhrakuta yields 
great benefit. Snow falls all round it upto a distance of five 
Yojanas (1 Yojana = 12 Kms.). The forest surrounding the her¬ 
mitage of Bharata is remembered as the most meritorious. The 
foot-print of Matanga is seen there with the physical eye. 

99. This spot is glorified as (conducive to) entire righte¬ 
ousness. It is an example for this world. Similarly the Panca- 
vana is very holy. It is resorted to by men of meritorious actions. 
The holy centre Panduvisala is also a ready example. 

100. (Defective) The persons who perpetrate sins come to 
the surface (become exposed) by means of weighing balances, by 
its arcs 3 and by various scriptures when they get attached (visit) 
to that Tlrtha (?). 

101. Highly efficacious is the Sraddha offered at the silent 
(deep) great lake Pavamandala in the (river) Kausiki in the 
third quarter on the third Tithi (day). 


of Banda district. 


1. The places mentioned are identified as follows: 

(1) Kalanjara—Kalinjar in Badausa sub-division 
Bundclkhand (M.P.). 

Dasarna—Eastern N. Malwa, including Bhopal in Madhya 
rradesQ. Its ancient capital was Vidisa 
Naimisa-Nimsar, 45 miles NW of Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. 
Kurujangala—a forest country situated in Sirhind, NW of 
Hastmapur. 

Brah ^ f ° U ° Win , g are idcmified by De thus : Lauhi^a (The 

3. It appears that sinners are supposed to be weighed in the balance. 


(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 










15.102-113 


607 


102. After performing a very severe penance for many celes¬ 
tial Yugas, the intelligent deity Mahadeva set foot on Mun<Ja- 
prstha. 

103. Within a very short time, a righteous man discards 
his sin quickly like a serpent casting off its slough. 

10*1—105. To the noi tuofMundaprstha, there is a holy centre 
famous in the three worlds by the name Kanakanandi. It is well 
protected by day and night by terrible serpents of huge bodies and 
licking with their tongues, frightful to the sinners (but) very 
delightful to Siddhas. (Even) birds flying as they please take 
bath there and go to heaven. 

106. Sraddha offered there is said to yield everlasting 
benefit. An excellent man becomes Tree from his three-fold 
indebtedness by taking his bath there. 

107. On the banks of that lake, there is a great shrine of 
the lord. After mounting up to it and performing Japas, one be¬ 
comes a Siddha and thereafter goes to heaven. 

108. After going to the northern Manasa, 1 one attains 
excellent Siddhi. On going to the excellent city 2 , a very wonder¬ 
ful thing is seen. 

109. One should perform Sraddha there according to 
one’s capacity and physical strength. He should attain divine 
pleasures and the means to liberation (from Sariisara) for ever. 

110-111. In the excellent Manasa lake, a very wonderful 
thing is seen. The highly blessed goddess Ganga of three-fold 
path, slipping dawn from heaven, shines in the sky. Falling off 
the lunar rays on to the earth, it appears like festoons in the sky 
with the brightness of the sun. 

112. It is diving with golden splendour. It is like the gate 
to heaven thrown wide open. It is from this place that it 
flows again towards the eastern ocean in its final stage. 

113. It sanctifies all living beings and particularly those 
who know righteousness. Candrabhaga (Chenab) and 


1. Can it be the Kara Kul of northern Pamirs as suggested by M. Ali 
(AGP P. 71) ? The so-called Uttara Manasa at Gaya is an ordinary 
pond. 

2. No mention of any city is here in the context. Bd. P. ibid V. 117 reads 
Sarafreffhe ‘inthat excellent lake*. 






608 


Vayu Purana 


Sindhu both these are like Manasa (in sanctity). The divine 
Sindhu, the most excellent of rivers flows towards the western 
ocean. 

114-115. There is the mountain named Himavan. It is 
embellished with various kinds of minerals. It is said that it ex¬ 
tends to eighty thousand Yojanas. It is crowded with Siddhas 
and Caranas. It is served and resorted to by Siddhas and Cara¬ 
cas. There is a PuskarinI (lake) on it, well known by the name 
Susumna. 

116. One who is born there lives upto ten thousand years. 
Sraddha offered thereyields ever-lasting benefits, and great pros¬ 
perity. The performer of Sraddhas enables ten previous genera¬ 
tions and ten succeeding ones to cross (hell). 

117. Everything belonging to Himavan is holy. The Gahga 
is sacred everywhere (throughout). The ocean-going rivers and 
all the oceans all round are holy. 

118. A sensible man should perform Sraddha in all these 
places and at similar ones. Even by taking bath, he becomes 
sanctified. By offering (Sraddha* ?) he becomes so (all the 
more). 

119-123. Sraddha can be performed in the following places : 
On the high summits and ridges of mountains, crevasses, in the 
solitary sides, springs and fountains, on the sandy banks of 
rivers, on the auspicious anniversaries of the beginning of Yugas, 
on great oceans, in cowpens, in the confluence of two rivers, in 
the forests, well-cleaned and scrubbed ground, pleasing fragrant 
spots, in solitary houses, on the ground polished with cow-dung, 
etc. One should perform Sraddha in these places in accordance 
with injunctions. Those who seek fulfilment, of all desires shall 
perform Sraddha in these places carefully. They should perform 
circumambulation in all the quarters. An intelligent man per- 
ormmg thus, shall attain the Siddhi of Brahmatva (Brahmahood). 

124. The worship of Pit r s becomes fruitful if anger etc. 


dSn ° m ' giving a religious gift’, for dattva 
to fircLTbyTetigious gifts'^’ 127 rcads huM dattvS ‘ b V oaring oblations 








15.125-133 


609 


is eschewed, the duties of the three castes are performed and the 
discipline of castes and stages of life is maintained. 

125. Even a person who has committed sins becomes sancti¬ 
fied if he boldly and faithfully makes the pilgrimage to the 
holy centres and courageously controls his senses. What need be 
said in regard to a person of meritorious deeds ? 

126. He is not reborn in an animal womb. He is not born 
again in an impious land. A Brahmana attains heaven and at¬ 
tains the means to salvation (Moksa). 

127. These five do not attain the benefit of pilgrimage : 
those who have no faith, sinners, atheists, permanent doubters 
and those who always seek a cause (for everything). 

128. Great Siddhi is achieved in the holy centre of Guru (the 
preceptor). He is the most excellent of all sacred objects and 
spots. Meditation is a still greater Tirtha. It is the eternal Bra- 
hmatfrtha, 1 

129. Meditation is greater than observance of fasts. It makes 
all the sense organs shun (their objects). Those who are wedded 
to observance of fasts are reborn again and again along with 
their vital breaths. 

130. One shall equalise Prana and Apana. One should res¬ 
train in mind objects and the sense organs and restrain the 
intellect in the mind. Then every sense-organ recedes. 

131. Understand that undoubtedly Pratyahara (the withdra¬ 
wal of all sense organs) is the sure means to salvation. Among 
the sense-organs, the mind is the most terrible. It makes the 
intellect and other organs function. 

132. (The restlessness of the mind) is subdued by not taking 
food. Know that fasting is a penance. By restraining the intel¬ 
lect and the mind, the intellect is sublimated (the intellect be¬ 
comes beautiful). 

133. When all the sins are mitigated, when the sense organs 
are weakened (subdued) the pure soul attains bliss of libera¬ 
tion like fire without fuel. 


1. The influence of Yoga is so profound on the Purana writer that 
Yogic meditation is regarded superior to Tirthayatra (w. 128-131). The 
importance of feeding a Yogin at the time of Sraddhas has been already 
extolled in previous chapters. 





610 


Vaju Puratja 


134. A knower of Yogas separates the individual soul from 
all manifest and unmanifest causes and Glows by means of his 
Yogic power. 

135. There is no place for him to go, whether manifest or 
unmanifest. He is neither Asat (non-existent) nor Sat-A sat. No¬ 
thing can be said of his existence. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


The Srtiddha Ritual : Purificatory Rites 

Brhaspati Said: 


1. Henceforth, I shail recount the various types of Danas 
(religious gifts) and the benefits thereof. I shall also mention 
the pure things to be used in the Sraddha rite and those that 
should be avoided. 

2. It should be performed on snow-capped precipice (?) 
or he should also bring snow from there (?). Hence Agnihotra 
is laid down (in the scriptures) as the greatest and holiest. 

3. One shall avoid Sraddha-performancc during the night. 
On other occasions also, since Rahu is seen, one should quickly 
perform Sraddha as soon as Rahu is seen 1 even by spending one’s 
entire possession. 


4. He who does not perform Sraddha at the time of 
eclipse becomes distressed like the cow (stuck up) in mire 

He who performs it, uplifts sinners like a boat in the ocean that 
saves those who are drowning. 

5. During the sacrifice to Vis'vedevas and Saumyas, the 
Haou can contain plenty of meat. But one should avoid the horn 
ol the rhinoceros to mitigate the malice (of Pitrs) (9) 

6-S. Formerly while Tvastr was being prevented by the 
nob e-souledLord of Devas from drinking the Soma juice meant 
or ndra, the consort of Saci, it (some part or drops of Soma) 

1. Cf. Bd.P. 2.3.14. 3-4, KP. II. 16.8; Brahma P. 220-51-54 Eclipses 
are the proper times for Kdmya Sraddhas. eclipses 






16.9-15 


611 


fell on the ground. Syimakas (a variety of rice) grew up that 
way (from drops of Soma). They are honoured for (the propitia¬ 
tion of) Pttrs. The spray (of Soma juice) sticking to (and 
coming out of) h,s nostrils fell f rom them (and bec * me 

sugarcane). Hence sugarcanes are phlegmatic, cool, pleasing 
and sweet. r 6 


One should perform all the Pit r -rites with Syamaka rice 
and sugarcane for the fulfillment of all desires. 

He who performs Agrayana i.e. the first Soma libation at the 
Agnistoma sacrifice (or of fruits after the rainy season) (with 

Syamaka and sugarcanes) attains the fulfilment of his desires 
quickly. 1 


9. Syamaka (rice), Hastinaman (?), Patola (fruit of Tri- 
chosanthes Diaoeca), fruits ofBrhatl (Brinjals) and the crest of 
Agastya—all are very astringent. 

10-1 la. 2 Such other excellent and sweet things as Na- 
gara (?), Dlrghamulaka (a kind of radish) should be offered (at 
Sraddha). So also tender shoots of a bamboo, surasa, sarjaka 
(juicy parts of the Sala tree) and Bhustrna (andropogen scho- 
cnaiithus). 

11 b-14. I shall now mention those things that should always 
be avoided Jn Sraddha. Garlic, carrots, onions, globular 
radish and Karambha (groats or flour mixed with curds) and 
other articles devoid of smell and with no taste should be 
avoided in Sraddha. 3 The reason is also mentioned (as follows) : 

Formerly in the fight between Devas and Asuras, Bali 
was defeated by Suras. From his wounds drops of blood 
gushed out and from them these articles grew up- Hence they 
are avoided in the Sraddha rite. 

15. The exudations mentioned in the Vedas, the salts found 
in arid lands are to be avoided in the Sraddha rites. Women in 
their monthly course shall not take part in Sraddhas. 


1. For the lists of kinds of corns to be used for Sraddha food vide MKP. 
29-9-11 (quoted by Hemadri), VP. III. 16.5-6, Visnu Dhs. 80.2. 

2. A comparison of our text with Bd, P. 2.3.14 shows that some lines are 
missing here while others are mixed up. 

3. Cf. Bd.P. 23,14.22-27; Smjrti Candrikd —Sraddha, pp. 415-416. 





612 


Vayu Purat}a 


16. Foul-smelling water, water having froth and foams, 
water from puddles, water where cows are disinclined to drink 
and the water stored in vessels the previous night shall not be 
used in Sraddha 1 . 

17. The milk of ewes, deer, camel, single-horned animals, 
buffalo and the Camarl deer should be avoided by a wise man. 2 

18. Henceforth I shall mention the places that should be 
avoided assiduously. I shall also mention, by whom Sraddha 
should not be seen. I shall also recount what is pure and impure 
in a Sraddha. 

19. With great faith one should perform a Sraddha by means 
of fruits, roots and foodstuffs available in forests. Thereby he at¬ 
tains desirable country, heaven and liberation (from Samsara) 
as well as fame. 

20. Places full of noise-pollution and teeming with insects 
and a place with foul smell shall be avoided for the performance 
of Sraddha. 3 

21. A place within a distance of twelve Yojanas from all 
the rivers joining the sea (i.e. so far from their confluence with 
the sea), a door at the south-east as well as the land of Tris- 
anku, should be avoided. 

22. The land to the north of Mahanadi and to the south of 
Kaikata is the land of Trisanku. It is forbidden for the rite of 
Sraddha. 4 

23. The lands of Karankara (Karkal in south Kanara Dist.), 
Kalinga, the land to the north of Sindhu and those lands wherein 
the practice of the pious rites of different stages of life and castes 
are not in vogue, should be avoided scrupulously. 

24. The naked and similar (apostates and non-Vedic sects) 
people should not see the Sraddha rite. 5 This is the rule. 

1. Mk. P. 29.15-17 

2. Gf. Brahma P. 220.169; VP. III. 16.11; MK.P. 32.17-19. 

3. Gf. Mk.P. 29.19. 

4. It is not clear why places like Orissa, Telangana or regions north of 
Indus were declared unfit for & raddha-performance. Were they beyond 
the pale of Brahmanism when this s ection of the text came to be written? Gf. 
Bd.P. 2.3.14.31-33. 

5. As explained below (w.26ff), those who do not have the protec¬ 
tive covering of the Vedas. The term includes not only non-Vedic sects like 







16.25-32 


613 


Such Sraddhas as are seen by these, do not reach Pitrs or 
Pitamahas. 1 

Sariiyu said : 

25. O holy lord, O leader of important Brahmanas, please 
recount in detail and precisely to me who ask about the naked 
and similar people. 

26. Thus requested, Bfhaspati of great brilliance said to him • 
The Trayi (the three Vedas) is remembered as the protec¬ 
tive covering unto all living beings. 

27. Those who discard it out of delusion are the naked 
O excellent Brahmana. If a man forsakes that protection, he 
becomes supportless and is ruined. 

28. If a man discards. Dharma and seeks liberation ( Moksa ) 
elsewhere, his labour therein is in vain. For he has not the cor- 
rect perspective. 

29-30. Formerly, all the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vai£yas and 
Sudras were made heretics and placed in a deformed state by 
Asuras who were defeated in the battle between Devas and 
Asuras. This is not the creation of the self-born god 
Brahma*. Nor are these : 

31. Those who do not practise piety come underthe category 
of the naked and similar people” (Nagnadayah). A Brahmana 
who keeps matted hair without any specific aim, who shaves off 
his hair for nothing and who goes about naked purposelessly is 
also called so. 

32. He who observes holy rites in vain, he who performs 
Japas in vain is also called '“Naked etc.” So also those who blow 
off their homes, the hunters and those who destroy property 
(are considered so). 


Jams and Buddhists but includes apostate Brahmins, atheists, committer of 
gross sins (maha-patakas). Cf. Mbh. Anusdsana 91-43-44, KP. II. 21-32, 
23.4-25, Visnu Dh. S. 89.3ff. The underlying idea is that the sacred food 
for Sraddha would get polluted by the mere sight of these fallen people. 

’The line : Pdfapda-vaikftasthdne naif a 
. Jff/z# svayambhuvahl 

is obscure. Bd. P. 2.3.14.39 reads 

Pdfapda vai krtds tala , tesdm Sfffih prajdyate 

(The defeated Asuras), created heretics. Their progeny are Vfddha-Srd- 
vakas (Dvi-Sraddhaka is mis-spelling), Nirgr ant has (nude Jainas), Sakyas (followers 
of Buddha) and Puffi-kalam-kasas (?) 




614 


Vajiu Purina 


33. They are denounced as men of evil ways finding fault 
with every action committed. The Sraddha performed or witnes¬ 
sed by these, goes to men(and not to Pitfs). 

34. The Brahmana-slayer, the ungrateful, the atheists, the 
defilers of the preceptor’s bed, robbers and wicked men are shun¬ 
ned at the very sight. 

35. One shall avoid all those who commit sins and parti¬ 
cularly those who indulge in slandering Devas and the divine 
sages. 

36-40. Whatever is witnessed by these, goes over to 
Asuras and Yatudhanas. 

Krtayuga is said to be the age of Brahmanas. Tretayuga 
is remembered as the age of Ksatriyas. They say that Dvaparayuga 
is the age of Vaisyas and Kaliyuga is remembered as the 
age of Sudras. 

Pilrs said : 

The Vedas are to be worshipped in Krtayuga. Similarly 
Suras are to be worshipped in Tretayuga. Wars are always 
to be worshipped in Dvapara and the heretics in Kaliyuga. 

There is no doubt in this that these spoil a Sraddha by their 
mere sight: the dishonoured, the unholy, fowl, domestic 
pig and dog. The Sraddha materials touched by calves and 
the people having pollution and chronic ailments are defiled. 
Cooked food should never be seen by dirty or fallen persons. If 
they see, it cannot be used as Havya and Kavya (offerings to 
gods and Pitrs). 

41. The chief materials touched by them become desecra¬ 
ted. Solidified ghee shall be avoided at the very outset. Sprink¬ 
ling with water mixed with clay is laid down (for the consecra¬ 
tion of materials of Sraddha). 

42. Scattering of yellow mustard and black gingelly seeds 
should be done. The articles should be assiduously shown to the 
preceptor, the sun and the fire. 

43-47. The following should be avoided in Sraddha : that 
which is trodden upon by people while climbing on to their 
seats, that which is seen by the mobile beings that are defiled; 
dried up and stale things; partly eaten things, defiled objects; 
that which is licked at the tip; that which is defiled by gravel. 





16.48-58 


615 


fluffs in Which sL°Ur™OT a added°t'nf n“ “f oth ' rfood - 
ground and powdered like oilcake; iud tLngs“Ltatff Sm 
garments. There are certain people who profess to be very wise 
by showing Ike,r opposttion to the Vedas. Theyare to be timed 
Ayajnapaus (non-masters of sacrifice). They are as though the 
dusu of Sraddha Forbtdden vegetables mixed with cur* « 
well as sour gruel or fomented liquids are avoided in a Sradim 
48. One hould avoid (the egg-plant) and all distilled 
liquors. The salt extracted from the ocean (water) and from the 
(waters of the) Manasa (lake) (is holy). 

• , 4 n 50 ; Th 5 ‘1 eMremc, y holy. I, is visible directly. It is put 
mto he ftre and then taken in the hands and carefully pressed 
It .s Co be applied to the forehead. This is remembered L Bra h : 

matirtha. All the arttcles for Sraddha should be sprinkled and 
offered in the sacrifice. 1 


51 Arista (soap-berry), Tumula, Bilva, Ihguda and Sva- 
of'them) 11 d beS ° aked m waterand (water be) sprinkled (out 


52. All sorts of baskets (wicker-work) should be purified ac¬ 
cording to the conventional practice. Vessels made of tooth 
(ivory)-bone, wood and horns should be scrubbed and scraped. 

53-54. All earthen pots should be burnt again (for purifica¬ 
tion). Gems, diamonds, corals, pearls and conchs are to be 
purified by (brushing with) the residues of powdered yellow 
mustard or gmgclly seeds. The same can be used to purify sheep 
wool and all types of hair. 

55. All kinds of sheep’s wool can be purified with clay and 
water, (but) at the beginning and end of all purificatory proces- 
ses washing with water is recommended. 

56. Purification of cotton cloth is effected with sacred ashes. 

Flowers, fruits, pins and rods should be dipped in water. 

57-58. Purification of the earth (ground) is by sweeping, 
sprinkling and smearing (with cowdung). Outside the village 
the ground (earth) is purified by the wind. Purification (cleans- 
*ng) of bow and arrows is effected by (brushing) it with clay. 
Thus the excel lent modes of purification have been mentioned. 

beiedTn er alr 5 aSa deSCribC ^ procc3s of purifying different articles to 





gig Vayu Parana 

Henceforth I shall mention further modes of purification. Listen 
to it even as I recount. 

59. One should evacuate the bowels early in the morning 
at a distance of an arrow-shot from the house in the south-wes¬ 
tern direction and within the view of the house. He should cover 
the head (with a cloth). He shall not touch 4 the head with the 
hands. 1 

60-61. (Before evacuating) the ground should be covered 
with dry grass, wooden sticks or leaves, bamboo chips or broken 
mud pots. He should take water in a pot and hold clay also in 
the hand in complete silence. He should sit facing the north 
during the day and the south during the night. 

62. He should hold the water-pot with the right hand and 
wash the anus with the left hand applying clay three times. 

63. He should scrub the left hand with clay ten times and 
then each of the two hands five times. 

64. Washing the feet after applying clay, he should duly 
perform Acamana (sipping of water). He should then pour water 
down three times with (invocation of) the sun, fire and water. 

65. A sensible man should always keep a water-pot handy. 
Subsidiary actions and washing of the feet shall be done by means 
of this pot. 

66. The performance of Acamana and divine duties shall 
be done by means of a second (vessel). If such actions are per¬ 
formed with a defiled hand, one should observe fast for three 
nights. 

67. In protracted cases of default, the rite of Krcchra is 
prescribed for expiation. After touching a dog or a Candala 
one should perform Taptakrcchra rite. 

68. If human bones are touched, fasting is the purification 
(for it). It is prescribed that if (the bones are) touched delibera- 


1. After dealing with the purification of things or materials for Sraddha, 
the aut hor deals with the purification of the man performing the Sraddha 
in w. 59 to the end of the Chapter. The Purana-writers (in fact the whole 
tribe of writers on Dharma-Sastra in the mediaeval period) appear to have 
been so much obsessed with ‘purity-psychosis’ that they lost sight of the 
social necessity of assimilating foreigners or backward people in 
Hinduism and prohibited their own followers from going beyond the contrac¬ 
ting geographical limits of Brahmanism (vide w. 69-71), 






16.69-78 


617 


tely, the fast is to be observed for three nights, and for one night 
if touched unintentionally. 6 ’ 

69-71. By going to unholy places, one acquires all sorts of 

sms. These unholy places are-Karaskaras, Pulindas, Andhras 

Sabaras and others the land of Bhutilaya (if one drinks wat e ; 

there), the land of Yugandhara, up to the northen borderlands 
of Sindhu, the land of Divyantarasata, sinful countries 
occupied by sinners and lands devoid of good men such as 
Brahmanas who have mastered the Vedas. 


72-73 Clarity of mind, fire, timely whitewashing-these 
things indicate purity. But one is always ignorant. If one makes 
default m the purificatory rites—except out of ignorance, undoub¬ 
tedly the benefit goes to PiSacas and Yatudhanas. 

74-75. One who has no faith in purificatory rites is born 
among Mlecchas. Those who do not perform Yajnasand sinners 
are born among the lower strata of animals. A man gets released 
from sins through purificatory rites and attains heaven. Devas 
indeed desire purity. This has been declared by Devas themselves. 

76. Suras always forsake the hideous and the unclean. 
Men of auspicious rites perform three types of purificatory rites 
justifiably. 


. 77-78. Pitrs delighted with them for their pure rites, 
increase the Yogic power and bestow all cherished things 
available in the three worlds, on these people, viz. a man who 
reveres Brahmanas, one who receives guests, an intelligent man 
who adheres to purity, one devotedly attached to parents, 
one who possesses self-control and one who is sympathetic, O 
Brahmanas. 



618 


Vayu Puraria 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

The Test for Eligibily of a Brahmana 
(for Sraddha Invitation ) 


The Sages said : 

1. O intelligent Suta, the Sniddhakalpa has been recounted 
by you. The Sraddhakalpa glorified by sages, has been heard 
by us. 

2. Its extensive details have been particularly narrated. O 
extremely intelligent one, please mention the remaining topics 
too, according to the opinion of that sage. 

Suta said : 

3. O blessed Brahmanas, I shall recount the opinion of that 
sage in detail, in regard to Sraddha. Listen to it from me. 

4. The Sraddha rite as well as the mode of its performance 
have been previously mentioned by me. I shall also mention 
what remains in the proper order as regards the Brahmanas. 

5. It is not that Brahmanas should always be (subjected 
to) tests and investigation. But in regard to rites pertaining to 
gods and Pitrs (employment of) tests has been laid down in the 
Sruti. 1 

6. One shall scrupulously avoid that person in whom de¬ 
fects are seen or who is shunned by good men or who, through 
contacts or staying together, is known to be wicked. 

7-8. A sensible man should always test a Brahmana who is 
not known before, at the time of Sraddha. 2 


1. Since the days of Grhya Sutras, there was insistence on the antecedents 
learning, character of the invitees (Brahmanas) for rites nertainim* in 

<**■%•»« c.s.IV.7.2, b.«m,L 0 sX sTs S n lofc? 
TotaeS^and ***, added man, JU, bu, he.Ju, ’ " oS' 

Sraddha Kapda —pp. 389 - 394 ) Self con t l * \ • - and Smrti Candrikal 

vitee. Manu (IIJ18) declares ° f an in ’ 

Mantra but is self-controlled, is prefLb ” Ta 8^^ T 
three Vedas, but lacks in self-coLoI. * who knows the 

2. Cf. Visnu Dh.S. 82-1-2. 





17.9-17 


619 


Indeed Siddhas roam over this earth in the guise of 
Brahmanas. Hence one should approach the in-coming guests 
with palms joined in reverence. He should worship him offering 
water for washing the feet, oil for massage and food for 
eating. 

9-10. Devas and the masters of Yoga roam about the 
ocean-girt earth in various guises, virtuously protecting the 
subjects. A man should worship and offer a Brahmana guest 
different types of food and vegetable dishes and fruits as well. 1 

H. I t is heard that one attains the fruit of Agnistoma 
(sacrifice) by offering milk (or water) to a guest. 2 By offering 
ghee he attains splendid vision as well as the fruit of a yajna of 
sixteen-day duration. By offering honey, he attains the fruit 
of Atiralra sacrifice. 

12. A devout person who feeds Brahmanas faithfully, 
offering them all desired objects, obtains the fruit thereof. He 
who offers all his possessions to all guests and Brahmanas enjoys 
for ever the fruit of Sarvamedha sacrifice. 

13. He who slights a guest after his coming at the time 
of Sraddha or in a rite for Devas, is shunned by Devas in the 
manner a Hotr disregards another man’s wealth. 

14. For the purpose of blessing the worlds Devas, Pitys 
and Fire-god enter those Brahmanas and take food. 

15. If they are not worshipped, they burn; if they are 
worshipped, they grant all desires. Hence one should always 
worship guests by offeringone’s entire possession. 

16. A forest-dweller, a householder, a person who visits the 
house, children, distressed persons and an ascetic—all there are 
to be known as Alithis (guests). 

17. An Abhydgata is the guest who begs for something. An 
Atithi will not beg. An Atithi is the most excellent because he 


I* Verses 8-10 mean thst an atithi (an uninvited guest)—a stranger- 
coming for food at the lime of Sraddha is exempt from the qualifications on 
the specious ground that the stranger might be a siddha or a god in 
disguise. 

2. Such cheap promises of getting the fruits of sacrifices like Agnisjoma 
or Atiratra by offering ordinary things like milk or ghee to Brahmanas have 
adversely affected the Vedic institution of sacrifice. For the distinction 
between Atithi and Abhydgata vide w. 16-18 below. 




620 Vayu Purana 

has no Tilhi (fixed date). This is said to be the etymological 
meaning of Atithi. 

18. A real guest is neither terrible nor of a mixed caste, 
neither devoid oflearning nor a very learned specialist, neither 
has he too many children nor is he servile. He is of good 
conduct. 

19. A person who wishes (the fruit of) the performance of 
a Yajna should hospitably receive and give (food etc.) to a 
guest who has wandered a lot, is thirsty, tired and extremely 
hungry. 

20-22a. By climbing on to Bhrgutunga, by visiting (and 
taking holy dip in) the holy river Sarasvatl, the holy river- 
goddess Ganga, MahanadI, and other rivers originating 
from Himavan and those worshipped by sages, as well 
as lakes and holy centres, one becomes free from sins and is 
honoured in heaven. 

22b-23. It is said that there is pollution due to death for ten 
nights particularly for a Brahmana. It is prescribed that a 
Ksatriya has twelve days’ pollution. A Vaisya has pollution for 
half a month and a Sudra becomes pure after a month. 1 

24-25. A woman in menses in all the castes becomes pure 
in three nights. It is laid down that by touching a woman in 
her menses, a woman lying-in-chamber, a dog, a Gandala, 
a nudist like a Digambara Jaina and similar people and those 
who have borne a dead body, one gets polluted. He must take 
bath along with his clothes and smear clay twelve times on 
himself. Then he becomes pure. 

26-27. The same purificatory rite should be followed in the 
case of sexual intercourse. Clay is to be applied nine times. 
After washing hands with clay (and water), a person shall 
perform the purificatory rite. After washing the hands with 
water and taking bath, a sensible man shall apply clay to the 
private parts twice. 

28. This is themode of purification to be observed by all the 
castes for ever. One should smear hands and feet three times 
and sprinkle them with water. 

_ 29 ' This is the purificatory rite for forest-dwellers 

1. Verses 226-30 deal with personal purification 







17 . 30-42 


621 


( Vanaprasthas ). Henceforth I shall mention the procedure for 
village-dwellers (i.e. for householders). Clay is applied to the 
hands three times and three times to the feet. 

30. Clay shall be applied fifteen times to the hands and 
other unclean parts. Clay shall be applied to the uncleaned 
parts and it shall be washed with water. 

31. After tying a cloth round the neck or the head, if any- 
one walks on foot along the street, he shall wash the feet. With¬ 
out washing the feet, even if he performs Acamana, he shall be 
unclean. 

32. After washing the feet and setting the waterpot down, 
he should perform Acamana and then sprinkle it with water. 
The materials of Sraddha etc. shall be sprinkled again. 

33. Sprinkling is recommended on flowers etc., grass and 
Havis. Objects brought by others should be placed down and 
sprinkled with water. 

34. In a Sraddha and rites for Devas only, those articles 
that are sprinkled with water should be used. Whatever is 
brought to the altar should be brought at the northern end and 
taken away from the southern end. 

35. If the procedure is altered in the rites pertaining to 
Devas or Pitrs, it (the rite) becomes fruitless. With the right 
hand, one should touch the southern altar*. 

36a It is auspicious to scatter ritualistically the offering to 
Devas and Pjtrs with both the hands. 

36b. {Acamana is the purificatory rite in the following 
cases:) 

When one is agitated or enraged; after getting up from 
sleep; after urination and evacuation of bowels; 

37-42. when one spits; after taking food; when feet are not 
washed; after conversing with a person excommunicated 
(by others) ; after working in unclean places (?); in all doubtful 
acts such as when the tuft of hair is untied and/or one is with¬ 
out the sacred thread; when the lips touch the teeth; when one 


*The text reads: daksinena lu hastena daksindm vedam alikhet out of which the. 
last three words are confusing. Bd. P. 2.3.14.99 reads daksindm vedim alabhet 
‘should touch the southern altar* which is more appropriate and hence 
accepted here. 







622 


Vayu Purana 


sees Cantfalas; after touching things clinging to the teeth with 
the tonguejsnapping the fingers loudly; when seeing while bowing 
down etc. He who is in the midst of a sinful action, but out of 
delusion performs Acamana is 'also unclean. He should then 
squat in a clean place and bow down facing the north or the 
east. After washing the hands and feet, he should perform 
Acamana between the knees (keeping hands on laps ?). He 
should sip tile still water thrice with concentration and purity of 
mind. 

43. He should perform Marjana (cleansing with water) 
twice and then Abhyuksana (sprinkling with water) once over 
the sense organs, head, hands and feet as well. 

44-49. Anything not considered properly, shall besprinkled 
with water. In tin's manner his Acamana, Vedas (Vedic Study) 
Yajnas, penance, charitable gifts and vow of celibacy become 
fruitful. If an atheist performs holy rites without performing 
Acamana out of delusion, all those rites shall undoubtedly be 
futile. All these following should be known pure—that which 
is pure in words, that which is cleaned, that which is undefiled 
and that which is not censured. The opposite of these is 
impure. A hungry Brahmana should never be told—“There is 
nothing”. If anything is given to him after duly honouring him, 
it is called a sacrifice without erecting a sacrificial post. During 
Sraddhas, an indigent but non-begging, solitary and shy 
Brahmana should always be fed with food neither over-cooked 
nor watery. He who offers food to the low castes only, is a 
wicked soul, a Brahmana-slayer. 

50-51. Even if he takes a hundred births, he does not be¬ 
come free from that sin. A Brahmana who feeds the nobler 
and less dignified Brahman as in the same row, whether urged 
by others or not, incurs sin immediately. Even his merit 
resulting from digging wells and tanks becomes destroyed. 

52-53. In a festival, an ascedc is the leader of all Brah- 
manas. 1 An excellent Brahmana who reads all the Vedas with 
Itihasa constituting their fifth (Veda), should be kept next 


. Verses o2-54 state the precedence to be given to Brahmanas according 
o eir learning, in the seating arrangement of Brahmanas to be fed. It is 
noteworthy that a recluse or a Yogi gets the first place of honour. 






17 . 54-59 


623 


to him by one who knows. A Brahmana who studies three Vedas 
comes next to him. One (a student) of two Vedas comes next to 
him. 

54. Then a man of a single Veda and after him comes a per¬ 
son who studies the Nyaya System. For the purity of the row, 
I am mentioning them. Understand. I shall mention those 
who sanctify the row (?). 

55-58. Those who are mentioned before, are mentioned in 
their order. The Panktipavanas 1 (those who sanctify the row of 
diners) arc the following:—Sadangl (a person who has learnt 
all the six ancillary subjects of the Veda), Vinayl (the discipli¬ 
ned one), Yogin, Sarvatantrasvatantra (he who has mastered all 
systems of philosophy) and Yaydvara (a wandering mendicant 
saint). All these five should be known as Panktipavanas . He who 
has mastered completely one of the eighteen lores, he who ful¬ 
fills his duty duly—all of them are also so. The Trinaciketas 2 (a 
Brahmana who learns the three Vidyas of Naciketas), the 
Traividya (he who has mastered three Vidyas), the Brahmana 
who learns Dharmasastras, the Brahmana who has mastered the 
Barhaspatya scripture—all these Brahmanas are said to be 
those who sanctify the row. 

59. If a Brahmana invited in a Sraddha indulges in 
sexual intercourse with a woman, the Pitrs lie down in his semen 
virile for the period of that month (?) 


1. It was believed that persons of specially high character, merit, 
learning etc. purify excommunicated or degenerate members of the 
society by associating with them, by sitting in their row for dining or even 
by their beneficent look (v 91 below). The belief was probably current 
before the time of Dharma Sutras: vide Apartamba Dh. S.II. 7.17-22. 
Curiously enough, Gautama (15.28), Baudhayana Dh.S. II. 8.2, Manu III. 
185-186, Yajnavalkya Smfti (I. 219) use the same words about these 
sanctifiers of diners ( Panktipavanas ). We get a long list of such sanctifiers 
in Mbh. Anuiasana 90.25-31, Mt.P. 16.7-23, KP. II.21-1-14. Bd.P. 2.3.15.28- 
32. Our text practically repeats the same lines. 

2. Trindciketa is alternately explained as : 

(i) A person who knows the Nacikcta fire. 

(ii) A person who has thrice kindled the Nacikcta fire. 

(iii) One who has studied the Anuvaka called Virajas (Tait. Br. III. 
11.7-8) which describes the Nacikata fire and the story of 
Naciketas. 









624 


Vaju Purana 

60. If the performer of a Sraddha or he who takes food 
in a 3raddha, indulges in sexual intercourse, undoubtedly the 
Pitrs are stationed in his semen virile that month. 

61-62. Hence a Dana (religious gift) is to be made to the 
guest and a Brahmacarin (celibate person) is to be fed. The 
Dana is to be made to one engrossed in meditation and having 
sympathetic feelings. In the Sraddha rite, a righteous ascetic or 
a Valakhilya (a mendicant who docs not hoard anything) 
should be fed. A Vanaprastha (forest-dweller) and an Upakur- 
vdiia (Brahmacarin who completes his studies and pays his 
teacher and is about to be a householder) is propitiated by mere 
worship. 

63. If a householder is fed, Visvedevas are worshipped. 
By worshipping a Vanaprastha, sages are worshipped. By 
worshipping Valakhilyas, Purandara (i.e. Indra) is wor¬ 
shipped. 

64. In worshipping ascetics, Brahma himself is wor¬ 
shipped. These Asramas are holy. There are five Anasramas 
through deceitfulness (?) 

65. Four Asramas (i. e. people in the four stages of life) 
are to be worshipped in the rites ot Devas and Pitrs. A Sraddha 

should never be offered to those who are outside the four staees 
of life. 

66. Even if he stays hungry, let him stay so outside the 
four stages of life. The non-ascetic and the Salvationist—both of 
them are the defilers of the row. 1 


(pLZZT f lf Ve aliSt 0f persons wh ° * rc ^filers of the row of diners 
ZT:X arC COmn,on *° Sm !'6s and other Puranas 

I?3«8 MhH l l 5M66 ’ 222-224, Brhad YamaSmr. 

NP. I30.4KP uofoTJ 0 ' 6 ' 11 ’ Mt - P ‘ 1(U4 - 17 > BM.r 220.127-135, 
similarity the list • ’ ' 6 . t0 n,entI0n a fcw - Apart from the textual 
kS , w . aremteresung from a sociological point of view. They 

the elites of thol^t V ° CaUons ’ wa V s ° f Kfc were disrespected by 

S'l /t tlmCS - SeCtS Which insbt long fasts (e.g. Jainas) 
£uddhS T WCrC ° riginally 3theists )’ non-Brahmanical mendicams like 
n0t r ° il0Win S vocations of their castes are 
gifts (did). * S inVhed t0 a SrSddha or reiving reli’gious 






17 . 67-78 


625 


67. Those who shave off their hair in vain, those who 
wear matted hair, those who wear all sorts of robes, those who 
are devoid of mercy, those who break all codes of good con¬ 
duct and those who are indiscriminate in eating—are to be 
avoided. 

68. In the matter of Havya and Kavya , one shall avoid 
Karukas (a Saiva sect) and men of no disciplined conduct of 
life, men ostracised from the Vedic Society, musicians and 
actors (who imitate deities). 

69-70. A person who has social and other contacts with 
these, attains black complexion (taint). He who dines with 
Sudras—all these are defilers of the row (of diners). 

71. Killing (of animals etc.), destruction with force, 
agriculture, trading activities, animal husbandry, secret service 
to a person other than the preceptor—these should not be 
followed by a Brahmana. 

72. Those who are real Brahmanas, pursue knowledge and 
meditation. Even if they are born as Brahmanas, those who 
have false conceptions are of evil conduct. 

73. The preachers of wrong/heretic doctrines should be 
avoided. So also the arrogant, the scandal-monger, and people 
defiled by minor sins and great sins should be avoided. 

74-75. Those who make use of Vedas as a means of em¬ 
ployment out of greed and delusion or for profit are the sellers 
of Vedas. They are to be avoided in the Sraddha rite. 

Study of Vedas is not a profession. He who makes it a 
profession is a sinner. The partaker is deprived of the fruit of 
Vedic study. The donor is deprived of the fruit of charity. 

76. A person hired to teach the Vedas and one who is 
taught by such a person—both of them do not deserve invit¬ 
ation to a Sraddha as the sellers and buyers of the Vedas. 

77. Those (Brahmanas) who buy and sell for the purpose 
of livelihood are despicable ones. This is the profession of a 
Vaisya but a sin unto Brahmanas. 

78. They say that he who depends for his livelihood upon 
the Vedas and he who depends upon those who know Vedas 
for livelihood do not deserve invitation to a Sraddha. The 
husband of one’s daughter also shall not be invited. 





626 


Vayu Purana 


79. He who goes unto his wife in vain (i.c. an issueless 
person) and he who performs Yajna in vain—both of these do 
not deserve an (invitation to) a Sraddha. A Brahmana (who 
is) an atheist also shall not be invited. 

80. He who cooks food for himself only and he who does 
not offer anything to Dcvas and guests—both of them are 
fallen and they are Brahmaraksasas. They do not deserve 
(invitation to) a Sraddha. 

81. Those whose wives eagerly await the nights and those 
who run after other men’s wives, as well as those who are 
mad after wealth and love should not be invited to a Sraddha. 

82. Those who are opposed to the discipline andtbe duties 
of the four castes and stages of life, a thief and he who indiscri¬ 
minately performs Yajna for everyone—all these are defilers 
of the row in the rite ofSraddha. 

83- Pitfs do not partake of their share in the Sraddha 
if the invited Brahmana eats like a boar, or eats off his palm or 
eats with his left hand. 

84. The leavings of the Sraddha food should not be given 
to women or a Sudra unless he is an attendant. If anyone 
gives out of passion or delusion, it never reaches Pitrs. 

85. Hence in a Sraddha rite, the leavings of food should 
never be given except curds and ghee and that too to a disciple 
and a son; not otherwise. 


86. Only that which is not left over should be given, such 
as food particularly. Pitrs are propitiated with flowers, ’ roots 
and fruits too as with food. 


87. The foodstuffs served are sanctified as long as they 
are warm. Pitrs partake of the food as long as the invited 
Brahmanas take their food, with control over their speech. 

88 Charitable gifts, acceptance of gifts, Homa, taking food 
and oblations must be made with the thumb (touching them) 

lest they should go to Asuras. 

89. All these rites and particularly the rite of gifting away, 

, , ^ Performed. The rite of Acamana is performed with the 

hands within the knees. 


9°. One should avoid persons with shaven heads, matted 
ham, and ochre-coloured robes, at the time of Sraddha rite. 




17.91—18.1 


627 


One should assiduously offer Sraddha to those who wear tufts 
and to the Tridantfin type of ascetics. 

91. Those who are steadfast in their holy rites, those who 

seek knowledge and are engaged in meditations and the noble- 

souled devotees of Devas do sanctify (others) by their mere 
sight. 

92. The whole of the three worlds is pervaded or ever by 
the masters of Yoga. Hence they (can) observe whatever there 
is in the universe. 

93-94. The noble souls keep both the manifest and the un¬ 
manifest under their control. They control even that which is 
greater than all. Truth and falsehood have been perceived 
by them. Sat, Asat have been seen by them. All knowable 
things, absolution etc. are' seen by the noble souls. Hence one 
who is devoted to them attains everything auspicious. 

95. He who knows the Rks knows the Vedas. He who 
knows the Yajur Mantras knows Yajna. He who knows Saman 
Mantras knows Brahman. He who knows Manasa (? mind) 
knows everything. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
Benefit Derived from Charitable Gifts 

Brhaspati said: 

1. Henceforth I shall recount the various types of religious 
gifts and the benefits thereof. 1 A religious gift enables all living 
beings to cross (the ocean of worldly existence). It is the pleas¬ 
ing pathway unto heaven. 


1. Though ancient works on Dharma Sastra insist upon avoidance of 
lavishness in Sraddha , later Puraijas encourage profuse expenditure 
on Sraddha, e.g. Pd. P. Srsti-Kha^da 9.179-181, Varaha P. 13.50-51, 
VP. III. 14.22-23. Pitrs are reported to have two Gathas expressing their 
desire to have a descendant who would bestow on Brahmanas (for the 
benefit of Pitrs) jewels, clothes, land, costly vehicles. This text encourages 









628 


Vayu Parana 


2. That which is the most excellent in the world, that 
which is conducive to the attainment of heaven, nay, everything 
that is pleasing to oneself, must be offered to Pitrs by one 
who seeks one’s own eternal salvation. 

3. A person who offers cooked rice, derives the benefit of 
attaining a divine golden chariot dazzling like the sun and 
filled with divine Apsaras-s. 

4. Pie who gifts a cloth fresh from the loom at the time of 
the Sraddha rite attains longevity, ample wealth, beauty and a 
son. 

5. The knower of Dhannas who gives a sacred thread at 
the time of Sraddha and offers water to all Brahmanas attains 
the fruit of Brahmadana (the gift of Vedic learning). 

6. If anyone offers a good waterpot at the time of 
Sraddhas to the Brahmanas, a cow exuding honey and milk 
approaches the donor. 

7. He who gives a circular waterpot at the time of 
Sraddha obtains a milk-yielding divine cow that can be milked 
for whatever he wishes. 

8. If anyone gives a complete bed-equipment decorated 
with garlands of flowers, it becomes a palace and follows him 
as he goes (to heaven). 

9. By giving a house full of gems, furnished with bed, 
seats and food, at the time of Sraddha to ascetics, one rejoices 
in heaven. 

10-14. He obtains pearls, lapis lazuli , garments, varieties of 
precious stones, divine vehicles, hundred thousands and trillions 
in number and a divine aerial chariot that dazzles like a great 
blazing fire, that ;has the lustre of the moon and the sun and 
that is furnished with jewels according to one’s desire. The 
aerial chariot has the speed of the mind and can go anywhere 
as per his pleasure. It is surrounded by Apsaras-s. He remains 
at the head of the aerial chariot eulogised by eveyone allround. 
The Gandharva-s and Apsaras-s sprinkle him with divine scents 
and showers of flowers. They sing and play on the instruments. 


lavish gifts in Sraddha. The reward promised is happiness in heaven. 
There is little rational co-relation between religious gift (dana) and the 
reward obtained. 




18.15-29 


629 


Youthful and prominent maidens accompanied by groups of 
Apsaras-s, wake him up in sweet pleasing voices. 

15. by the gilts ol a thousand horses, a hundred chariots 
and a thousand elephants, a man lives with a Yogint, 

16. He who offers water (and) lamp to Pitrs and Yogins, 
attains the fruit of the gift of thousands of gold coins. 

17. No other gift is more excellent than the gift of life. 
Hence, by all means protection to life should be given. 

18. Non-violence is holier than all the Devas. It bestows 
everything. Learned men say that the gift of life is the noblest 
unto all living beings. 

19. At the time of Sraddha, one should give golden vessels 
having good characteristics. Sweet (divine) juices and bevera¬ 
ges, good foodstuffs and good fortune approach him. 

- 20. One shall give beautiful metallic vessel while feeding 
in Sraddha. He will become a recipient of the objects of 
cherished desires and of beauty and wealth. 

21. In the Sraddha rite, one should give a silver or gold 
vessel. By giving it, the donor gets ample virtue (as reward). 

22. He who makes a gift of a cow that has calved but 
once, along with a milking pot, at the time of a Sraddha, 
obtains several cows and the nourishment of the cows. 

23-26a. At the time of winter, one shall offer fire and 
plenty of wood. He who gives fuel to Brahmanas at the 
onset of winter, becomes always victorious in battle. He 
shines with glory. One should honour Brahmanas and offer 
fragrant garlands and sweet scents as well as vessels. Great 
rivers flowing with fragrant scents and all sorts of happiness 
approach the donor. So also youthful maidens of pleasing 
manners (approach him). 

26b. Beautiful beds and seats, grounds and vehicles (are to 
be given). 

27-28. He who gives the above-mentioned articles at a 
Sraddha, attains the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. In ordinary 
Sraddhas or at the time of Darsa Sraddha, one should give to 
the Brahmanas of good qualities, vessels full of ghee with.very 
great respect. He shall attain good memory and fine intellect. 

29. He obtains the benefit of many cows yielding potfuls 







630 Vayu Purana 

of milk. In this world, he rejoices with chariots and good 
horses. 

30. By giving the thing wished for, at the time of Sraddha, 
one gets the benefit of the sacrifice called Pundarlka. By 
giving a beautiful residential place, one attains the fruit of 
Rajasuya sacrifice. 

31-33. By giving a forest full of flowers and fruits, one 
obtains sweet smelling substances. By giving wells, parks, tanks, 
fields, cowsheds and houses, one rejoices in heaven as long 
as the moon and the stars stay. By giving beds and bedsheets 
embellished with jewels, one attains endless heavenly pleasure. 
Pitps are pleased with him. He is worshipped (honoured) by 
kings. He flourishes with wealth and grain. 

34-35. Woollen and silk garments, excellent blankets, 
deer-skin, gold brocade, coloured cloth and wool—these should 
be given to Brahmanas after duly feeding them. A person who 
has faith then gets the benefit of a hundred Vajapeya 
Yajiias. 1 

36. Many beautiful women, sons, servants and attendants, 
nay all living beings, become submissive to him in this world. 
He becomes free from all ailments. 

37. He who gives silk, woven silk, cotton and velvet 
cloth, in Sraddhas obtains the fulfilment of all his cherished 
desires. 

38. He dispels all inglorious things and misfortunes im¬ 
mediately like the darkness at the time of sunrise. He shines 
on an aerial chariot like the moon among stars. 

39. A garment is praised by all Devas; garment belongs 
to all the deities. In the absence af cloth, no holy rite—neither 
Yajiias nor (study of) Vedas nor penances, can be performed. 

40. Hence clothes should be given at the time of Sraddha 
particularly. He obtains all those things—Yajiias, the Vedas 
and the penances. 


1. The promise of the fruit of sacrifices (which require a lot of trouble 
and expenditure) for dim must have resulted as a disincentive for perfor¬ 
mance of sacrifice and these Brahmanical advocates of such cheap and easy 

7,° f « . Sac f ificiaI «««*«* get the dubious credit of adversely 
affecting the Vedic institution of Sacrifice. 





18.41-52 


631 


41. He who always gives them during Sraddhas with faith 
and purity, obtains all his desires and all realms H f * 

42.43.He obtains the fruit of asacrifice richly equipped with 
all desirable things. He who gives different kinds of P e dibles 

grains, flour mixed with curds, flour cake. ’ 

milk milk puddings, KrsW and Madhuparka and pies'fried 
m ghee, obtains the fruit of Agnistoma 

44^ p itrs are eager for curds and other milk products 
and different kinds of edibles and cooked rice during the 

Cendant" at the tlme w ^en the constellation Magha is 

4 , 5 . ° ne s h aJ l feed Brahmanas with ghee. A little of ghee 
must be poured on the ground. By gifting elephants in G^ya, 
one can be free from all worries about Sraddha. 

46. By giving cooked rice, milk pudding, ghee, honey, fruits 

and roots as well as different types of food, one rejoices here and 
alter death. 

47. Beaten rice mixed with sugar and milk is always of 
everlasting benefit. If Masuradal and Ki-sara (rice cooked with 

spices and pulses) are offered, Pitrs will be pleased for a 
year. r 

48. Fried grain-powder, fried rice, pies, cooked horse-gram 
dishes all mixed with curds-He who gives all these in Sraddha 
obtains the treasure of Kubera. 

49 He who assiduously gives fresh vegetables in Sraddhas 
after duly honouring the guests, attains all enjoyments. He is 
levered when he goes to heaven. 

50. The man who offers the most excellent foods and edibles, 
beverages, lambatives and juicy things, becomes the most excel¬ 
lent of all. 


51 ; # The flesh of the rhinoceros is the best Havis in the rites 
for Visvedevas and Soma. But the best horn of the rhinoceros 
should be avoided to mitigate the malice (of deities) ? 

52. The devotee, with palms joined in reverence, should 
offer the best seat to the guests while feeding. He shall then 
attain the excellent fruit of all the rites and Yajnas. 


1. A dish consisting of sesamum and grain (mixture of rice peas with a 
few spices)— MW, p. 308. 





632 


Vayu Puratja 


53. Well-cooked food should be served hot and quick 
to the hungry. It should not be over-cooked. After honouring 
him assiduously vegetable dishes soaked in ghee should be of¬ 
fered devotedly. 

54. The person who ofTers food attains an aerial chariot 
resembling the mid-day sun and fitted with swans for three crores 
ofKalpas (crores of maidens in Bd. P.). 

55. There is nothing here greater than the gift of food and 
they are sustained by it without any doubt. 

56. There is no gift nobler than the gift of life. The set 
of the three worlds lives by means of food. That is the fruit of 
offering cooked rice. 

57. All the worlds are founded (dependent) on food. It is 
the fruit of the gift of the worlds. Food is Prajapati himself. 
All these worlds are pervaded by it. Hence a gift on par with 
that of food has never been before nor will there be any ever in 
future. 

58. A man devoted to Pitrs immediately attains all the jewels, 
vehicles and women on the earth. 

59. One should with palms joined in reverence, always offer- 
shelter to the guests. They are the Devas awaiting in thousands, 
for the divine hospitality. 

60. He who makes all gifts (mentioned before) shall be the 
sole emperor on the earth. He shall become happy even if he 
makes three, two or even one of those gifts. 

61. Making gifts is the greatest virtue (Dharma) . It is 
honourd and revered by good men. The Lordship of the three 
worlds is to be attained only through Dana. 

62. A king regains his kingdom; a poor man gets excell¬ 
ent wealth; a man about to die, attains longevity. Whatever a 
man devoted to Pitrs desires in his mind, will be granted by 
his Pitrs. 



19.1-5 


633 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

The Benefit of Sraddha Performance 
on Various Tithis 

Brhaspali said : 

!• Henceforth I shall describe the various types of Srad- 

dha1 such as A J' asra or Wr* (daily, regular), Naimittika (oc¬ 
casional, conditional) and Kamya (performed with some desired 
object in view) and the mode of worship (in them). 

2. There are three sets of Asfakas* (the 7th, 8th and 9th 
days of the dark half of a month) that bring about marriage, 
birth of a son and acquisition of wealth. The dark half of a 
month is the most excellent. The first Asfaka is called Citri. 

3-4. The second Asfaka, shall be Prajapatya (with Prajapati 
as its deity) and the third one (is) Vaisvadevikl. The first Asfaka 
shall always be performed with flour cakes. The second should 
always be performed with meat. The third Asfaka shall be per¬ 
formed with greens and vegetables. This is the injunction regar¬ 
ding the articles (for Sraddha ). The Anoasfaka (the ninth day in 
the dark half of Pausa, Magha and Phalguna) of the Pitrs is 
also laid down permanently. 

5. If there happens to be a fourth As / (ihd 9 a learned person 
should perform a special Sraddha therein, even by spending his 
entire possession. 


1 * The Ajasra or ( Nitya 5racldha must be performed everyday, c.g. 
Pitr-yajfia in daily PancamahayajHas . Sraddha to be performed on an occasion 
which is uncertain (e.g. the birth of a son) is Naimittika . Sraddha done 
with a desire for a fruit or reward (c.g. progeny) is Kamya , 

2. The word c Asfaka* is formed from ‘asfan*. But according to Vartika 
9 on Panini VII. 3.45, it means f a rite with Pitre as deities’. Afualayana 
Gr. S . II. 4-1 informs that the 8th day in the dark halves of seasons 
Hemanta and Sisira are Asfakas. As a season consists of two months there 
are (and should be) four Atfakas. But most other Grhya Sutras differ and 
regard the 8th day in the dark halves of Margasirsa, Pausa and Magha as 
Asfaka days. This Purana does not follow As'valayana. Though the above- 
mentioned Vartika regards Pitrs as the deities on these days, our Puraria 
regards the first Asfaka as Citri (Aindrl ? as in Bd.P.), the second has 
Prajapati and the third has Visvedevas as the deities and Pitrs are cons¬ 
picuous by their non mention. 







634 


Vayu Purana 


6. He (the performer of a Sraddha ) shall always be happy 
both here and hereafter. The worshippers shall attain progress 
and the non-believers, downfall. 

7. Like cows approaching a water-trough, all these Pitps 
and gods approach the man (who performs a Sraddha)—Pitrs 
during the Parvan days and deities on different Tithis. 

8. Let them not return without being worshipped during 
Asfakas. The world (worldly life) will be in vain in regard 
to him (who does not worship). Even what is obtained by him, 
perishes. 

9-10. Those who offer worship attain Devas. Those who 
do not offer are reborn as lower animals. A person who performs 
a Sraddha on the Full Moon day obtains progeny, nourishment, 
memory, intellect, sons and prosperity. 1 2 3 4 5 6 He enjoys to the full. 
(The Sraddha performed on) Pralipad (the first day of a fort¬ 
night) is conducive to the acquisition of wealth. What he has 
acquired does not perish. 

11. He who performs a Sraddha on the second day of the 
lunar fortnight, becomes the lord of bipeds. The third day (is 
to be selected for Sraddha) by one who seeks excellent things, 
(for) Trtiya (third day) is destructive of sins. 


1. Verses JO-19 state the benefit accruing from performance of Sraddha 
on different Tithis from the 1st to the 15th. Apastamba Dh. S. II. 7.16-22, 
Mbh. Anuttsana 87, Bd. P. 2.3.9-20, BM. P. 220.15-21, KP.II. 20.17.22 
state the reward a man gets for performance of Sraddha on these Tithis . But 
there is difference of opinion among these about the benefits. For example, 
see the comparative table of rewards of Sraddha performance on various 
Tithis. 

The Tithi Reward as per our 

Text 

1. Acquisition of wealth 

2. Lordship over bipeds 

3. Destroys sins 

4. Discovers weak points 
of his enemies 

5. Attains prosperity and glory 

6. Reverence from Brahmanas 

The list need not be extended. 


Reward as per K.P. II. 20 

Auspicious sons 
Begets daughters 
Gets animals 
Gets small animals and 
things 

Begets splendid sons 
Blessed with lustre and 
good cultivation 





19.12-22 


635 


12. He who performs a Sraddha on Caturthi (fourth day) finds 
the weak points of his enemies. A performer of a Sraddha on the 
fifth day attains great prosperity and glory. 

13-14. Brahmanas revere him who performs a Sraddha on 
the sixth day. The man who performs a Sraddha on the seventh 
day regularly attains the fruit of Mahdsalra (great Soma sacri¬ 
fice). He becomes the lord of Ganas (followers of Siva). The 
man who performs a Sraddha on the eighth day attains complete 
prosperity. 

15. He who performs a Sraddha on the ninth day, attains 
prosperity and a beloved wife. He who performs a Sraddha 
on the tenth day, attains the glory of Brahman-hood. 

16. He shall attain (mastery over) all the Vedas and the 
destruction of sins. The Dana (religious gift) offered on the ele¬ 
venth day yields prosperity for ever. 

17. They say that he who performs a Sraddha on the twelfth 
day acquires wealth, a kingdom and becomes victorious. He who 
performs a Sraddha on the thirteenth day attains progeny, intellect, 
cattle, wisdom, freedom, excellent nourishment, long life and 
prosperity. 

18. One shall offer a Sraddha on the fourteenth day to those 
young men of the house who have met premature death and to 
those who have been killed by weapons. 

19. With purity one should always offer a Sraddha on 
the New Moon day to those children unfavourably born (e.g. a 
son after three daughters or a daughter after three sons) as well 
as to twin children. 

20. One who regularly performs a Sraddha attains all cheris¬ 
hed desires and infinite heavenly pleasures. One shall always 
perform on the New Moon day the rituals and those great rites 
that involve extraction of Soma Juice (or that are conducive to 
the development of the Moon (?) ) 

21. Thus developed, the Moon sustains the three worlds, 
being regularly eulogised by Siddhas, Caranas and Gand- 
harvas. 

22. (The Moon) is eulogised by thousands of Apsaras-s danc¬ 
ing, singing and playing on instruments, by means of eulogies, 
flowers of great beauty and all the requisites for the fulfilment 
of desires. 






636 


Vayu Purina 


23. Devas and Gandharvas and the groups of Siddhas 
eulogise that devotee of thePi/w, steady in his holy rites. They 
serve him by means of aerial, chariots for sport. 

24. The devotee of Pitrs shall attain all cherished desires 
on the' Amavasya (New Moon) day, for Pitrs are worshipped by 
him directly always. 

25. The constellation Magha has Pitrs for its deities Hence 
a Sraddha on that day yields everlasting benefit. The wise per¬ 
form the rites for Pitfs particularly on that day. 

26. Hence the Pitrs always desire Magha. Those who are 
devoted to Pitrs and deities attain the greatest goal. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

Benefit of Sraddha Performance under 
Different Constellations. 1 

Brhaspati said: 

1. Listen to a detailed account of all those Sraddhas which 
Yama mentioned to Sasabindu. They are to be performed under 
different constellations severally. 2 

2. He who maintains the sacrificial fires for ever and per¬ 
forms a Sraddha (when the Moon is) in conjuction with the 
Krttika constellation, becomes free from worries and ailments 
along with his children. 

3. A person desirous of children should perform a Sraddha 
under Rohini.By performing a Sraddhaundcr theSaumya (Mrga- 

1. This chapter is incorporated from Mbh. AnuSasana 89. 

2. Vi§nu Dh.S. (78.8-15) mentions the rewards obtained by performing 
iriddha under different constellations from Krttika to Bhararu. Yajnavalkya 
I. 265-268, MK.P. 30.8-16, BM.P. 220.33-42, KP.II. 20.9-15, Bd.P..2.3.18 
deal with the same topic though there is some disagreement about the 
benefits promised. 

The counting of Naksatras from Kfttika and not from Asvini shows 
that this chapter (and also the Mbh. chapter, the source of this chapter) 
was written some time before 500 A.D. when the Vedic counting of Naksatras 
was prevalent. 





20.4-13 


637 


giras) constellation one attains vigour and vitality. Generally 
the man of ruthless activities performs a Srdddha under Ardra. 

4-5. One performing a Sraddha under the Punarvasu conste¬ 
llation becomes the possessor of fields and begets sons. He will 
be blessed with wealth and food-grains as well as sons and grand¬ 
sons. A man who desires satisfaction and contentment should 
perform Sraddha under Pusya constellation. One shall attain 
heroic sons by worshipping Pitfs under Aglesa. 

6. He who performs a Sraddha under Magha becomes the 
most excellent among his kinsmen. A man worshipping Pitrs in 
the (Purva) Phalgunl constellation attains good fortune. 

7. He who performs a Srdddha under Uttaraphalguni 

constellation becomes the leader (in his community) along 
with his children. He who performs Tarpana to Pitfs under the 
Hasta constellation becomes the chief of good men. 

8. He who performs a Sraddha in the Citra constel¬ 
lation sees (has) handsome sons. He who performs a Sraddha 

under the Svati constellation becomes a scholar and attains 

profit. 

9. A man wishing for sons shall perform a Sraddha in the 
Visakha constellation. He who performs a Srdddha in the Anu- 
radha constellation extends his realm. 

10. He who performs a Srdddha under the Jyestha constella¬ 
tion attains lordship and excellence for ever. Those who desire 
health shall perform a Srdddha under the Mula constellation. 
Those who desire great fame should perform a Srdddha under 
Purvasadha. 

11. A man performing a Srdddha under the Uttarasadha con¬ 
stellation shall be free from grief. By performing a Srdddha under 
the Sravana constellation, one shall attain the greatest goal in 
excellent worlds. 

12. A man who performs a Srdddha under the Dhanistha 
constellation gains a kingdom and attains enormous wealth. By 
performing a Srdddha under the Abhijit constellation, (he) ob¬ 
tains goats and sheep as fruit. 

13. He who performs a Srdddha in the Satabhisak constel¬ 
lation attains success as a great physician. He who performs a. 
Srdddha in the Purva-Bhadrapada (Prosthapada) constellation 
attains goats and sheep as the fruit. 











638 


Vayu Parana 


14. He who performs a Sraddha unfailingly under Uttara 
Bhadrapada shall obtain thousands of cows. He who per¬ 
forms a Sraddha under the Revatl constellation gets much wealth. 
By performing a Sraddha under the Asvini constellation one at¬ 
tains horses. He who performs a Sraddha in the BharanI constel¬ 
lation attains long life. 

15. By performing a Sraddha according to these injunctions 
SaSabindu attained the entire earth. After attaining the entire 
earth he praised him (Yaraa). 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE 

Miscellaneous Topics : Qualifications of a Brahmana 
for Sr&ddha-gifls : Merits of Performance of 
Sraddha at Sacred Places 

Sarhyu said : 

1. O foremost one among the eloquents, what is it that 
offered to the Pitj-s, delights them to a little extent ? What deli¬ 
ghts (them) for a long time ? What is it that is conducive to 
delight them infinitely 7 1 


1. The first topic discussed is about the vegetarian and non-vegetarian 
dishes liked by Pitxs and therefore should be served to Brahmanas while 
dining at a Sraddha (vide w. 3-9). 

Apastamba Dh.S. (600 B.G.) prescribes flesh-eating as obligatory at 
Sraddha and enumerates the animals the flesh of which gratifies Pit T s for a 
specific period e.g. the flesh of a gewaya (a cow-like animal) offered in 
Sraddha gratifies the Pitjs for a year ( samoatsaram gavaycna tfptih ). For other 
animals and the period of gratification etc., sec Apastamba Dh.S. II. 7.16- 
25; II.17.3. For refusal to accept non-vegetarian food at a Sraddha one has 
to go to hell ( Viflaidharmottara I. 140-49-50, also Manu V. 35; KP. 11.17.40). 

Manu III.267-272, Yajnavalkya I. 158-260, Mbh. AnuSasana Gh. 88, 
Katyayana’s Sraddha-Sutra (Kandika 7-8), KP. 11.40-42, Mt. P. 17.31-35, 
Bd.P. 2.3.19, VP. III. 16.1-3 and such other Puragas specify the flesh of 
certain animals served at Sraddha and the period of gratification of Pitrs 
thereby. Hemadri opines that greater the period, greater is the gratification 
( iha saruatra prltyatUayo vivakfitafi —Sraddha p. 590). 





21.2-12 


639 


Brhaspati said : 

2. Listen to those sacrificial offerings which are to be made 
at the time of Sraddha as the knowers of Sraddha have under¬ 
stood. Listen also to the benefit of these in accordance with 
their strength. 

3. Grandfathers are pleased for a month by a Sraddha in 
which gingelly seeds, grains of rice, barley, black gram, water, 
fruits and roots are offered. 

4. They are pleased for two months if fishes are offered; for 
three months if venison is offered; for four months if the meat of 
hare is offered; and forfive months if the meat of birds is offered. 

5. They are delighted for six months with the flesh of boars, 
for seven months with goats’ flesh and for eight months with 
the flesh of a spotted doe. 

6. The manes are delighted for nine months with the meat 
of the Ruru deer. They will have contentment lasting for ten 
months with the meat of Gauaya (a kind of ox). 

7. They are propitiated for eleven months with the meat of 
a tortoise. Know that Sraddha with (products of) cow’s milk 
lasts for a year. 

8. So also in the case of milk-pudding along with milk pro¬ 
ducts, honey and ghee. The satisfaction with the meat of a 
Vadhririasa (a rhino-like animal ?) lasts for twelve years. 

9. With the meat of Khadga (rhinoceros) during the rites of 
Pitrs, the pleasure is everlasting. So also with the meat of a black 
goat and an alligator provides endless pleasure. 

10. In this connection, those who know the ancient lores 
mention about the gathas (traditional verses) sung by Pitrs. 

I shall narrate them to you. Listen and understand precisely. 

11-12. (Pitrs sing) “Will a son be bom in our own 
family who will give us on the Trayodafi (thirteenth) day, cooked 
food, milk pudding, honey and ghee on the occasion of Gaja- 
cchaya Parvan P * 1 Or give the same with the meat of a goat that is 


In Southern India, though neither Mitatyara nor Kalpataru have prohibited 
flesh-diet at tfraddha, strict vegetarianism is observed. 

1. The conjunction that occurs when the Moon is in the Magha constel¬ 
lation, the Sun is in Hasta and the Tithi is the 13th in the rainy season, it 
is called Gajacchdya or Kunjaracchaya. 












640 


Vayu Pur&na 


entirely red during the rainy season and under the constellation 
of Magha ? It is better to wish for many sons. At least one of 
them will go to Gaya or marry a girl eight years old 6r dis¬ 
charge a blue ox 1 (free to wander).” 

Sarhyu asked : 

13. O dear one, recount the benefit of the holy centres 
Gaya etc. to me who ask. Please mention the merit entirely that 
is derived by performing the rites of Pitrs. 

Bfhaspali said : 

14. O son, a Sraddha performed in Gaya yields endless 
benefit. Japas, Homas and penances (performed there) ‘are also 
beneficial endlessly. Hence on the anniversary day of the death 
of father, Sraddha performed there is remembered as everlasting, 

15. A son begot after marrying a girl of eight years 
sanctifies twentyone generations. Moreover, he sanctifies six 
generations in the family of his maternal uncle. This is remem¬ 
bered as the benefit (of such a marriage). 

16. I shall recount the benefit derived from (discharging) 
a bull. Even as I recount listen and understand. The discharger 
of the bull sanctifies ten previous generations and ten succeeding 
generations. 

17. At the time of letting free the bull whatever is sprinkled 
with water as it emerges from water on to the ground, is said to 
yield endless benefit. 

18. There is no doubt in this that all those things touched 
by water tossed about by its tail etc., give endless satisfaction to 
Pitrs. 


1. This is called‘the rite of letting free a bull* ( Vrsotsarga-vidhi) . For 
the details vide Vifliu Dh. S . 86.1-20. Vimdharmottara 1.147. 1-19 repeat 
the same procedure. Though the words ‘ nilam v^am' are translated as 
‘blue bull* the bull is not blue in colour. Though the adjective ‘blue* 
(Mla) is variously defined, Mt. P. 207.38 defines it as ‘a bull having white 
legs, face & tail and the rest of the body as red* I could not trace the 
verse lohilo yastu varpena etc. in Bd. P. though Kane quotes it as ascribed 
to it (HD, IV p. 540, fn 1215). • 

For the benefit accruing from Vrfotsarga see the following w. 16-20. 




21.19-29 


641 


19. The ground dug up by the bull by means of its hoofs or 
horns, serves as canals of honey perpetually feeding Pitrs. 

20. The satisfaction derived by Pitrs at the rite of letting 
free the bull is more than that when they hear that a tank, a 
thousand Nalvas square, has been dug (a Nalva =400 hands). 

21. If anyone gives gingelly seeds mixed with honey and 
jaggery, it yields everlasting benefit. 

Brhaspali said : 

22. One should not test Brahmanas always in order to give 
them anything. But testing is heard about (i.e. prescribed in 
£rutis) in regard to the rites of Devas (gods) and Pitrs. 1 

23-27. One should invite these for the Sraddha rite : Those 
who have studied all the Vedas and who have performed all rites; 
the Brahmanas who are the sanctifiers of the row; important 
Brahmanas who know the Bhasyas (Glosses on Aphorisms); those 
who regularly study Grammar; those who study Puranas and 
Dharmasastras; those who are conversant with the three-Naci- 
ketas-Vidyas; the worshippers of five fires; the Trisuparnas , the 
knowers of the six ancillary subjects of the Vedas; a son of the 
Brahma form of marriage; a master of Vedic Prosody (or chanter 
of the Vedas); a singer of the Jycstha Saman ; one who has taken 
baths in sacred waters (at holy places); those who have taken 
part in important Yajnas and taken the concluding (Avabhrtha) 
ablutions; those who observe rites immediately; those who stri¬ 
ctly adhere to their own duties; those who are not wrathful and 
those who are always calm and quiescent. And those who 
perpetually observe the ten meritorious deeds shall also be 
invited. 

28. Whatever is offered to these, yields everlasting benefit. 
These are the sanctifiers of the row. Those Brahmanas who observe 
Yogic rites and duties should be revered faithfully. 

29. They are the foremost due to their adherence to the 
duties of their (specific) stages of life. In regard to the offering 


1. Verses 22-31 state the qualifications of the Brahmins eligible for in¬ 
vitation to Sraddha, though it has been already discussed in Gh. 17. 
Yogins are given the first preference as Yoga-dharma was regarded as 
the foremost among Dharmas. 











642 


Vdyu Purana 


oiHwyasznd Kavyas, they are the leaders. He who worships 
them worships the three deities Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara. 

30. One who worships these, worships all the worlds along 
with the Pitrs. ( Togadharma ) is the holiest of all holy things, the 
most auspicious of all auspicious things. 

31. Togadharma is mentioned as the first among all 
Dharmas . 

I shall recount those who cannot be included in the row (i.e. 
cannot be invited) for a Sraddha} Listen and understand as 
I recount them : 

32-36. A rogue, a drunkard, a patient of pulmonary con¬ 
sumption, a cattle breeder, an ugly person, a common servant of 
all in the village, a usurer, a professional musician, a merchant, 
an incendiary, an administerer of poison, a pimp, a seller of 
Soma juice, a person who undertakes sea voyage, one whose skin 
is defiled, a dealer in oil, a deceitful person, one who quarrels 
with his father, one who has a co-husband at home, a calumnia¬ 
ted person, a thief, a person whose livelihood is arts and crafts, 
a tale-bearer, a person giving wrong information about holy 
days, one who is malicious to his friends, a group-beggar, an 
atheist, a discarder of the Vedas, a mad fellow, a eunuch, a 
knavish fellow, a destroyer of foetus, a defiler of the preceptor’s 
bed, a follower of the physician’s profession for livelihood, a 
messenger and an adulterer. 

37. He who sells the Vedas, religious observances, holy rites 
and penances—all these are defilers of the row. 

What is gifted to an atheist, ungrateful person or a censurer 
becomes lost. 

38. What is given to a trader is not beneficial here or here¬ 
after. The same is the case in regard to a person who misappro¬ 
priates (deposits), who is knavish and who hates the Vedas. 

39-42a. That which is given to a merchant or an artisan 
devoid of virtue becomes lost; a merchant despises (underrates) 


1. Verses 31-42 give a list of persons unfit for invitation to a Sraddha. 
Long lists of such unfit persons are given by Gautama Dh.S. XV. 16-19, 
Manu III. 150-166, Yajiiavalkya I. 222-224, Mbh. Anuiasana 90.6-11, 
Mt.P. 16.14-17, KP.II. 21.23-43. 




21.42b-48 


643 

the commodities while purchasing and praises (the same) while 
selling. Hence a merchant, the abode of untruth, does not deserve 
(invitation to) a Sraddha. What is given to a widow’s son (after 
remarriage) even if he be a Brahmana, is like what is oblated 
into ashes. 

The following persons if invited to a Sraddha destroy the 
merits of the donor: a one-eyed man (destroys) sixty (merits), 
a eumuch a hundred (merits), a sufferer from leprosy as long a^ 
he sees, a sufferer from sinful ailment a thousand (meritorious 
acts). A donor, by being childish, falls off from the benefit of 
Dana . 

42b-43. Brahma has ordained that he who covers his head 
while taking food and one who eats food facing the south, he 
who takes food with shoes on and he who offers Dana scornfully 
gives the entire share unto the leaders of Asuras. 

44. Dogs and demons should not see the performance of a 
Sraddha. 1 Hence it should be screened out all round, and 
gingelly seeds should be strewn around. 

45. It is to ward off Raksasas that gingelly seeds are strewn 
and the screen is to prevent the dogs. Boars destroy the effect of 
a Sraddha by having a look at it and a cock by fluttering its 
wings (or by the fall of its feathers within). 

46. A woman in her monthly course destroys the Sraddha 
by touching. If the performer of a Sraddha becomes angry, he 
destroys the benefit derived. If anyone gets his friends to offer 
Sraddha and Havis, they do not please Pitrs or Devas. Nor does 
he attain heaven. 

47. Grandfathers (manes) are delighted with what is given 
on the beautiful banks of the rivers and streams as well as of the 
lakes and in secluded places. 

48. One shall not shed tears while performing a Sraddha, 
nor should he take active part in irrelevant conversation. One 
should not munch or crunch anything while performing a Srad¬ 
dha. One should avoid mutual rivalry too. 

1. Since the period of Dharma Sutras , people believed that food for 
Sraddha got polluted even by being looked by certain animals and .certain 
categories of people. The list of such unvvorthies is given in vv. 44-46—an 
echo of Gautama Dh.S. 15.25-28, Manu III. 239-242, and Purarias like 
KP. II. 22.34-35, VP. III.16.12-14, Bd.P. 2.3.19, 43-44. 






644 


Vayu Purana 


49. While performing a Sraddha the sacred thread should 
be worn from right to left and the Darbhas should be held duly 
in the hands. One should perform a Sraddha till one’s death. 
Thus one delights Pitrs. 

50. At the outset, he should formally take permission 
of the preceptor or the invited Brahmanas. He should then kindle 
a fire duly. The articles to be offered to Pitrs should be 
placed on the ground over a winnowing basket or on a Kusa 
mat. 

51. During the bright half (of the month), the Sraddha is 
to be performed in the forenoon by the skilful performer of a 
Sraddha. During the dark half, it should be performed in the 
afternoon. In any case the Rauhina period (the 4th Muhurta 
of the day), should not be transgressed. 

52. Thus the great and noble souls, the seers of time and 
place, the Pitrs of great Yoga (yogic power) and great virility 
should be worshipped. 

53. A person always devoted to Pitrs attains the excellent 
Yoga. After eschewing both auspicious and inauspicious actions 
they attain salvation through meditation. 

54. It is for the sake of (promotion of) sacrifices that after 
deluding the universe, it (Yoga) was eschewed and kept in the 
cavity (of the heart, i.e. kept secret) by the noble-souled 
Kasyapa. 

55. O excellent one among the knowers of Yoga, that 
nectarine (or immortal) Yoga, the eternal great Dharma was 
promulgated by Sanatkumara. 

56. It is a great esoteric secret of the Devas. It is the grea¬ 
test resort of the sages. It can always (be attained) by the devo¬ 
tees of Pitrs through filial devotion, piety and endeavour. 

57. There is no doubt in this that one who is devoted to 
Pitrs shall, with endeavour, attain everything of that Yoga in 
essence. 

58. To whom are the Sraddhas to be offered; which are the 
things that yield great benefits when given; what are the 
holy centres and sacred rivers wherein the Sraddha offered bears 
everlasting benefits; by what means does one attain heaven—all 
these have been mentioned to you in brief. 



21.59-67 


645 


Brhaspati said: 

59. The man who after hearing this explanation of the 
procedure of Sraddhas, becomes malicious, is an atheist envelo¬ 
ped in darkness. He will drown himself in the terrible hell. 

60. He who has perfectly controlled his mind, finds all his 
great ailments terminated. He who is not mindful of the Airamas 
(stages in life) stated in the Vedas attains the Kumbhlka hell. 
He attains the status of a thief and gets his tongue cut. 

61. Those who censure Yoga become lumps of clay in the 
ocean 1 and decay as long as the earth exists. Hence, this is the 
Dharma (virtue) intended in the Sraddha that it should be per¬ 
formed by a man with faith (in it). 

62. Scandalisation of Yogins should be scrupulously avoided. 
By scandalising (them), a person becomes a worm and rolls 
there itself. 

63. There is no doubt in this that he who censures Yoga, 
the cause of salvation unto those who meditate, goes to 
terrible hell. He who listens to it (the censure), also falls into 
the hell. 

64. By denigrating masters of Yoga, a man certainly falls 
into the hell surrounded by darkness and terrible to behold. 

65. There is no doubt about it that he who pays heed to 
the vilification of masters of Yoga of fully controlled selves, be¬ 
comes submerged in the Kumbhlpaka hell for a long time. 

66. One should eschew hatred for Yogins mentally, verbally 
and physically. He will reap the benefit of the same here itself 

as well as after death. There is no doubt about it. 

67. A person who has mastered (all lores) does not get 
(realize) the Atman. He wanders within the three worlds due 
to his own actions. A person who has mastered Rgveda, 
Yajurveda, Samaveda and all their ancillary subjects does not 
attain Brahman which is devoid of changes and aberrations 
( avikaram ) and therefore, becomes distressed. 


1. Verses 54-57, and vv. 61-71 show the blind faith of Puranic writers 
in Yogins. Since the times of Vasisjha Dh.S. XI. 17, Yatis (recluses) and 
Yogins had a special place of honour among the invitees to a Sraddha. But 
Purana writers have prohibited denigration of Yogis even orally. 







646 


Vayu Purana 


68. (Defective verse) 1 * * * He who has crossed the bounds of 
effects (of Prakrti) goes beyond Prakrti. Mastery, of the three 
Vedas leads to the crossing (of the limits?) of three gunas The 
(highest) principle is beyond the twentyfour Yogas (?). 
He is the master of all, who has passed beyond worldly existe¬ 
nce. (?) 

69. 2 (Defective verse) By means of his Yogic power, a 
knower of Yogas withdraws unto himself the dissolution of the 
Atman, in the same manner as the entire creation of the princi¬ 
ples by the Atman. He alone becomes the master of all. 

70. It is the knower of Yogas who knows the Vedas and at¬ 
tains the knowable. They call him the knower of the Vedas, and 
the master of Vedas. 

71. After duly knowing the knowable and what should be 
known (one becomes the knower of Vedas). They call him the 
knower of the Vedas. All others are thinkers of the Vedas. 

72. A person devoted to Pitrs attains the (fruit of) 
Yajfias, Vedas, all cherished desires, different kinds of knowledge, 
longevity, progeny and riches. 

73. He who invariably reads this Sraddhakalpa during 
Sraddha, in the end, gets all these (benefits) and the benefits 
of charitable gifts at the holy centres. 

74. He shall be the sanctifier of the row (of diners). He 
shall be given priority in being fed among the Brahmanas. Or 
he shall (be eligible to) teach all the Brahmanas and attain all 
cherished desires. 


1. The text is defective and requires slight modifications as per the same 
verse printed in the Bd. P. 2.3.19.64 which means: “One who has mastered 
all created things, the products of Prakrti (the nature known as AvidyS), one 

who has mastered the good features in three Vedas, one who has mastered 

the three ^(Sattva etc.) and one who has mastered the twentyfour 
principles, is the person who has crossed the Sarasara to the other shore and 
u the master of academic studies’*. 

.with corresponding verse in the Bd. P.2.3.19.65 

£fand x h ll . Wg)n,eanS: "° ne Wh0 “ dcvotcd to Brahman 

e^*Lt V ’ T' m , U ’ Simi,arly hc COm prehends the state where 
everything is merged into the soul**. 

d„J hC ! e .T dline i . 0f ‘ he VerSC “ different ‘ ^ means, “A Brahmana who 

Aa“comes und t0 r 2* ^ ^ Cannot beco ™ th <= master of everything 

that comes under the pervicw of order,, by knowledge.” 




21.75-86 


647 


75. He who always listens to this after subduing anger, 
being without malice and becoming free fromgreed and delusion’ 
attains endless heavenly pleasure. 

76. He attains the entire benefit of visiting holy centres, 
and making charitable gifts etc. This is the most excellent means 
to liberation. This is the greatest means of attaining heaven. 
He shall have the greatest contentment in this world too. Hence 
he should assiduously perform this. 

77. He who reads these injunctions about (performance of) 
Sraddha attentively and with purity of mind, in the assembly 
(of the learned) during Parvan days, becomes endowed with 
children. With great brilliance, he attains the same region as 
that of the heaven-dwellers. 

78. Obeisance to that self-born deity by whom this Kalpa 
has been prescribed. I always bow down to the great masters 
of Yoga. 

79. O dear one, these Pitrs are the deities of Devas. Pitrs 
are stationed in these seven abodes for ever. They are free 
from pain. 

80. All these noble souls are the sons of Prajapati. The first 
group is that of Yogins. That is eternal and is ever conducive 
to the increase in the Yogic Power (of Yogins). 

.81. The second group is that of Devas and the third is 
that of their enemies. The other groups are of the members of 
(four) other castes ( Varnas ). Thus all have been recounted. 

82-83. All Devas worship them. They are stationed in 
them (Pitrs). The four Airamas too successively worship them. 
The four castes also worship them in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions. Similarly the mixed castes and the Mlecchas (alien out- 
castes) also worship them. 

84. Pitrs revere him who devotedly worships Pitrs. Pitrs 
in the form of grandfather grant nourishment, progeny and 
heavenly pleasure to him who desires nourishment or who 
desires progeny. 

85. To a son, the rite for Pitrs is preferable to the rite for 
Devas. Pitrs are to be propitiated even before Devas. 

86. The subtle movement of the Yogic power of Pitrs is in- 



648 


Vayu Purana 


comprehensible to the physical eye which is distant (not empo¬ 
wered by) penance. 

87. To all of them a silver vessel or one accompanied 
with silver is ordained. It is said to be sanctifying and excellent 
(for the rites) of Devas along with (those of) Pit r s. 

88-89. The three Pindas which the kinsmen offer invoking 
the names and Gotra, which they place on the ground strewn 
with Kusa grass after wearing the sacred thread from right to 
left, delight the respective parents who are present everywhere. 
What constitutes the diet of the creature (i.e. the devotee who 
offers) is the diet of Pitrs as well. 

90. Just as in a cowpen the calf finds out its lost mother, 
so also the Mantra takes those articles where the Janlu (the man 
for whom the pin<la is intended) stays. 

91. The name, Gotra and Mantra take the food offered 
to him. Even if they had taken a hundred births, the satisfaction 
follows them. (They are satiated by the Sraddha offering.) 

92. Thus this convention is established by Brahma, the 
supreme god. This first creation of Pitrs is for the worlds 
that seek everlasting bliss. 

93-95. Thus these Pitrs are Devas and Devas are Pitrs. O 
sinless ones, all these (following) have been recounted by me— 
Dauhilras, (i.e. daughter’s sons), Yajamanas, worlds, daughters, 
grandsons, sons, charitable gifts, along with the mode of purity, 
holy centres, fruit thereof, everlasting nature of the benefit, 
(the different types of) Brahmanas and the rules governing 
Yayavaras (wandering ascetics). Everything has been mentioned 
in the manner that Brahma prescribed formerly. 

Bfhaspati said : 

96. This, Angiras explained in an assembly while the sages 
sat listening when he had been asked to clear the doubts regard¬ 
ing Pitrs. 

97. It was formerly in the course of an extensive Satra (sacri¬ 
fice) lasting for a thousand years wherein the lord of the house 
was the deity. Lord Brahma. 

98. It is heard that Brahma presided over it for hundreds 



21.99-22.5 


649 


of years The following verses were also formerly sung by the 
sages, the expounders of Brahman (Veda) 

. ‘' W p' n Brah T' « reat Presided over the 

Salta, then Pitpt were born for the benefit of the worlds seek¬ 
ing everlasting bliss, through Brahma Paramesthin.” 

Suta said : 


100. Brhaspati who had been asked by his intelligent son 
formerly, told thus. He recounted the family of Pitrs. What 
he said has been mentioned (by me). Henceforth I shall' recount 
(the race) ofVaruna. Understand (it). 


CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 

The Race of Varuna : Birth of Asoin Gods 1 

1. The sages to whom this ( Sraddha Kalpa ) was narrated 
became very much delighted. Extremely eager to hear further, 
they asked him thereafter. 

The Sages said : 

2. Please narrate (to us) in proper sequence the condition 
of the races of the kings of unmeasured spledour as well as valour. 
We implore you. 

3-4. Thus entreated, Suta Lomakarfana an expert in the 
narration of tales and proficient in the art of speech, (observed) 
the desire of the sages to hear the story and spoke these words : 

Hear and understand as I recount in the manner the sage 
recounted to me. 

5. Even as I recount, listen, and understand the state and 
position of the dynasties of the kings of unmeasured splendour, 
in the proper order and their prowess. 

1. This chapter corresponds to Bd.P. 2.3.59; only verse numbers from 
that chapter are quoted in notes. 





650 


Vayu Puraria 

6. Varuna’s wife was the daughter of the ocean and was 
called “Sunodevi”. She had two sons Kali and Vaidya and a 
daughter Surasundarl. 

7. Kali had two very powerful sons (namely): Jaya and 
Vijaya. Vaidya too had two sons of great strength, viz. Ghrni 
and Muni. 

8. When the subjects became desirous of eating, they ate 
each other. Devouring each other, they perished. 

9. Kali begot ofSura (a son). That son of his is remembered 
as Mada. Himsa, the daughter of Tvastr, was the eldest wife 
of Kali. She was known as Nikfti (too). 

10. She bore four other man-eating sons to Kali, viz. Naka, 
the famous Vighna, Sadrama and Vidhama. 

11. Among them Vighna was devoid of head; Naka had no 
body; Sadrama was single-handed; and Vidhama had a single 
foot. 

12. Sadrama’s wife was remembered as Putana. She had 
Tamasic qualities. Revat! was the wife of Vidhama. Their sons 
were in thousands. 

13. Sakuni was the wife of Naka and AyomukhI was the 
wife of Vighna. Raksasas of huge heads roaming about at dawn 
and dusk (were born of them). 

14. The sons of Revat! and Putana are remembered by the 
name of Nairrtas. All these Raksasas were evil demons known 
as Grahas. They particularly harassed children (by haunting 
them). With the permission of Brahma, lord Skanda became 
their overlord. 

15. Brhaspati’s sister was a noble lady (named) Yogasiddha. 
Observing celibacy and being detached, she roamed over the 
whole universe. 

16. She became the wife of the eighth of the Vasus, vizi 
Prabhasa. Visvakarma, the creator of arts and crafts was born 
as her son. 

17. (He was known as) Tvastr. He created many forms. He 
was the grandson of Dharma. He was liberal-minded. He was 
the creator of thousands of arts and crafts. He was the Architect 
of Devas. 

18. He made aerial chariots for all the Devas. Human beings 



22.19-29 


651 

maintain their livelihood by following the craftsmanship of that 
noble soul. ^ at 

19. Tvastr’s wife was the famous daughter of Prahlada and 
was the sister of Virocana and the mother of Trisiras 

20. Maya, the son of the intelligent preceptor of Devas in 
craftsmanship of all kinds, is remembered as Visvakarma also 

21. His younger sister, the daughter of Tva lt r (originally) 
famous by the name of Surenu, became the wife of the Sun and 
was well known as Samjna. 

22 . VVith the power of her penance, she bore the eldest son 

Mann to V.vasvan (the Snn-god). Then she gave birth to the 
twins Yama and Yamuna. 

23-24. Assuming the form of a mare, the noble lady went 
to the land of Kurus. The blessed lady bore two sons to the Sun 
who had assumed the form of a horse. She gave birth to them 
through nostrils. They were the twin gods, the Asvins 
Nasatya and Dasra. Both of them were the sons of Martanda (the 
Sun-god). ' v 

The Sages enquired : 

25. Why is (the Sun) called Martanda by learned men? 
Why did she, in the form of a mare, give birth to them through 
the nostrils ? We wish to know this. Please explain this to us 
who ask you. 


Suta said : 

26. Fora long time, the egg did not break (did not get 
hatched). It was broken open by Tvastr. On seeing it, Kas'yapa 
became sad as he feared that the foetus was killed. 

27. When the egg was broken into two parts, he looked into 
it and said to Tvastr, “This is certainly not an (ordinary)egg”. 
(Then to the child he said) “O Sinless one, be Martanda”. 

28. The father affectionately said—“Indeed this (child) in 
the egg is not dead”. On hearing his words, the relevancy of the 
name has been understood. 

29. Since he was addressed by the father, “Be born of the 
dead (broken) egg”, when the egg was broken, Vivasvan is cal- 



652 


Vayu Parana 


led Martanda 1 by those who know the Puranas. 

30. Henceforth I shall mention the progeny of Martanda 
Vivasvan. Formerly three children were born of his wife Samjna 

to Savitr- . , 

31. (Later) the younger Manu Savarni and Sanaiscara 

were bom to (the shadow) Samjna and the twin gods Asvins to 
(the real) Samjna. These seven are remembered as the children 
of Martanda. 

32. Vivasvan of great fame, was born of KaSyapa and a 
daughter of Daksa. The noble lady, the daughter of Tva?tr be¬ 
came the wife of Vivasvan. Originally she was well known by 
the name Surenu and later came to be known as Samjna. 

33. The wife of lord Martanda of excessive splendour was 
a woman of great beauty in the prime of youth. She was dis¬ 
satisfied with the dazzling form of her husband. 

34. The dazzlingly brilliant person of Martanda, the son 
of Aditi, coming into contact with her body was not very pleas¬ 
ing to her. 

35. Being unaware, Kasyapa said out of affection, “Indeed 
this (child) in the egg is not dead”. Hence he is called Mar¬ 
tanda. 

36. The brilliance of Vivasvan increased day by day where¬ 
by he, the son of Kasyapa, scorched the three worlds. 

37. Ravi (the Sun-god) begot of Samjna three children, 
two sons of great prowess and the daughter Kalindi (Yamuna). 

38. Manu was the eldest son of Vivasvan. He was a Praja- 
pati and known as Sraddhadeva. Yama and Yami were born as 
twins. 

39. On seeing the whetted brilliance of Vivasvan and una¬ 
ble to endure it, Samjna created her own shadow of the same 
complexion as hers. 

40. That woman of earthly form, bom of her shadow came 
to her humbly with palms joined in reverence and spoke to 
Samjna: 


1. The Vedic word is Marlaptfa ‘born of an (apparently) dead egg’. 
Martanda is a later Puranic form, though the derivation is the same. 




22.41-55 


653 


, 41 ‘ ‘™ me ’ what should be done by me ?” Samjna spoke 
to her: Welfare unto you. I will go back to my own father’s 
house. 

42. You must remain m my house without any hesitation 
These two sons of mine and this daughter of splendid complex¬ 
ion (should be looked after). 

43. This (arrangement) should not be mentioned to the 
lord, my husband”. 


Thus addressed, the earthly form of Samjna spoke to Samjna: 

44. “O noble lady, until the hair is caught hold of, I will 
never speak your secret idea. O noble lady, go back to your own 
house”. 

45. After consoling Samjna, she said, “So be it”. She- the 
woman in a pitiable condition, went nearTvastras though greatly 
ashamed. 


46. On seeing her come back, the father became angry and 
spoke to Samjna: “Go back to your husband. Do not hate Diva- 
kara (the Sun-god).” 

47. Though urged thus by her father and compelled (to go) 
again and again, she lived in her father’s house for a thousand 
years. 

48. “Go to your husband’s house”. When insisted upon 
again and again thus,that uncensured (praise-worthy) lady con¬ 
cealed her real form and assumed the form of a mare. She went 
to the northern Kurus and began to graze grass. 

49. Considering that she (the shadow of Saihjna) was the 
real Samjna, the Sun begot of the shadow, the second Samjna, 
two sons of the splendour of Aditya (the Sun). 

50. The sons were Srutasrava, the knower of Dharma, 
and Srutakarman. Both of those lordly ones were equal to Manu 
the eldest-born. 

51. Srutasravas will become Savarni Manu. The planet 
Sanaiscara (Saturn) is to be known as Srutakarman. 

52-53. It is known that Savarni became Manu. The earthly 
form of Samjna was affectionate only towards her (own) sons and 
not towards the earlier born ones. Manu bore.it patiently, but. 
Yama did not brook it. 

54-55. On being insulted many times (by the step- 






654 


Vdyu Purdna 

mother) out of spite, Yama became distressed and threatened 
Samjiia with his leg. Out of anger or childishness or the force 
of the inevitable destiny, that lady, having the same complexion 
as his mother, cursed Yama out of anger. 

56. “Since you are threatening the renowned wife of your 
father, this leg of yours will undoubtedly fall off.” 

57. With his mind deeply afflicted due to that curse, Yama 
of virtuous soul reported everythin g to his father, along with 
Manu (i.e. accompanied by him.) 

58. “I am much distressed due to the fear of the curse (tak¬ 
ing effect). I have been defeated (?) by the (statement) words 
of Saiiijfia. (This mistake is) due to my childishness or delusion. 
Sir, please protect me. 

59. O lord of the worlds, foremost one among those who 

blaze, I have been cursed by mother. May your grace protect 
us from this great danger.” ? % 

60. Thus implored, lord Vivasvan spoke to Yama: “O son, 
undoubtedly there will be a great reason behind this (incident). 

61. That was why anger took possession of you who are the 
knower of virtue and the speaker of the truth. The words of your 
mother too cannot be falsified. 

62- The worms will take away your flesh and go to the earth. 
Then you will regain your foot. O intelligent one, you will be 
happy again. 

63. In this way, your mother’s words will be true and effec¬ 
tive. By removal of the curse, you will also be saved.” 

64. Aditya then spoke to Samjna, “When the sons are all 
equal, why is more affection shown by you towards one ?” 

65. Avoiding (the necessity of disclosing the secret) she did 
not say anything to Vivasvan. But by means of his Yogic power 
and concentration, the Sun found out the truth. 

66. The infuriated Sun-god was about to curse her bringing 
about her destruction. She then confessed factually everything 
to Vivasvan. 

67-68. On hearing it, Vivasvan was enraged and hastened 
to Tvastr. Tvastr honoured with due formalities the Sun-god 
who wanted to burn down everything. He pacified him slowly 
saying : “Your present form which is excessively dazzling, is not 
attractive. 



22 . 69-83 


655 


69. It is because she could not endure it that Saihjna is 
wandering in the forests and meadows. You will see your wife 
of auspicious conduct today itself. 

70. O lord of rays, by using your Yogic power, you will see 
your praiseworty wife superbly endowed with youthful charm. 
Everything will be favourable if my condition is accepted. 

71-74. O suppressor of enemies ! At the outset, I shall 
change your personal form into an excellent one”. The form of 
Vivasvan, then, was sideways, upwards and below (i.c. the rays 
were diffused everywhere). Hence Divaspati (the Sun-god) was 
ashamed of that form. So the deity of great penance praised the 
wheel of Tvastr. Tvastr was then permitted to change the form. 
With the concurrence of the Sun-god (Martanda Vivasvan), 
Tvastr mounted him on the wheel and whetted his brilliance. 
Then the brilliance had pleasant refulgence due to reduction in 
dazzle. 

75. The refulgence became very pleasing to behold. What 
was inauspicious before shone splendidly. Then (the Sun) made 
use of Yogic power and saw his wife in the form of a mare. 

76. She had been invisible to all living beings due to her 
brilliance and observance of rites. In the form of a horse, Mar¬ 
tanda approached her and declared his love. 

77. In the physical activity of sexual intercourse, she suspec¬ 
ted him to be someone other than her lord. She therefore dis¬ 
charged the semen virile of Vivasvan through her nostrils. 

78. From that semen were born the twin gods Asvins, the 
excellent physicians, Nasatya and Dasra. They are remembered 
as Asvins. 

79. They are the sons of Martanda, the eighth Prajapati. 
Bhaskara (the Sun-god) showed his beautiful form to her. 

80. On seeing him the wife was satisfied and fascinated. 
Yama was much afflicted in the mind due to that curse. 

81-83. He pleased (all) by means of his Dharma. Then ne 
became known as Dharmaraja. By means of his auspicious acti¬ 
vity, he became extremely refulgent and attained the lordship 
of Pitrs and guardianship of the quarters. Savarni Manu 
of great fame shall become the Manu in the Savarnika Manvan- 
tara. Even today the holy lord performs penance on the beautiful 
ridge of the Meru mountain. 



656 


Vdyu Pur ana 

84. Their brother SanaiScara attained the status of a planet. 
With'the (chopped off) brilliance (of the Sun) Tvastr made 
Visnu’s discus. 1 It was unobstructed (irresistible) in battles to 
check Danavas. 

85. Their younger sister Yamuna of great fame, became the 
excellent river Yamuna, the purifier of all the worlds. 2 

86. I shall now narrate the details of Vaivasvata Manu who 
was the eldest among them. He had great splendour and his 
creation is current (and he presides over the present Manvan- 
tara). 

87. He who listens to or reads the origin of Devas, the 
seven powerful sons of Vivasvan, shall be released, if-he attains 
misfortune. He shall attain great glory. 


CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 

Creative Activity of Manu: The Story 
of Sudyumna . 

Siita said: 

1. When the Caksusa Manvantara had elapsed, when the 
Devas (pertaining to that epoch) too had gone, the kingdom of 
the earth was assigned to the great Vaivasvata (Manu) . 3 


1. The creation of Visnu’s discus Sudarsana from -the pruned part of the 
Sun-god is mentioned in VP. III. 2.11. 

2. This story of the Sun-god, his wife Samjna and Chaya, his children 
from them, pruning of the Sun-god*s excessive lustre, his approach to his 
wife Samjna (who was in a marc’s form) and birth of Asvin gods—these 
are traditional accounts found in Mbh. Adi 76, AnuSasana 150, VP. III. 2 
and other Pura^as. 

3. Description of dynasties of kings is an integral part of a Purana of five 
characteristics. Vaivasvata Manu, being the progenitor of these dynasties, 
is described in all Puranas. 

This chapter corresponds to Bd.P. 2.3-60, hence only verse nos. from 
Bd.P. are given. 




23 . 2-14 


657 


2. O Brahrnanas, I shall recount in the proper order the 
race of that noble-souled current Manu, the son of Vivasvan. 
(Listen to) and understand what is being narrated. 

3. (I shall narrate the story) now taking up the present 
creation of Vaivasvata Manu. The first bom Manu had nine sons 
equal to him. 

4. These nine are remembered as the sons of Manu : 
Iksvaku, Nahusa, Dhrsta, Saryati, Narisyanta, tha tall ( Pramsu ) 
Nabhaga, Arista, Karusa and Prsadhra. 

5. Know that formerly Manu, on being urged by Brahma, 
began to create willingly, but he was unsuccessful. 

6. Then Prajapati, desirous of sons, performed a great Isfi 
(Yajna). Manu offered the oblation (Ahuti) in the share of 
Mitra and Varuna. 

7. It is heard, that Ida 1 was born thereof. She wore heavenly 
garments and was bedecked in celestial ornaments. Her body 
too was divine. 

8-10. It is remembered that Manu, the bearer of the staff 
of justice, addressed her as ‘Ila’ and said, “Welfare unto you, 
I shall follow you”. Ila replied to the Prajapati who was desirous 
of sons, in the following words sanctioned by Dharma. “O fore¬ 
most of the eloquent ones, I am born in the share of Mitra and 
Varuna. I will (first) approach them. May not Dharma violated 
by us kill us”. After speaking thus, the noble lady went near 
them (Mitra and Varuna). 

11. After going near them, the beautiful lady spoke these 
words with palms joined in reverence: “O Devas, I am born in 
your share. What should I do ? 

12-14. I have been requested by Manu, thus, ‘Follow me’ ”. 
When the chaste lady Ida spoke thus, both of them, Mitra and 
Varuna spoke these words: “O fair-complexioned lady of beautiful 
hips, O knower of Dharma, we are delighted by your humility, 
self-control and truthfulness. O blessed lady, you will become 
renowned as our daughter”. 


1. In RV. it was used in the sense of ‘refreshing draught* Later on it 
came to mean ‘a cow*, and ‘a goddess of speech*. In Sat. Br. I<Ja is 
Manu's daughter. But in our text she is the daughter of (‘bora of the 
share of*) Mitra and Varuna. 






658 


Vdyu Purana 

15-16. The son of Manu, the rightcous-souled promoter of 
Manti’s race is the beloved of the universe. He who is revered in 
the three worlds is famous as Sudyumna. He has attained the form 
of a lady. 1 That noble lady returned to her father after securing 
the boon. 

17. After getting an opportune moment, she was invited for 
love making'(sexual intercourse) by Budha (the planet Mer¬ 
cury) . From Budha, the son of Soma, Pururavas, the son of Ila 
was born. 

18. After giving birth to the son born of Budha, she became 
Sudyumna again. Sudyumna had three sons, all extremely 
virtuous. 

19. They were Utkala, Gaya and Vinatasva. The land of 
Utkala went over to Utkala. The western region went over to 
Vinatasva. In the quarter of the Wind-god (north-west) was 
Gaya, the city of Gaya, the saintly king. 

20. (Defective verse) When Manu was abandoned (created) 
the Sun (Divakara) created the subjects and divided the whole 
region of the earth into ten. 

21. Iksvaku had ten other sons. In view of his being a lady 
(as well), Sudyumna had no share. 

22-23. At the instance of Vasistha, the establishment of the 
noble-souled Sudyumna, the virtuous king of great lustre, was 
(took place) in Pratisthana. After getting the kingdom, he, of 
great renown, gave it to Pururavas. The characteristics of wo¬ 
men and men among human beings, O blessed ones, (will be 
duly manifest). Sudyumna, the son of Manu, attained the status 
of a woman again. 


24. On hearing this the sages asked thereafter: “How did 
Sudyumna, the son of Manu, attain womanhood ?” 


Suta said : 

25. The beloved goddess (Uma) spoke these words to her 
lover (Siva) for the sake of his love: “O Lord, the man who 
enters my personal hermitage will certainly become a woman. 
She will be auspicious and on a par with the celestial damsels.’* 


. L story of Vaivasvata Manu’s 

Mbh. Adi 75, Anusasana 147, Bh.P. IX. 1. 


bi-sexual 


child is found in 






23 . 26 — 24.8 


659 


26. All the living beings there, Pisacas, and the animals 
became women and played with Rudra like heavenly ladies. 

27-28. That king who had gone a-hunting entered Uma’s 
forest. He attained womanhood along with the Pisacas, Bhutas 
and Rudras. Hence that king attained womanhood. By the grace 
of Mahadeva, he shall attain the lordship of the Ganas. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 

A Dissertation on Music : 

The Definition of Murcchana 1 

Suta said : 

1-3. (Listen to and) understand the details of Manu’s sons. 
Pjrsadhra tortured the cow of his preceptor and ate it. Due to 
the curse of the noble-souled Cyavana, he attained the status of 
a Sudra. 

Karusa’s son Karusa was a Ksatriya invincible in war. He 
became as valorous as the group of a thousand Ksatriyas. Bhal- 
andana, son of Nabhagarista 2 ( ?) was a scholar. 

4. Bhalandana had a very powerful son named Pramsu. 
Pramsu had a son who became well known as Prajani. 

5. Prajani had a valorous son named Khanitra. His son was 
the glorious Ksupa of great fame. 

6. Ksupa's son was Virhsa who had no one equal to him. 
Vimsa’s son was Vivimsa, the righteous performer of religi¬ 
ous rites. 

7. Vivimsa’s son was the virtuous-souled and valorous Kha- 
ninetra. In the beginning of Tretavuga, his son Karandhama 
was born. 

8. Karandhama’s son was the vigorous Aviksit. By means of 
his good qualities, Aviksit surpassed his father. 

1. The term ‘ Murcchana ' means the changing of key or modulation of 
voice (and sounds) in the Science of Music. For more explanation see 
Footnote No 3, p. 662. 

2. A. reads: Nabhaga was the son of Arista. Bhalandana was a scholar. 










660 


Vayu Puratfa 


9. (His son) named Marutta was a virtuous-souled king 
equal to an emperor. He was taken to heaven by (sage) Sam- 
varta along with his friends and kinsmen. 

10. In this connection a great dispute arose between Sam- 
vavta and Byhaspati. On seeing the magnificence of the Yajfia, 
Byahspati became angry with him. 

11. When the Yajfla was brought to a successful conclusion 
by Samvarta, he (Brhaspati) became more furious. He was in¬ 
tent on the destruction of the worlds but he was propitiated by 
the deities (gods). 

12. Emperor Marutta obtained Narisyanta (as son). Nari- 
?yanta’s successor was the king Dama, wielding the staff of jus¬ 
tice and punishment. 

13. The valorous king Ra$travardhana was his son. His son 
was Sudhytin and Sudhrtin’s son was Nara. 

14. Kevala was his son and Bandhuman was the son of Ke- 
vala. The virtuous-souled king Vegavan was Bandhuman’s son. 

15. Budha was Vegavan’s son and Tynabindu was the son 
of Budha. He became king at the beginning of the third Treta- 
yuga. 

16. His daughter was Dravi(ja (Idaviqla in Bd. P.) who be¬ 
came the mother of Visravas. He had a son also named Visala. 
He was an extremely virtuous king. 

17. The city of Visala (Vaisali) 1 was built by king Visala. 
Visala’s son was the king Hemacandra of great strength. 

18. After Hemacandra (his son) Sucandra became very 
famous. Sucandra’s son was the well known king Dhumrasva. 

19. Dhumrasva’s son Synjaya became a great scholar. Syn- 
jaya’s son was the glorious and valorous Sahadeva. 

20. Krsasva was Sahadeva’s son. He was extremely righte¬ 
ous. The valorous Somadatta of great brilliance was Krsasva’s 
son. 

21. Janamejaya was the son of the saintly king Somadatta. 
Janamejaya’s son named Pramati was very famous. 

22. By the grace of Tynabindu, all the kings ruling over 
Visala were long-lived, noble-souled, valorous and very righteous. 

I. Besad in the district of Muzaftarpur. The name is now officially 
changed as ‘Vaisali’, though local people still call it Besad. 




24.23-33 


661 


23. Saryati begot twins, a son and a daughter Th* tnn u 

came well known as Anarta and H* i g C ' Th SOn be " 
became ,l,e wife of CyavTa UghKr WaS Suka "V 4 wh » 

24. Anarta’s successor was the heroic (kin^ j n 

r *“**■ capital'^ 

He became the king and ruled over Kusasthal! 

Devac for the duratton of a Muhurta which w« equivalent 
manyjtyw accord,ng to the calculation of humanbring,. H 1 
returned to hts own city in his own prime of youth, but the city 
had been occupier, by Yadavas. I. had been renamed by th™ 
as Dvaravati, a beautiful city with many gates 

28-30 It was then protected by Vasudeva and other leading 

Bhojas, Vrsnis and Andhakas. On hearing the story (of the oc¬ 
cupation of Dvaraka by Yadavas) with all the facts, Raivata 
the suppressor of enemies, gave his daughter of good rites named 
Revati, to Balarama m marriage and went to a peak of mount 
Meru and became engrossed in penance. 

Virtuous-souled Rama (Balarama) sported with Revati. 

On hearing the story, the sages enquired thereafter. 


The Sages asked : 

31. O son of Suta, O holy lord, how is it that even after 
the lapse of a long period of many Yugas, Revati did not become 
old ? How did her hair not turn grey ? 

32. After going to the mountain Meru how did Saryati’s 
son have progeny of his own ? How did they survive till now on 
the earth ? We wish to hear precisely.- 

33. How many are the groups of gods ? How are the Gan- 
dharvas ? How was that music on hearing which Raivata consi¬ 
dered a long period as only a Muhurta ? 


1* Anartta, old name of Gujarat (including Saurashtra) and Kusasthali 
is modern Dwarka. 

2. Accidentally Einstein is anticipated by the imaginative Purana- 

wn t 




662 


Vayu Puratfa 


Sula explained : 

34. To a person who goes to the world of god Brahma, 
there is neither hunger nor thirst. He has neither old age nor 
fear of death. No ailment affects him. 

35. O excellent sages, as to the question put to me on 
Gandharva (science of music), I shall explain it precisely, O 
good sages of holy rites. 

36. The Svara Manila 1 (the whole group pertaining to 
musical notes) is comprised by seven Svaras (notes), three 
Gramas- (basic scales), twentyone Murcchanas? (the modes of 


1. It suggests the ascent and descent of seven notes, known as Svara- 
sap taka. Sec v. 37. 

2. Grama : Grama means the group of seven notes. The three Gramas 
mentioned in Puranas are (1) §adja-grama, (ii) Madhyama-grama and 
(iii) Gandhara-grama. These three were the basic scales—the Sdsca\c, 
the Ma-s cale and the Ga-scale. These had the notes Sd, Ma and Ga as the 
starting points. TIius the order of notes in these scales will be as follows : 

(i) The *Sfl-scale : Sa, Ri, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni 

(ii) The Ma-scale : Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni, Sd, Ri, Ga 

(iii) The Ga-scale : Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni, Sd, Ri 

Out of these Ga-scale fell into disuse later. Dattila, an ancient writer 
on Music, states that it is not found in this world while later scholars say 
that it went to Heaven. They say that due to the extremely high and low 
notes it disappeared. But for the reasons given by later writers like 
Sargadeva, it seems that it was not perfect in its aspect of consonance. And 
consonance is vitally essential for the melodic music of India. Bharata, in 
his Ndtya-fdstra describes the Sa-scale and Mas cale on the basis of the fourth 
(Sa-Mn Samvada) and the consonance of the fifth (Sa-Pa Samvada). In 
the Sa-scale the consonance of the fifth was more prominent ( Sa-Pa, Ri-Dha 
and Ga-ni) while that of the fourth in the Ma- scale ( Sa-Ma and Ri-Pa ). 

The number of Srutis (the microtones) in the Saptaka fixed by Bharatd 
is 22. The Sruti intervals were distributed in the notes a? follows : 

Sa-Scale : 4 Sa, 3 Ri, 2 Ga, 4Ma t 4Pa, 3 Dha, 2Ni=*22 

Ma-Scale : 4 Ma, 3 Pa, \Dha, 2 Ni, 4 Sa. 3 Ri, 2Ga=22 

The Sa-Ma consonance has the interval of 9 Srutis and the Sa-Pa conso¬ 
nance that of 13 Srutis . 

3. Murcchand : 

Murcchand was the gradual ascent and descent of the seven notes of 
the basic scale. The word is derived from the root ^Jmuxcch —‘to increase*, 
‘to pervade*. As Murcchanas started from each note of the scale, there were 
seven Murcchanas of each scale. Thus the Murcchanas of three Gramas 
numbered twentyone. 




24.37 


663 


gradual ascent and descent of the seven notes of the basic 
scale) and fortymne Talas * 1 ( Tanas ). 

o7. The following are the names of the svaras : Sadia (Sa) 
Jisabha (Ri) , Gandhara ( Ca), Madhyama {Ma), Pahcama (Pa) 

Dhaivata (Dha), and jVisada (M). These are the seven svaras 
(notes). 

(The Text dealing with Music is corrupt and obscure. An 


For example, the *Sa-scalc Murcchands would be : 

( 1) Sa Ri Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni . 

(2 ) Ni Sa Ri Ga Ma Pa Dha . 

(3) Dha Ni Sa Ri Ga Ma Pa.etc. 

The Soman-scale was descending having the notes Ma Ga Ri Sd Dha Ni 
Pa as per Naradiya Sikfd (I. 5, 1 and 2). Due to the influence of the Sdman- 
scale, there was the descending order followed in the case of starting notes 
of the Murcchands. Murcchands served as the basis of different types of 
songs. They also brought in the notes 0 r the low ( Mandra ), high (Tara) 
registers (Sthdna). If the first Murcchand of the rV/a-scale is rendered taking 
Ma as the §a<Jja and the remaining notes accordingly, then it would be 
indicated as ; 


4 Sa, 3Ri, 4Ga, 4Ma, 2Pa, 3Dha, 2Ni=22 gratis 

This gives the Gandhara of 4 grutis called Antara Ga , Its consonant note 
would be Ni of 4 grutis called Kdkali Ni. These two were called the 
Sddhdrana notes. Their use was restricted. Their employment was allowed 
when the songs had two Sruti Ga and two S ruti Ni notes in small measure. 
The Murcchamas with these two Sddhararta notes were called Sddhdratfkrla 
Murcchands . 

1. Tala or Tana : 

Tana is the Mdrcchand in which one or two specific notes are dropped. 
When one specific Svara (Note) is dropped, it is called §adava Tana (a 
Tana consisting of six notes) and when two specific notes are dropped, it 
is called Auduva Tana (a Tana consisting of five notes). According to 
Puranas, there are twenty Tanas of Madhyama-grdma, fourteen of $adja - 
grama and fifteen of Gandhdra-grama. Thus the number of Tanas of the three 
gramas is given as forty-nine. 

According to Bharata ( NdtyaSastra) when the single note Sa, Ri, Pa, 
or Ni is dropped from the Murcchands of the Madhyama Grama, twentyone 
gddava Tanas would be effected (7x3=21). 

By dropping Sa Pa GaNi or Ri Dha from the Murcchanas of the 5a-scalc 
twenty-one Auduva Tanas would be effected (7x3=21). When Ri Dha or 
Ga Ni are dropped from the Miircchands of the Ma-s cale, there would take 
place fourteen Auduva Tanas (7x2=14). Thus the total number of the 
Tanaf of the two Gramas is eighty-four according to Bharata. These are 
given as guddha Tanas by later Acaryas. 







664 


Vayu Parana 

attempt is made to emend it with similar verses on Music in 
Bd. P. and other Puranas.) 

38-39. The Murcchanas of the Mas calc ( Maclhyama-gramika ) 
are known as Saublr! (Sauvlra in Bd. P.) of the Madhyama- 
grama, Harinasya, Kalopabalopeta (also known as Kalopanata) 
the fourth Suddha-madhyama, Sarngi, Pavanl and Dpstaka 
in the serial order. Murcchanas of Madhyama-grama are ex¬ 
plained. Now understand (the Murcchanas of) the Sascale 
(Safia-grama ). 

40. Uttara-mandra, Rajani, Uttarayata, Suddha-sadja 
should also be known as the seventh. 1 

41a. Know the Murcchanas of the Ga-scale (Gandhara-gramika) 
as they are being described by me. 2 

41b-48. (The names of the Tanas are as follows :) . 

The first of the series is Agnistomika, the second is Vajape- 
yika; the third is called Paundraka; the fourth is Asvamedhika; 
the fifth is Rajasuya; the sixth is Cakrasuvarnaka; the seventh 
is Gosava by name; Mahavpstika is the eighth; Brahmadana 
is the ninth; the next is Prajapatya; the later should be known 
as) Naga-paksasraya, Gotara, Hayakranta, Mpga-kranta; the 
charming Visnukranta, the most excellent Suryakranta, Mat- 
takokila-Vadin, Savitra, Ardhasavitra, Sarvatobhadra, Suvarna, 
Sutandra, Visnu, Vaisnuvara, Sagara, Vijaya which is charm¬ 
ing to all beings. We know Hariisa and Jyestha as dear to 
Tumburu (or ‘Tumburupriya’ be taken as a separate name), 
the pleasing Adhatrya. 

These are followed by Gandharvas, desired by Alambusa and 
dear to Narada. It is mentioned by Bhlmasena that they are 
liked by citizens. (Bd. P. takes 'Ndgara-priya' as the name of a 
Tana.) 

49-50a. (The Tana) called Karopanita—Vinata, Srlh, 
Bhargava-Priya. 

1. The text omitted the names Abhirudgata, Matsarikrta and Asvakranta. 

2. Strangely enough neither our text nor Bd. P. gives the Murcchanas of 
the Ga-scale. 

N. P. II.50.35b-36a records them as follows : 

Nadi, Visala, Sumukhi, Citra, Citravati, Mukha and Bala. Without any 
introduction the text proceeds to enumerate the Tanas from 41b. 

The Puranic concept of a Tina is different from that of today. 




24.50b-60 


665 


while fourteen (k,/ ThT’klV' 71'ij^Z) 

(The deities associated with Murcchanas) 

50b. The Murcchana Gandharl accompanied with Sauvlra is 
hence sung by god Brahma. 

51 And god Brahma is the presiding deity here of the 
Utlaradi-svara . 

Harindsyd is originated in the region of Hari. Murcchana 
Harinasya has Indra as its presiding deity. 

52. The Murcchana Karopanita-vitala was sung by Maruts in 
Svara-Mandala. That is Kalofianitd. Hence its presiding deity is 
Maruta. 7 


53. The Murcchana Suddha-madhyama originated in the Manu 
(ru?) desa. 

Suddha Madhyamd is the note here and the presiding deity is 
.Gandharva. 

54. Since it moves along with the deer for the guidance of 

Siddhas, it is, hence, called Mdrgi . The Lord of animals (the 
Lion) is its deity. 

55. As the Murcchana is associated with hermitages and 
also with the various (human) voices of citizens, it is called 
Rajani due to its association with rajas (dust/atmosphere). 

56. The Tala (beating time) is known as having Satjlja as 
its deity. Hence Uttara-t&la is known first as well extended. 

Hence it is Uttara-mandra whose diety isDhruva. 

57. Since it is after Apana (?), Uttarayana having Dha 
(Dhaivata) as the starting point, is the Murcchana the deities 
of which are Pitrs (manes), the deities (worshipped in) 
Sraddhas. 

58. The great sages worship the Fire-god with the Suddha- 
Sadja (pure Sa-) note; it should be known as $uddha-Sa<jljika . 

59. It starts from the Pahcama note causing delight to the 
good people. 

The Murcchana belonging to Yaksis (female Yaksas) is 
called Yaksika Murcchana. 

60. (Defective) That Murcchana which serpents of poiso¬ 
nous eyes do not approach and the serpent-deities become as it 






666 Vayu Purana 

were drawn by Brahma, is called the Murcchana of serpents 
(. Ahi-murcchana) and here the deity is Varuna.^ 

61. The Murcchana with which Kinnaras (sing) in 
imitation of birds, is the excellent ( Ultama) MQrcchand. Its 
deity is the Lord of Birds (Garutfa). 

62. By the sound of Gandhara Raga, the earth (or cow?) 
is held in support. Hence it is called Visuddha-Gandharl (of 
pure Go). And Gandharva is its presiding deity. 

63. The Murcchana Uttara-Gandharl is so called as it was 
created after Gandhara. Its (presiding) deities are Vasus. 

64. The Satfja Murcchana first approached god Brahma 
(Pitamaha). Hence its greatness. Its deity is the Fire-god. 

65. The Murcchana called Mandasastha is divine and 
extensive. The names of its equalities cannot be described. Its 
deity is Paflcama (the note Pa). 

66. All the seven Notes ( Svaras) and the Murcchanas are 
recounted completely. Murcchanas with Sadharana Svaras 1 
Ce.g. Antara Gandhara, Kakall Nisada) are many. Only six of 
them are known. 


CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 
The Science of Music: The Embellishments 

1. After knowing the views of earlier teachers, I shall 
explain in due order, the thirty embellishments of music. Listen 
to them while I am expounding. 

2. The Alankaras (embellishments of music) are to be 
explained along with their Varnas (movements of notes such 
as ‘steady’, ‘ascending’ and others) as their specific basis and 
also along with their associated configuration ( Samsthana ), 
always in regard to dramatic performance 2 etc. 

1. The SSdharana Svaras are : 

(i) Antara Gindhdra i.e. modern Suddha Gandhdra 

(ii) KakallNifada i.e. modern Tlvra Nifada 

2. Vide Bharata’s NafyaSastra Volume. IV, pp. 79-92 (Baroda Edition) 




25.3-9 


667 


3. The fulfilment of embellishment is achieved by the 
implications of sentences and connotations of the word-com- 
binations. 

The words of a song are said to be either preceding or 
following the embellishment. 

4. One should understand that there are three place of 
utterance. They are the chest, the throat and the head. The 
best procedure (of production of notes) begins in these three 
places. 

5. In the original stage (Prakftau), there are four varnas 
(tone-patterns) with fourfold movement. The alternative 
movement is eightfold; 1 and gods know it as sixteenfold. 

6. [ The designations of Varnas: ] 

The first Varna is Slhdyin\ the second is Pra-sancarin , the 
third is Avarohana (•= Avarohin) and the fourth Varna is known 
by the experts in the knowledge of Varnas to be, Arohana 
( = Arohin) . 2 

7. There is one (Varna viz. Sthayin) which has steady 
employment. Sancara is a mixed movement. One should 
indicate the descent of Varnas (i.e. Svaras) as Avarohana. 

8a. And the experts in the knowledge of Varnas know 
(that Varna) as the Arohana Varna by the ascent of notes. 

8b. Now understand the embellishments of these specific 
Varnas. 3 

9. There are four embellishments, viz. Sthapani , 


1. These are mentioned in the Puranas, only later writers do not refer 
to them. 

2. The exigencies of the metre have led to the change in the order of 
Vardas. The order should have been : 

(i) Sthayin (i.e. Sd Sa So) 

(ii) Arohin (e.g. SdRi Ga etc.) 

(iii) Aoarohin (e.g. Ni Dha Pa etc.) 

(iv) Saflcarin (e.g. Sd Ri SdRi Ga Ri Sd etc.).’ 

3. Although I have referred to the section on Alankdras in Sangita 
Ratnakara (I.VI) only a few Alankaras like Sycna (p. 133 of S. R.) shed 
some light. Though S.R. is much later than Va.P or Bd.P., I consulted it 
m S.R. preserved some of the PurAuic traditions. 





668 V& y u Pur ana 

Kramarejina, Pramada and Apramada. I shall (henceforth) explain 
the characteristics of these. 1 

10. (Names of Alankaras still continue as follows:) Visoara, 
Asfakala 2 3 which has an interval of one place (from its original 
place?). Avarta and Kramolpalti —these two should be effected 
according to their proportion. 

1 la. One should know the other one to be Kumar a and 
Vislara* 

11b. And this indeed is the Apanga (Alankara) and 
Kutareka (?) possesses one more kala (time-measure). 

12. Syena is originated as having one interval and 
situated in the midst of Matras of a Kala. In it there abides 
the increase in the order of the note different from it (e.g. Sa~ 
Pa, Ri—Dha, Ga—Ni). 

13. The descent of the Syena AlankSra is called Uttara. The 

Alankara called Bindu is originated due to the measure of 
Kalas. t,. 

14a. One Kala (measure of time) should be employed of 
the Varnas. Then it would be Sthapita (Sthayin?) (established). 

14b. Durghafita is that which has the note even in the 
reverse order. 

15a. Ekantara ( Ekottara-svara ) has the highest note from 
Safia. 

15b. Akfepaskandana should be effected as having high 
amplitude like the (harsh) crowing of the crow. 

16a. The two Sanlaras belong to the Sancarin Varna either 
as the cause or the effect. 

16b. Aksipta belongs to the category of the descending 
( Avarohin ) Varna. 

17. The Alankara called Prenkholita has the twelfth place 
of Kala having one interval. Thus it is endowed with Svaras 
(Notes). 

18a. Puskala is said to be due to the transfer of the notes. 


1. Some verses after this must have been lost as neither our text nor 
Bd.P. explains these anywhere. 

2. Uffrakala in the text being obscure, is emended as per Bd. P. 

3. The text is obscure both here and in the Bd. P. 




25.18b-28a 


669 


18b. Praksipta is due to Kala_(?) 

19a. Il ls caUed Hr&sita (Bhafila in Bd. P.) in which them 
is the use of two Kalas as before. 

I9b. Vism,l,a<thi (Visarinm) has got eight noles in 
ascendance. 

™ S"* WhiCh , iS 3 des “ m ft0m hi S h low register. 

20b. These are placed verily with one interval and have 
the same note at the end. 

2lab. The Alankara called Makfipracchedana is declared to 

have a group of four Kalas. Thus, these are the thirty Alahkaras 
explained. 

21c-22. Due to the employment of Varna and Slhdna 
having the measures of Kala and Matra are the configuration, 
proportion, modification and characteristics. This should be 
known as the purpose of embellishments (of music) 1 2 . 

23. Just as in the case of beautification (of one’s person; 
it is extremely censured if it is used at the wrong place, 
similarly unfavourable (discordant) embellishment of the Varners 
also (is censurable) as it is produced by oneself. 

24. Just as with the use of various ornaments, a woman 
gets herself beautified, so are the (musical) embellishments to 
a Varna, (but) if discordantly used, it is bitterly denounced. 

25. The ear-ring is not seen (worn) on the feet; nor a 
girdle round the neck. So also the embellishment (in music) 
if used in the wrong place, is reproached. 

26. When the embellishment is effected, it should indicate 
the Raga (melody); just as the path intended to be undertaken 
is characterised. 


27a. The characteristics, its opposites are indicated (with 
business ?) by scribes ( Varnika ?) 

27b. I shall describe realistically (as it is)-? 

(Obscure). 

28a. (Obscure) Twenty-three and eighty is the inversion 
(of their order ?) 


1. If the reading from Bd.P. is referred to the name of this Alankara is 
Vdpa. But I am not sure of the correctness of the reading in the Bd.P. 

2. Vide Sangita-ratndkara I, 6.64 which enumerates Rakfilabha etc. 







670 


Vayu Puratia 


28b. (Obscure) Even the Safta becomes a deficient note 

(in themiddle?)riy ^ resu}t in the co nfusion between the 

Gramas of Sa<fja and Madhyama. 

29b. Obscure. 

30. Obscure*. . ,. . 

31a. (Obscure) A part of the note Ma-Madhyama -is the 

deviation before R?abha? _ 

31b. (Obscure) Their division is a guide ( margasarpsthita) 


t0 "sjfc! (Obscure) [Svasira and Svaranlara have been indicated 
^ 32b^ The reverse would take place in the case of the order 


of seven notes. 

33a. The four Mandraka gitas (songs) are sung with 
Gandhara as the key note. 

33bc. In Mandraka gitas, we know the notes Pancama \Pa ), 
Madhyama (Ma), Dhaivata ( Dha ), Nisada (Ni), Sofia (Sd), 
Rsabha (i?i) as the remaining notes. 

34a. One should know two Aparantika songs. (The rest 

is obscure). 

34b. (Obscure but with Bd.P. text) In the Aparantika 
songs, Gandhara ( Ga) is employed in the original and modified 
form by flute players ( Vainava ). [Bd.P : Gandhara is employed 
in the original and modified forms. ] 

35a. The Pada has got three forms (?). The Kaifika [Ai] 
song has seven forms. 

35b. The key-note procedure is declared with the entire 
use of Gandhara. 

35c. This is also the order intended for its Madhyama as 
the key note. 

36. The songs which have been mentioned with particular 
emphasis on the form should be effected with seven notes and 
the Kaifiki [-Aa] of the sevenfold form. 


*(A tentative translation:) The embellishment of Svaraa is remembered 
as the experience (?) of all following. The external music(?) is known to 
have live deities. 




25.37a-45a 


671 


(of »ng S ?™ S “ “ I|C<I ‘ he indicati0 " of th ' “n>P0"«n« pam 

{The Topic of Tala) 

There are two even measures. 

sfkitl)? ( ° bSCUr ^ the malra is not advanced ( abhiprati- - 

38 In Uttara songs in the original form, the Mdtrdh thus 
deleted (the rest of the verse obscure). 

39. With one foot (Pada) in the Matra and with one foot 

deficient-when there is the Upahanana (deficiency 

error?) of numbers in it, it is called Yana. 

40. The second break in the foot is well, established with 
Graha (the starting point of the song) and in the Aparantika 
(songs). The first, the eighth, the third and second are esta- 
blished with Graha (!) 

41. (Obscure) With half of the equivalent of a Pada and 
in the one-fifth portion of the Pada, the Pada-bhdga (one fourth 
of the Pada) also along with the one and a quarter (of a 
pada) (?) is established in the original form) 

42. In the Uttara and Mandraka songs in their original form, 
the Kala exists as explained of the Daksina Marga (way of the 
Tala—procedure) .* 

43 1 2 3 4 . Obscure (both here and in Bd.P.) 

44. When there is the use of one and the use of two, O 
best of Brahmanas, and when there is the combination of many 
Pataka 3 etc. are declared. 

45a. There are three Vrttis^-Cilrd, Vjtti and Dakfind (the 
text is obscure and hence emended). 

1. Some lines are perhaps missing ( vide Bd.P. 2.3-62.40-41). 

There were three Mdrgas (ways of the Tala-procedure) viz. Citrd, Vdrtikd 
and Dakfina having the Kala of two mdtrds, four mdtrds and eight mdtr&s 
respectively. The forms Ekakala ,, Dvikala and Catufkala were associated 
with Margas. 

2. (Tentative translation): The two feet and their Ahara(ia(?) beyond this 
are not laid down. 

3. Patdkd was one of eight mdtrds, which was indicated by moving 
the hand upwards. These mdtrds were to be employed in the mdrgas as 
specifically directed. 

4. The Vjrttis are the styles of rendering songs. They were three in 
number viz. Citrd , Vftti and Dakfipa. They were associated with the three 





£72 Vayu Parana 

45b The Samavayas (combinations of?) are eight; similarly 
the Murcchana is Sauvira. 

45c. Obscure. 

(Last foot of 45c.) Thus the Svara-man^ala of seven Svaras 
(notes) (is explained). 


CHAPTER TWENTYSIX * 1 
Tht Iksvakn Dynasty 

Sula said : 

1. When Raivata, otherwise known as Kakudmin, went to 
that world (of Brahma) the entire Kusasthall was over-run and 
destroyed by Punyajanas and Raksasas. 

2. The hundred brothers of that noble-soulcd virtuous 
king, on being harassed by the Raksasas, fled away in great 
terror. 

3. Fleeing in terror, those Ksatriyas established their 
families in different places. 2 3 O excellent Brahmanas, these 
families were very great. 

4-5. As they were virtuous, they were famous in all the 
quarters as ‘■'Prayalas” 2 (the pure ones). The family of 
Dhpsta, the Ksatriyas named Dharstakas, became quite invinci¬ 
ble in war. Thus there were three thousand groups of noble- 


Margas : Citra, Vdrtika and Dakjina, the three Layas (Tempi) and Grahas 
etc. 

In Citra the music of stringed instrument was prominent and song 
(vocal) subservient. In Dakfipa, the song was prominent and instrumental 
music subservient and in Vrtti both were employed with equal prominence. 

1. This chapter corresponds to Bd. P. 2-3-63. The references are to the 
verses in this chapter. 

2. Though the chapter is mainly concerned with the Iksvaku dynasty, 
w. 3-7 mention a dynasty of the pre-Yayati period, before circa 3000 B.C. 
(The Vedic Age, p. 276, BVB’s The History and Culture of the Indian People 
Vol. 1.) 

3. Saryata in Bd. P. ibid v. 5 








26.6-14 


673 


souled K§atriyas. Nsbhaga, s successor Nabhaga. was very 
powerful. 

6. Arhbarisa was the son of Nabhaga. His son was 
Virupa. Virupa s son was Prsadasva and his son was 
Rathltara. 

7. These (Rathitaras), though born as Ksatriyas, were 
known as Angiras-s. The prominent members (descendants) 
of Rathltara were Brahmanas with Ksatriya-like (heroic) 
prowess. 1 

8. Formerly when Manu sneezed, Iksavaku was bom. 2 
Iksvaku had hundred sons. All of them were liberal-minded 
(distributing enormous wealth as Daksina). 

9. The eldest son was Vikuksi. His younger brothers, 
Nemi and Danda (two were famous). He had five hundred 
sons, the chief of them being Sakuni. 

10. They were the kings and protectors of the land of 
Uttarapatha (northern region). Forty-eight of them ruled in 
the southern region. 

11. Twenty of them were very important. They protected 
the whole of the southern region. 

Iksvaku ordered Vikuksi on the occasion of Astaka. 3 

12. The king said : O powerful one, kill deer and bring 
the meat worthy of the Sraddha. Undoubtedly the A?fakd 
Sraddha has to be performed today. 

13. Vikuksi who went a-hunting at the instance of the 
intelligent (king) killed thousands of deer. Though very 
powerful, he became very tired. He then (killed and) ate a 
hare. 

14. When Vikuksi returned with the meat along with the 
army, the king urged Vasi$tha, “May the meat be sprinkled 
with the holy water”. 

1. This indicates the fluidity of the caste-system in ancient India. 

2. From v. 8, the Purana describes the Iksvaku dynasty. His three 
sons—Vikuksi, Nemi and Dan<Ja—founded separate dynasties at Ayodhya 
(U.P.), Videha (Bihar) and Dantfaka (North Deccan) respectively. Nemi 
is mentioned as ‘Nimi* in Buddhist Jatakas. 

3. The Sraddha performed on the 7th, 8th and 9th days after the Full 
Moon in the three months of Pausa, Magha and Ph&lguna. 



674 


Vayu Purana 


15 Thus urged by the king, Vasi 5 *ha said “So be it" and 
cam6 'there for the due performance (of the Sraddha). On 
seeing the meat desecrated, he became angry and spoke to the 

K,n j g g «. 0 king of great lustre, the meat has been desecrated 
by your son (behaving like a) Sudra. The meat offered by 
you cannot be eaten, as he had eaten a hare. 

17 O excellent king, O sinless one, a hare has been eaten 
by the wicked one before (the Sraddha) at the iorest. Hence 
this meat has been defiled and made unworthy of the Pit r s.” 

18-19. The infuriated Iksvaku then spoke thus to Vikuksi: 
“Commanded by me for the purpose of the rites of Pitrs, you 
went for hunting the deer. In the forest you mercdessly ate 
the flesh of a hare before the Sraddha. Hence I banish you. 
Go away along with your fate (as a result of your own action).” 
Thus at the instance of Vasistha the son was abandoned by 
Iksvaku. 

20-23. When Iksvaku passed away, the hare-eater attained 
this earth. He was a very virtuous-souled king of Ayodhya. 
Urged and guided by Vasistha, he ruled over the kingdom. 
Thereafter, being full of that sin, the king, ruling over the king¬ 
dom declined in power as time elapsed. 1 After understanding 
(the import of) this story, no one shall eat (meat) outside the 
injunction. Learned men explain the etymology of Mdriisa 
(Meat) thus—‘In the other world that will eat me, Marti Sa 
(Bhaksayita) the flesh of which I eat here now’. 2 

24-25. Sasada’s successor was Kakutstha, the powerful. 
Formerly he had sat on the hump of Indra who had assumed 
the form of a bull, in the course of the war named Adibaka. 3 

Hence he is remembered as Kakutstha 4 -(The occupier of 
the hump). 

Anenas was the son of Kakutstha. P r thu was the son of 
Anenas. 


1. or went to an inferior world (hell) after death. 

2. Quoted from Manu V. 55. 

after awu^^the^orrm fo ^ ght b Y Vasi?tha and Visvamitra 

Ajuraj fought with iL r? (two acquatic birds . Devas and 
Viivamitra? “ ch 0ther formm * 311 alliance with Vasina and 

4. Kalidasa, however, explains the epithet Kakutstha as 'one who 



26.26-34 


675 

26. Vfsadasva was Prthu’s son. From him was born the 
powerful Andhra. YavanaSva was Andhra’s son. Sravasta was 
his son. 

27. Sravasta was the king by whom SravastI * 1 was built. 
Sravasta’s successor was BfhadaSva of great fame. 

28. It is heard that Kuvalasva was the son of BrhadaSva. 
By killing Dhundhu that king became known as Dhundhu- 
mara. 

The Sages said : 

29. O highly intelligent one, we wish to hear how 
Dhundhu was slain, whereby Kuvalasva attained the title of 
Dhundhumara. 

Suta said : 

30-32. Bfhadasva had twentyone thousand sons. All of 
them were experts in Vidyas. They were powerful and invin¬ 
cible. All of them were righteous. All of them were performers 
of Yajnas with profuse Dak§ina. Bfhadasva, the king, crowned. 
Kuvalasva who was very powerful, heroic, excellent and 
virtuous, in that kingdom. After transferring the royal position 
and glory to his son, the king went to the forest. 

33. Uttahka, the Brahmana sage, prevented the great heroic 
king Bfhadasva who was excellent and virtuous and who was 
proceeding to the forest (for penance). 

Uttanka said : 

34. “O King, protection must be offered by you. It be¬ 
hoves you to do it. I am unable to perform penance un¬ 
disturbed. 


occupies a prominent place among kings’ in Raghuvamia VI. 71 as follows: 
Ikfv&ku-vamSyab kakudam nfpaiidm 
Kakutstha ityahita-lakfapo'bhut / 

Mallinatha, the commentator, correctly mentions the Purapic episode 

(vidt his comm, on ibid.). m . „ . 

1. Modern Sahet-Mahet on the Rapti (ancient Airavatl or Aciravau) 

in the Gonda Diitrict in U.P. 



676 


Vayu Purana 


35. In the wild desert region near my hermitage, there is 

a vast sea full of sand, O king. 1 

36 There is a huge-bodied, extremely powerful being lying 

benea'th the ground covered with sand. He cannot be killed 


CV 37 by He is the son of Manu. His name is Dhundhu. He 
is cruel and terrible. He is performing a severe penance for 
the last hundred years for the destruction of the worlds. 

38. He breathes out (once) at the end of a year. But 
when he exhales the whole earth along with forests quakes and 


39. A great column of dust is raised by the air exhaled 
by him. It covers up the path of the sun and the earth — quake 
continues for a week. 

40. It is accompanied by very terrible flames of fire, sparks 
and smoke. O King, I am not therefore able to stay in my 
own hermitage. 

41. O brawny-armed king, restrain him with a desire for 
the welfare of the worlds. The great deity Vi$nu will further 
develop your prowess by means of his own splendour. 

42. The worlds will be happy and relieved today when 
the Asura is killed. O King, you are hence competent to kill 
him. 

43-44. O Sinless one, a boon has been granted to me 
(that you would help me by killing him) formerly by Visnu. 
Hence Dhundhu of great virility cannot be slain by anyone of 
less splendour even in hundreds of years. His virility is so 
great that it cannot be brooked even by the Devas.” 

45. Thus requested by the noble-souled Uttanka, that 
saintly king entrusted his son Kuvalasva with the job of restrain¬ 
ing Dhundhu. 


1- .u- VC rf 35 'f° describe a sand y rc gi° n with occasional earthquakes and 
someth.ngJ.ke_volcanic eruptions. Scholars differ about its identification. 

western « a was sub- 

Kuvalas'va ^ ^ volcanic action ceased by the efforts of 

“led s« n n -'" ! 'u '' fl ’ P - 126) - Pargiter regards this as a shallow 

pp tS ei) JaSthan WWch PreVCmed Ar y an expansion (AIHT 



26 . 46-58 


677 


46. The King said, “I have already laid aside iny 
weapons. Here is my son. O Excellent Brahmana, he will 
undoubtedly become the slayer of Dhundhu.” 

47. After ordering his son who was ready to slay Dhundhu, 
the king of praise-worthy holy observances retired to the 
mountains for performing penance. 

48. The righteous-souled king Kuvalasva, obeying the 
behest of his father, went ahead to Dhundhu’s haunt, accom¬ 
panied by his twentyone thousand sons and Uttanka, in order 
to restrain Dhundhu. 

49. Due to the imploring entreaty of Uttanka, and with a 
desire for the welfare of the worlds, lord Visnu entered him 
with his own brilliance. 

50. When that invincible (king) started, a loud voice 
arose in heaven—“This king shall be the slayer of Dhundhu 
(Dhundhumara) with effect from today.” 

51-52. The Devas honoured him with divine flowers. It 
was a wonderful thing. That tiger-like man (the king) of 
great prowess went to that vast sea of sand accompanied by his 
sons and dug it up without any waste (of time). That saintly 
king had already been developed (empowered) extra-ordinarily 
by the splendour of Narayana. 

53-54. He became still more powerful by staying under the 
control of Uttanka. Dhundhu was found out by his sons who 
were digging. He had been lying hidden beneath the sand on 
the western side. He seemed to be furiously covering the 
worlds by means of the fire coming out of his mouth. 

55. O excellent one among the imbibers of Soma, by 
means of his Yogic power, he exuded water like the great ocean 
at the time of Moon-rise. It was a vast sheet of water with 
currents and waves. 

56. His sons excepting three were burnt by the Raksasa. 
Then the king of great strength destroyed all the attendants 
and kinsmen of Dhundhu. 

57. The king who was a Yogin, drank up his behemence 
in the form of water-flood (let loose by him) by means of his 
Yogic power and extinguished the fire by means of water. 

58. Then he overpowered the huge-bodied aquatic 


678 


Vayu. Pwrana 


demon by means of his strength. The king, having successfully 
accomplished his task, showed him to Uttanka. 

59 60 To the noble-souled king, Uttanka granted the 
boons of‘everlasting wealth, invincibility (in battles) by his 
enemies perpetual interest in Dharma and everlasting resi¬ 
dence in heaven. To the sons who were killed by the demon, 

he granted everlasting worlds in heaven. 

61. DrdhaSva was the eldest ofhis three sons who survived. 
BhadraSva and Kapilaiva were the younger ones. . 

62. DrdhaSva was known as Dhaundhumari (son of 
Dhundhumara). Haryasva was his son. His son was Nikumbha 
who was always engaged in Ksatra Dharma (military Pro- 
fession). 

63. Samhatasva was the son of Nikumbha. He is reputed 
as an expert in warfare. Krsasva and Aksayasva were the sons 
of Samhatasva. 

64. His wife was Haimavati who was like the river 
DfSadvati to the minds of the good. She was famous in the 
three worlds. Her son was Prasenajit. 

65. Yuvanasva was his son. He was very brilliant and 
famous in the three worlds as highly virtuous. The chaste lady 
Gauri was his wife. 

66. She was cursed by her husband and turned into the 
river Bahuda. 1 Her son Gaurika became an emperor. 

67. Mandhata, the son of Yuvanasva, became a king con¬ 
quering the three worlds. In this connection, Brahmanas well 
versed in Puranas, cite these two verses. 


68. “The entire region from the place where the Sun rises 
up to (the place) where he sets, the whole of it, is called the 
territory of Mandhata, son of Yuvanasva”. 

69. People who know the (details of) different races also 
quote this verse. “Those who know Puranas call the son of 
Yuvanasva, noble-souled, a performer of sacrifices and (a king) 
of unmeasured splendour. Mandhata is the embodied form of 
Visnu.” 


Dhumela or Burha-Rapti, a feeder of the Rapti in Oudh 
( U.P.). Sage Likhita had his amputated arm rejoined by a bath in this 
nver. Hence she is BShu-di ‘Granter of arms’—De 16 



26.70-82 


679 


70. His wife CaitrarathI was Sasabindu’s daughter. She 
was known by the name ofBindumati also. She was a chaste 
lady and had no equal in beauty all over the earth. 

71. She was the eldest sister often thousand brothers. She 
was devotedly attached to her husband. Mandhata begot three 
sons of her. 

72. They were Purukutsa, Ambarisa and Mucukunda. 
Ambarlsa’s successor was another Yuvanasva. 

73. Harita was Yuvanasva’s son. Descendants of Harita 
are remembered by the name Suris. They were the (adopted) 
sons of Ahgiras (spiritual lineage). They were Brahmanas 
endowed with martial qualities. 

74. Purukutsa’s successor was Trasaddasyu of great fame. 
He was born of Narmada. His son was Sambhuta. 

75. Sambhuta’s son was the valorous Anaranya. He was 
killed by Ravana formerly while he was conquering the three 


worlds. 


76. Trasadasva was the son of Anaranya. His son was 
Haryasva. From Haryasva Drsadvatl gave birth to king 
Vasumata. 

77. His son was the virtuous king Tridhanva by name. 
The scholarly king Trayyaruna was the son of Tridhanvan. 

78-79. He had a powerful son named Satyavrata. 
Vidarbha’s wife was abducted by him after killing (i.e. defeat¬ 
ing) the heaven-dwellers, when all the sacred mantras of 
marriage ceremony had been chanted and the ceremonies con¬ 
cluded. Visnuvfddha was his son whence his descendants are 
remembered as Visnuvrddhas. They were also the (adopted) 
sons of Ahgiras endowed with martial qualities. 

80. That (sin) was committed by him out of lust, or 
(pride) due to his strength, or to the powerful force exerted by 
the inevitable destiny, though he was intelligent. 


81. His father Trayyaruna banished him as he was sinful. 
Being infuriated with him, he repeated many times, “Be 

degraded (and gone)”. 

82. He spoke to his father again and again, 

Where shall I go?” The father ordered him 
the Cancjalas. 


“I am alone. 
"Live among 






680 


Vayu Purana 


83 o d«ffl«r of the family, I don't seek to be a father with 
such a son as you.” On being repulsed thus by the words or 

the king, he went out of the city. . 

84 Vasistha, the holy lord and sage, did not give tarn 
asylum. The bold and intelligent Satyavrata, discarded by 
his father, lived near the hutments of Cancjalas. The father too 

went to the forest. , ... 

85 On account of that unrighteous deed, Indra did not 


bring showers to that land for full twelve years. 

86. Visvamitra of great penance left his wife in that land 
and performed a severe penance in the marshy land near the 


dca. 

87. His wife tied her own bosom-born middle son (with ; a 
rope) round his neck and offered him for sale in exchange for a 
hundred cows for maintaining (the remaining ones). 

88-89. On seeing the son of the sage tied round the neck, 
the excellent man of good rites, the virtuous-souled Satyavrata 
of great intellect, got him released by being sold. He nurtured 
him in order to propitiate Visvamitra and gain his sympathy. 

90. The boy came to be known as Galava because he had 
been tied round the neck {Gala ). That descendant of Kusika, 
a great sage of severe penance had been redeemed by that 
powerful (King). 

91. On account of his (?) sacred vow, devotion, mercy 
and solemn declaration, the king who adhered to the rules of 
discipline, sustained Visvamitra’s wife also. 

92. After killing deer, boars, buffaloes and other forest 
animals, he cooked that flesh near the hermitage of ViSvamitra. 

93-94. At the behest of the father, he adopted a secret 
vow (UpdrhSu Vrata) and for that purpose took initiation ex¬ 
tending to twelve years. As the king (Satyavrata’s father) had 
gone to the forest, the sage Vasistha, in the capacity of the 
king s priest, protected Ayodhya, the kingdom and the harem. 

95. Out of childishness, or due to the force of the inevit¬ 
able destiny, Satyavrata nursed a great grudge against Vasistha. 

96. While he was crying on being exiled by his father and 
banished from the kingdom, the sage Vasistha had not restrain- 


26.97-108 


681 


97. The Mantras chanted during the celebration of a 
marriage are concluded at the seventhstep (of the Saptafiadi rite) 
but Satyavrata abducted her (the bride ofVidarbha) at the 
seventh step. 

98. Vasistha the knower of Dharmas does not wish to 
repeat the h^antras. So Vasistha was inwardly angry with 
Satyavrata* (?) 

99. It was because of being fully mindful of his position as 
preceptor that Vasistha did so then. Nor did Satyavrata 
understand the secret vow of (the sage). 

100-102. (Defective verses) When the father of lofty mind 
passed away, Indra did not shower for twelve years. Thereby 
all the people on the earth became weak. All these years the 
son was having Dikfa (i.e. performing holy rites in accordance 
with his fathers’ injunction). Vasistha thought that the people 
would be saved if he was crowned again. So he restrained 
Satyavrata from keeping out of the kingdom further. 

103-106. The powerful (younger king) performed the holy 
rites for twelve years. When there was no meat avail¬ 
able, the son of the king saw the cow of the noble-souled Vasi¬ 
stha, Kamadugha (i.e. the yielder of desired objects). Out of 
spite, due to delusion and exhaustion and because he was hungry, 
the foremost among powerful persons who had adopted the 
practice ofDasyus (robbers and Candalas), killed the cow. He 
himself ate the meat and fed the sons of Visvamitra also. On 
hearing it Vasistha abandoned him then. The holy lord Vasistha 
spoke also thus to the son of the king (i.e. Satyavrata): 

107. “O base one among men, had it not been for the fact 
that you have already three Sahkus (sins), O cruel one, I would 
have let this iron Sahku (rod) fall on you. 

108. Your transgression (commission of sins) is of three 
forms: One because of the dissatisfaction of your father, the 
other due to the slaughter of the preceptor’s cow and (finally) 
due to the partaking of unsanctified (flesh) 


*The line needs emendation as in Bd. P. v. 97: 
iti satyavrato rofam vasiffhe manasa *karot / 

‘So Satyavrata entertained anger about Vasistha in his mind . 




682 


Vayu Ptirapa 


i go Tho, (observing out) .he three isms, the rage of great 

^ Jm him, "Triiahku” by which name he . -mem- 

,1-112. When he was asked to choose a boon as he plea- 

sed the son of the king (Satyavrata) requested him to be hi, 
preceptor. Wben the danger of the drought lasttng for twelve 

years was averted, the sage (ViSvtontra) crowned han d the 
Lreditary kingdom and presided over hat sacrifice. Even as 

Devas and Vasi«ha were watching, the holy lord Kanaka 
(Visvimitra) made him ascend to heaven along with his 

physical body. ... 

113. To Vasistha who was watching, it was very surprising. 

In this connection, people well-versed in the Puranas cite these 
two verses: 

114-115. By the favour of Visvamitra, Tnsanku shines 
in heaven with great brilliance in the company of Devas. 
It is the result of the blessing of that intelligent one. 
A beautiful woman bedecked by the moon in the season 
Hemanta proceeds slowly. She is embellished by the three 
Bhavas and adorned by the heavenly body—a planet (called) 
TriSanku. 

116. Satyarata hailing from the Kekaya family was his 
wife. She gave birth to a son, HariScandra, the sinless. 

117. That king Hariscmdra was well known as Traisankava 
(son of Trisanku). He was renowned as an emperor and a 
performer of Rajasuya sacrifice. 

118. Hari&jandra’s son was Rohita, the powerful. Harita, 
wasRohita’s son. Cancu is called Harita (son of Harita). 


119. Vijaya and Sudeva were the sons of Cancu. Since he 
was the conqueror of all Ksatriyas, he is remembered as 
Vijaya. 

120. Ruruka was his son. He was a king, a great expert 
in matters pertaining to religion and wealth. Hrtaka (or 
Dhrtaka) was the son of Ruruka and Bahu was born of him. 

121. The king (viz. Bahu) who was addicted to vice was 


26 . 122-131 


683 


defeated by Haihayas, Talajanghas, Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas, 
Paradas and Pahlavas. 

122. Even in that righteous Satyayuga that king was not 
very virtuous. Sagara was born as the son of Bahu. He was bom 
with a body containing poison in the hermitage of Bhrgu. 
He was saved by Turva (Aurva). 

123. After obtaining the missile pertaining to Fire-god 
from Bhargava, the king Sagara went over the whole of the 
earth and killed Talajanghas along with Haihayas. 

124. The unerring king repudiated the Dharma (code of 

conduct, rites etc.) of Sakas and Pahlavas. He who was con¬ 
versant with Dharma cast out the Dharma of (his opponents) 
Ksatriyas and Paradas (i.e. excommunicated them). 

The Sages enquired : 

125-126. Plow was the king Sagara (Sa-gara) born with 
poison (inside)? Why did the infuriated unerring .king repudi¬ 
ate the traditional holy rites of those powerful Ksatriyas such as 
the Sakas and others? 

Suta said: 

It is reported that the kingdom of the vicious king Bahu 
was taken over by Haihayas and Talajanghas who came 
along with Sakas ? 

127. These five clans, viz. Yavanas, Paradas, Kambojas, 
Pahlavas, (and Sakas) attacked him. 

128. His kingdom was plundered and taken by these 
powerful leading Ksatriyas. King Bahu whose realm was seized, 
renounced the world. Accompanied by his wife the righteous- 
souled king entered the forest and performed penance. 

129. After some time the king once went to fetch water. 
Due to advancing years and weakness he died midway. 

130. His wife Yadavl who was pregnant then, followed 
him. Poison had been administered to her by her co-wife with 
a desire to kill the foetus. 

131. She prepared the funeral pyre of her husband, got 
him placed and lit it and was (about) to enter into the fire, 

when Aurva, descendant of Bhrgu made her desist from it out 

of sympathy. 


684 


Vayu Purana 


, \ Uormitape she delivered the foetus 
132. In his ^ urVa .^fiministercd) poison. Thus she gave 
(child) along^h the : |^^ t P ^ ^ 

birth to her son, the nng jr t . natal h oly rites for that 

,33. Aurva performed th e^p das and he instruc . 

nP H b W SO in rtfusHf miraculous weapons and missiles. 

Fire-godfromtheson o 6 Naturally strong 

missiles the infuriated 
E’SS’SSiTS Rudm destroying ft* W 

d "t». Then the king attempted to exterminate completely 
gakas Yavanas, Kambojas, Paradas and Pahlavas. _ 

136. Being harassed and victimised by the heroic and 
noble-souled Sagara, all of them desirous of protection sought 

shelter and protection from Vasi§tha. 

137 Having stipulated some conditions, Vasistha agreed. 
Promising them protection from fear (of extermination by 
Sagara), the great sage restrained Sagara. 

138. Remembering his own vow and on hearing the words 
of his preceptor, Sagara put an end to their traditional rites of 
worship and made them change their dress and apparel. 1 

139. He got half of the heads of Sakas shaved and released 
them. He got the heads of Yavanas and Kambojas comp¬ 


letely shaven. 

140. Paradas were compelled to keep their hair dis¬ 
hevelled and Pahlavas were made to grow their beards. 
They were debarred from Vedic study and the use of Va$afkara 
by that noble-souled king. 

141-142. Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas, Pahlavas, Paradas, 
Kelisparsas, Mahisikas, Darvas, Colas and Khasas—all these 
were clans of Ksatriyas. Their traditional religious rites were 
prohibited by the noble-souled Sagara at the instance of 
Vasi$tha. 


1* Verses 139-140 describe the ways of hair-dressing etc. of these tribes 
and attribute to Sagara the credit of imposing these non-k§atriya ways 
on them. 



26.143-154 


685 


143. Conducting his conquests righteously, the king con¬ 
quered the earth and took initiation for the performance of a 
horse-sacrifice. He let loose the horse. 

144. As it was being taken round, it was stolen near the 
shore of the south-eastern sea and made to enter beneath the 
earth. 

145-146. The king made all his sons to dig the whole 
area. Then ultimately, in the great ocean, they met with the 
primordial Being, Lord Visnu, Lord Hari, K r sna, the Lord of 
subjects, Lord Hamsa, Lord Narayana, in the form of Kapila. 

147. They came within the range of the vision of that 
brilliant being. Then all those sons (ofSagara) were burnt and 
four of them survived. 

148. They were Barhiketu, Suketu, Dharmarata and the 
heroic Pancavana. All these continued the lineage of the lord 
(Sagara). 

149. Lord Hari, Narayana granted him boons such as 
the everlasting nature of his race, the benefit of a hundred 
horse-sacrifices, the all-pervading Samudra (ocean) as the son 
and perpetual residence in heaven. 

150. Taking the horse with him, the ocean, the lord of 
rivers, came there and bowed to him. On account of that 
action he earned the title of “Sagara” (born ofSagara). 

151. After regaining the horse from the ocean the king 
performed horse-sacrifices again and again making up the total 
of one hundred. 

152. We have heard (it reported) that there were sixty 
thousand sons. Those sixty thousand sons were burnt. Those 
noble-souled sixty thousand sons entered (merged in) the divine 
brilliance of Narayana. 

The Sages enquired : 

153. By what means did the sixty thousand sons of 
Sagara become powerful and valorous? Please narrate. 

S uta replied : 

154. Sagara had two wives. By means of penance they had 
burnt all their sins. The elder of them named Ke$Ini was the 
daughter of Vidarbha. 







686 


Vayu Pur ana 


?r_ w/ac verv virtuous. She was the 
daughter of ArljWncmi^n beamy she was unrivalled on the 


, 56 PneplUalcd by means of penance, the holy lord 
Ania sited them these boons-“One of them w.ll g,ve b,„h 
t , son who will establish the lineage and who w 1 be 
coveted/The other will give birth to sixty thousand sons 

157 On hearing the words of the sage m the tmgs 
assembly, Kesini, the elder one, chose the boon of a single son 

who will be the cause of the perpetuation of the race. 

158. Sumati, the sister of Suparna, accepted the boon of 
sixty thousand sons from the noble-souled sage, in accordance 


with her wish. , . , 

159. After some time the elder wife gave birth to the 

eldest son (subsequently) famous as Asamanja (Asamanjasa), 
the son of Sagara, the scion of the family of Kakutstha. 

160. Sumati, the famous lady, gave birth to a gourd-like 
foetus. From the gourd-like foetus all the sixty thousand sons 
came out. 

161. The king caused (pieces of) the foetus to be depo¬ 
sited in (sixty thousand) jars of ghee and engaged as many 
nurses to look after them individually. 

162. Then, In the course of nine months, they grew well 
and came out of them (jars) hale and hearty; those blessed 
sons heightened the pleasure of Sagara. 

163-164. After a long time those sixty thousand sons (of 
Sagara) attained youth. Of those who (later) (closely) followed 
the horse (of Asvamedha) the eldest son of Sagara was a 
tiger among men. The powerful one was famous as Asamanja, 
otherwise known as Barhiketu. 

165. Since he was engaged in activities against the interest 
of the citizens, he was banished by his father at the very outset. 
The son of Asamanja was the powerful Amsuman. 

166. His son was a virtuous soul. He was well-known by 
the name of Dilipa. From Dillpa was born Bhagiratha, a hero 
of great splendour. 

167. Ganga, the most excellent of rivers, rendered beauti¬ 
ful with aerial chariots, was (brought here in this world) by 
him. She was given the status of a daughter by the (king), the 


687 


26.168-177 

performer of the sacrifice ( ijanena ), from the sea 1 (?) In this 
connection, people well-versed in Puranas cite this verse. 

168. “Bhaglratha brought down Ganga by means of his 
active endeavour. Hence Ganga is called Bhaglrathl by those 
who are the foremost ones among those conversant with 
genealogies (of kings).” 

169. Bhaglratha s son was Sruta by name. His successor 
was Nabhaga. He was always engaged in religious activities. 

170. Ambarisa was his son. Sindhudvlpa succeeded him. 
It is well-known that the knowers of the Purana of genealogies 
sing thus : 

171. “Protected by the arms of Ambarisa, son of Nabhaga, 
the earth became completely free from three types of Tapa 
(distress)”. 

172. Ayutayu, the powerful, was the son of Sindhudvlpa. 
Rtuparna of great fame was the successor of Ayutayu. 

173. He was the knower of the divine Aksahrdaya Mantra 
(the Mantra with which people become sure winners at the 
game of dice). He was a powerful king and a friend to Nala. 

There are two Nalas of stead ast holy rites, very famous in 
the Puranas. 

174. One of them was the son of Virasena and the other a 
leading member of the Iksvaku race. Rtuparna’s son was 
Sarvakama who was lord of the people. 

175. King Sudasa was his son. He was Hamsamukha (one 
with the face of a swan) 2 . Sudasa’s son was the king Saudasa. 

176. He was well-known by the names of Kalmasapada 
and Mitrasaha. Vasistha, of great brilliance, begot of Kalma- 
sapada’s wife the son Asmaka, for the purpose of making the 
line of Iksvaku flourish (and perpetuate). 

177. Urakama was the son of Asmaka and his son was 
Mulaka. As regards King Mulaka, they cite the following 
(verse). 


1. The text: Ijanena samudrddvai is obscure and gives an awkward meaning, 
especially of samudrat. Bd. P. v.167: ihanM sureSSd vai etc. ‘was brought 

here (in this world) and was assigned the daughterly status from the lord of 
Suras.’ 

2. Indra-sakho ‘a friend of Indra’ in Bd. P. v. 175 is better. 






Vdyu Purana 


688 ,. T, / 

ns. -n- 

J2g32Uw »pp-> “ d had ,hc coat of mail !in 

to formjofwomen^ ^ is mbere d *ithc 

sonofMulaka. From Sataratha war born the powerful mg 

The son of »*« the glorious and valorous 
Kr. Sima. He had a daughter also and hi, son was V.svamaha. 

^"pa- his son. He became well known as Kha,- 

vinga.' Having attained a span of life extend,ng to a Muhurta, 
he returned to this world from ,varga (celestial world). By 
SS of his intelligence and truthfulness the three world, 

were mastered by him. 

182 Dirghabahu was his son and Raghu was born of him. 
Aia was the son of Raghu. From him (Aja) was born that 

powerful king Dasaratha, the cause of delight for the race of 

Iksvaku. ... 

183. The heroic Rama, the knower of Dharmas, well-known 

in the’worlds, Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna of great 
strength were the sons of Dasaratha. 

184. After killing Lavana, the son of Madhu, Satrughna 
entered his Madhuvana and founded die city of Mathura there. 

185 Subahu and Surasena, his sons, born of the princess 


of Videha, protected the city of Mathura, accompanied by 
(their father) Satrughna. 

186. Angada and Candraketu were the sons of Laksmana. 
Their territories at the border of mountain Himalaya were very 
prosperous and flourishing. 

187. Angadiya, the capital city of Angada, was in the land 
Karapatha. 1 Candravakfra, the city of the mighty Candraketu, 
was very auspicious. 

188. Tak?a and Puskara were the heroic sons of Bharata. 


1. Modem Karabagh or Baghan on the west bank of the Indus, at 
the foot of salt range called Niti hill in the Bannu district (cf. RaghuvamJa. 
XV-90). 


—De 92 



26.189-197 


689 

The cities of those two noble-souled ones were in the Siddha 
land of Gandhara. 

189. The beautiful city of Tak§a, viz. Tak^asila 1 is 
renowned in all the quarters. Puskaravati, 2 the city of the 
heroic Puskara, is also well-known. 

190. The people who know the Puranas sing this Gatha 
(laudatory verse): “All the principles are fettered to (con¬ 
centrated in) intelligent Rama due to his greatness.” 

191. Rama was a dark-complexioned, youthful, red-eyed, 
bright-faced hero with arms extending upto the knees. With a 
smiling face and leonine shoulders, that mighty-armed (one) 
uttered only measured words. 

192-193. Rama reigned for ten thousand years. The sound 
of the chanting of Rk, Saman and Yajur Mantras and the 
twanging of his bow string were always heard. 

“May it be given. May it be enjoyed”. These utterances 
were continuously heard in the realm. While staying in Jana- 
sthana 3 he carried out the work of Devas. 

194. Proceeding in search of Slta, that renowned leader of 
men killed the (demon) of the family of Pulastya, who had 
committed sins before. 

195. Rama, son of Dasaratha, was brilliant with his own 
splendour. He possessed Sattvic qualities. He was richly 
endowed with good attributes. He surpassed even the Sun and 
the blazing fire in brilliance. 

196. Thus the mighty-armed scion of the family of Iksvaku 
killed Ravana along with all of his followers and then went 
back to Heaven. 

197. Srirama’s son was called Kusa, He had another son 
Lava of great prowess. Understand (the names of) their 
realms. 


] Taxila, in the district of Rawalpindi in W. Panjab, (now) 
Pakistan. 

2. According to VR. VII. 101.10-15 it was founded by Bharata. 
Probably the same as ‘Poukelaotes* mentioned by Greeks as being sacked by 
Alexander the great. De (p. 163) identifies it with Charsaddah eighteen 
miles north of Peshawar, on the Landi near its junction with the Kabul 
river. 

3. Modem Nasik or Paficavafi in Maharashtra. 






690 


Vayu Purdna 


m The realm of KuSa was Koiala The capital c.,y 

waj Ku^asthali- 1 This beau* city »» founded by h, m on 

the ridges of the Vindhya mountains. 

,99 Uuara-Koiala was the kingdom of the noblcsonled 

Lava!^ (His capital) Sravasti was renowned in the worlds. 

Understand the descendants of Kusa. 

200 Kusa’s son was the pions-sonlcd At,tin who loved to 

1 u ' , Atithi’s son who was more well- 

receive guests hospitably. Atitm son 

known than his father was a king named N.sadha 

201 Naia was the son of Nisadha and Nabha was Nala s 
son. Pupdarika was bom of Nabha and Ksemadhanvan was 

h,S M2.' The valorous king Devanika was Ksemadhanva's son. 
Devanika’s son was lord Ahlnagu by name. 

203. Ahlnagu’s successor was Pariyatra of great fame. 
His son was Dala and from him was born the king Bala. 

204. Bala’s son was a pious-souled (king) Auhka 2 by name. 
His son was Vajranabha whose son was Sarikhana. 

205. Sankhana’s son Dhyusitasva was a renowned scholar. 
King Visvasaha was the son of Dhyusitasva. 

206. Hiranyanabha belonged to Kosala. His son was 
Vasistha. He was remembered as the disciple of the grandson 
of Jaimini in all auspicious rites. 

207. He had studied five hundred Vedic Samhitas. 3 The 
Yoga philosophy was learned from him by the intelligent 
Yajfiavalkya. 

208. Pusya, his son, was a great scholar. His son was 
Dhruvasandhi. Sudar^ana was his son and Agnivarna was 
born of Sudarsana. 

209. Agnivarna’s son was Slghra and Manu (Maru in Bd. 
P.) is remembered as the son of Slghraka. Manu adopted 


1. Dc(p. Ill) identifies it with Ujjain but our text locates it on the 
ridges of the Vindhya mountain. 

2. ‘Uluka* as per Bd. P.v. 205. Pargiter, in the list of kings of Ayodhya, 
calls him'Uktha* ( A1HT\ p. 149). 

3. Bd.P. v. 207 states that Pausyaiiji was his teacher in Sama Veda. 
Pau?yanji, a disciple of Sukarman, taught 500 branches of the Sama Veda. 



26.210—27.3 


691 


Yogic practice and stayed in the village Kalapagrama. 1 In the 
nineteenth Yuga, he would be the lord who originated and 
made the Ksatriya race flourish. 

210. Manu’ssonwas Prasusruta. His son was Susandhi. 
Susandhi’s son was A-marsa, otherwise known by the name 
Sahasvan. 

211. Sahasvan’s son was the king known by the name 
ViSrutavan. Visrutavan’s son was the king Brhadbala. 

212. These are the mostly remembered kings, the successors 
of Iksvaku. The most important members of the race have 
been enumerated here. 

213-214. One who reads well this creation of Vivasvan, 
the son of Aditi, becomes endowed with progeny. He attains 
identity with Vaivasvata Manu, lord Sraddha-Deva who 
bestows prosperity on the subjects. He becomes free from sins 
and Rajasic qualities. He becomes long-lived and does not 
swerve from the righteous path. 


CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 
The Nimi Dynasty 8 

Suta said : 

1-3. Now (listen to and) understand the race of Nimi 3 , 
the younger brother of Vikuksi. It was he who founded a city 
well known as Jayanta near the hermitage of Gautama. 

(the city) was comparable to the city of Devas. In his race a 
very intelligent son named Nemi was born to Iksvaku of great 

1. Probably a fictitious It I I * r! sar ^ t e ^ a s° a pleasure 1 haunt of 

somewhere near Badrmath in the Himalayas- (Manu) and Devapi, 

Urvasi and Pururavas according to our tex . A y 0B a, waiting to 

the last kings of the Solar and Lunar races ? f tcr t h e incarnation 

re-establish their kingdoms at Ayodhya and Hastmapur alter 

ofKalki - j . ka v 9 3 64 so from Bd. P. only verse 

2. This chapter corresponds to Bd. r. 2.3.0*., 

n “' "Mfi-tze-sifr 











692 


Vayu Pu.rd.na 

extremely pious-souled and revered by all 
as born in the course of a Yajna, the pro- 


three Parvans. This king of great fame was born of Arani (a 
piece of wood from which fire is kindled for sacrificial purpose) 
while it was being churned. He was well known by the name 
of Mithi. Since his birth was of this type, he became (known 
as) Janaka. 

6. Mithi was a king of great prowess whereby the capital 
city became (known as) Mithila 1 and the king was Janaka. 
Janaka’s son was Udavasu. 

7. From Udavasu was born the extremely pious-souled 
Nandivardhana. From Nandivardhana was born the heroic 
and pious Suketu. 

8. From Suketu was born the pious-souled Devarata of 
great strength. It is heard that the pious-souled Brhaduccha 
was Devarata’s son. 

9. Brhaduccha’s son was the valorous Mahavlrya. Dhrti- 
man was the son of Mahavlrya and his son was Sudhrti. 

10. The pious-souled Dhrstaketu, the oppressor of enemies, 
was the son of Sudhrti. Dhrstaketu’s son was well known by 
the name of Haryasva. 

11. Maru was Haryasva’s son. Pratitvaka 2 was Maru’s 
son. The pious-souled king Kirtiratha was the son of Pratit¬ 
vaka. 

12. The son of Kirtiratha was well known as Devamldha. 
and Vibudhawas the son of Devamldha and Vibudha’s son was 
Dhrti. 

13. MahadhftPs son was Klrtiraja, a king of great 
valour. Klrtiraja s son was a scholar well known as Maharoma. 


1. Also called Janakapur, capital of Videha in the district of Darbhanga 
(Bihar). It was famous for its Brahmanical University (upto 14th cent. 
A.D ). Now a new Sanskrit University has been founded there some years 


2. Pratimbaka in Bd.P.v, 11. Pargiter records ‘Pratindhaka* as his name 


(AIHT, p.147). 



27.14-23 


693 


14. From Maharoma was born, the famous Svarnaroma. 
Svarnaroma’s son was the king Hrasvaroma. 

15. It is heard that the son of Hrasvaroma was the scholar 
Slradhvaja. While this king was ploughing, Sita, of great 
fame, was born. She became the chaste queen of Rama. She 
was devoted to her husband and a virtuous wife. 

SarhSapayana enquired : 

16. How was Sita of great fame born while (the field) was 
being ploughed. Why did the king plough the field wherein 
she was born ? 

Sula replied : 

17. While the Agniksetra (the field where sacrifice was to 
be performed) was being ploughed in accordance with the 
injunction in the course of the horse-sacrifice of the noble soul 
she was born out of it. 

18. From Slradhvaja was born the Maithila (king of 
Mithila) named Bhanuman. His brother was Kusadhvaja, the 
lord and king of Kasl. 

19. Bhanuman’s son was the valorous Pradyumna. His 
son was Muni and from him Urjavaha is remembered (as 
born). 

20. From Orjavaha was born Sutadvaja. Sakuni was his 
son. Sakuni’s son was Svagata. 1 Suvarcas is remembered as 
his son. 

21. Sruta was his successor. Susruta was his son. Jaya 
was Susruta’s son. Vijaya was the son of Jaya. 

22. Vijaya’s son was Rta and Sunaya was the son of Rta. 
From Sunaya was born Vitahavya, and Vitahavya’s son was 

Dhjrti. 

23. Dhrti’s son was Bahulasva and Bahulasva’s son was 
Krti. 2 It is with him that the race of Janaka is terminated. Thus 
the Maithilas (kings of Mithila) are enumerated. Understand 
the race of Soma also. 


1. The list in AIHT, p. 144 shows that our text and Bd.P. jumped 
twelve generations downwards and declared Svagata as the son of Sakuni. 

2. Krtaksana in AIHT, p. 149. 



694 


Vayu Purana 


CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 
The Nativity of Soma and Saumya (. Budha) 


Sutasaid: _ i , 

1 OBrahamanas, the progenitor of the Moon-god was 

Atri,' the holy sage. He surpassed all the worlds by means of 

his brilliance. He was a holy lord. 

2-3 He always performed only holy rites physically, men¬ 
tally and verbally. We have heard that formerly, for a period 
of three thousand years, he performed a penance that was indeed 

very difficult to be performed in the worlds, wherein with his 

arms upraised he stood firm (unmoved) like (a piece of) wood, 
a wall or a piece of rock. 

4. The highly intelligent Brahmana had sublimated his 
sexual urge. He stood without even winking his eyes. His body 
attained the status of Soma. 

5. The sage of sanctified soul in the state of Soma rose up 
(to the sky). The Soma juice exuded from his eyes illuminating 
all the quarters. 

6. On being ordered by Vidhi (Brahma), the ten Devis 
(i.e. the quarters) gathered together there and received it in 
their womb collectively, but could not do so (for long). 

7-8. When those goddesses (ladies) were unable to hold 
the foetus in their wombs, the foetus endowed with lustre, illu¬ 
minated the worlds like the Moon (now) blessing everyone; it 
emerged from the quarters (womb of the ladies) and fell on 
the ground (assuming the form of) the Moon along with them 
(the goddesses). 

9. On seeing Soma falling, Brahma, the grandfather of the 
worlds, placed him in a chariot, with a desire for the welfare of 
the worlds. 

10. O Brahmanas, indeed he (the Moon) was a Deva(god) 
himself, a seeker of righteousness and truthful to the. promise. 
We have heard that (the chariot) was (fitted with) yoked to a 
thousand white horses. 

11. When that great soul, the son of Atri, had fallen, 

Dcvas and the seven famous mental sons of Brahma eulogised 
(him). 


28.12-24 


695 


12. There itself, the sons of Angiras and Bhj*gu eulogised 
by means, of Rks, Yajur mantras and many Atharva Ahgirasa 
mantras. 

13. The brilliance of the shining Moon who was being eulo¬ 
gised, developed further and it purified all the three worlds. 

14. In that prominent chariot, he circumambulated the 
earth extending upto the ocean twenty-one times. 

15. His splendour that reached the earth became medicinal 
herbs. They sparkle by means of his brilliance. 

16. O excellent Brahamans ! He sustains subjects of four 
types and the universe with them (herbs). Lord Soma is indeed 
the nourisher of the universe. 

17. Having acquired splendour through the penance (of 
Atri), the eulogy (of Devas and sages) and his own religious 
activities, the blessed one (Soma) performed penance for 
ten times ten Padma years, (one Padma<= a thousand billion). 

18. Soma who is famous by his own Karmans will be the 
pervader of those (ten) gold-complexioned goddesses (viz. 
quarters) who sustain the whole world. 

19. Thereafter, Brahma the foremost among the knowers 
of Brahman, entrusted him with the kingdom of seeds, herbs, 
Brahmanas and waters. 

20. Being naturally the foremost among those who shine 
brilliantly and, thereafter, being crowned over a big kingdom, 
(Soma) of great splendour became the king of kings and puri¬ 
fied the worlds and developed them. 

21. Daksa, the son of Pracetas, gave twenty-seven Daksa- 
yanls (daughters of Daksa) of great holy rites to Indu (the 
Moon). They (people) know them as Naksatras (constellations). 

22. Having attained that great kingdom, Soma the lord of 
possessors of Sonia (i.e. Brahmanas) performed the Rajasuya 
sacrifice, wherein the Daksina amounted to hundred thousands. 

23-24. In that sacrifice, Hiranyagarbha was the Udgatr 
(the presiding priest who recites mantras); Brahma occupied 
the seat of Brahma and lord Narayana Hari was the Sadasya 
(member of the witnessing assembly). He was surrounded by 
Sanatkumara and other leading original Brahmarsis. O Brah¬ 
manas, we have heard that Soma gave the three worlds as 


696 


Vayu Pwrana 


/ -c -,1 fv.p'i to those important Brahmana sages 
D ak§ina (sacrificial fee) to tno F 

who were the members of the As^m y Prabha, 

25. Nine Devls, viz. Smi,_Kuhu,v P 

Vasu, KIrti, Dhrti and Laiserv^ ( 0 f the sacri- 

. i 6 he t “a r m"'LJrom worries. He had been revered by all 
DeJi »d s"e. That supreme emperor of emperors shone 

Aftertovtag attained suoh a rare glory praised even by 

-1 - . sudden, he 

ua Tara of great fame, the wife of Brhaspati. 

29. Though implored by Devas and celestial sages, he 

did not give up Tara to Ahgiras (Brhaspati). 

30. O Brahraanas, Usanas, one of the Ahgiras (?) took h is 
side. Indeed, he had been the highly brilliant disciple of Bphas- 

pati’s father. , , _ , . 

31. Thanks to that affection, lord Rudra took 




Ajagava and sided Brhaspati. . 

32. The great miraculous weapon was discharged by that 
noble soul aiming at the chief Brahmana sage and Devas 
whereby their fame was destroyed. 

33. There ensued a great battle directly (between Devas 
andAsuras). It was called Tarakamaya 1 2 (concerningTara ?)• 
It caused great destruction of Devas, Danavas and all the 
worlds. 


34. Only three Devas survived. They are remembered by 
the name Tusitas. They sought shelter in Brahma, the primor¬ 
dial lord, the grandfather of the worlds. 

35. Then Pitamaha (Brahma) himself prevented Usanas 
and Rudra, the eldest (deity) Sankara, (from fighting) and 
handed over Tara to Ahgiras (Brhaspati). 


1. Sini and Kuhu are deities presiding over (i) the day preceding the 
new moon day on which the moon rises with scarcely visible crescent and 
(ii) the new moon day when the moon is invisible, respectively. 

2. Out of the twelve wars between Devas and Asuras this was the 
fifth one. 



28.36-48 


697 


36. On seeing that Tara, the lady with a moon-like face, 
was pregnant, the Brahmana Brhaspati said: “Don’t you cast 
off the foetus ? 

37. In (your) body belonging to me another foetus shall 
by no means be held in the womb.” Still she did not cast off the 
child • Dasyu-hantama * (the slayer of robbers). 

38. Like the fire that blazes after catching the I§ika grass, 
the son surpassed the beautiful bodies of Devas at the very 
instant he was born. 

39. Their suspicion having been aroused, Suras spoke 
to Tara : “Tell us the truth, whose son is he, Soma’s or Brhas- 
pati’s r 

40. When she, out of bashfulness, did not tell Devas, 
‘yes’ or ‘no*, the boy Dasyuhantaraa was about to curse her. 

41. Preventing him, Brahma said to Tara, “(We have) 
suspicion that it is Candra’s (Moon’s), O Tara; therefore, speak 
the truth. Whose son is this ?” 

42. With palms joined in reverence, she said this to lord 
Brahma, the granter of boons, that the noble-souled boy Das- 
yuhantama was Soma’s. 

43. Thereafter, sniffing at the head of his son, Lord Soma, 
the Prajapati, named his intelligent son as Budha. 

44. (Defective verse) While rising up to go towards the 
east*, Budha begot a son of the princess (Ila). 

45. Pururavas, his son of great brilliance, was born of Ila. 
In UrvasI, six sons of great prowess were born (to Pururavas). 

46. Then, being violently attacked by pulmonary con¬ 
sumption Soma became exhausted and helpless. Overwhelmed 
by consumption, the Moon’s disc became pale and weak. He, 
therefore, sought refuge in his own father Atri. 

47. Atri, of great fame, quelled his sin (disease). He was 
cured of the pulmonary consumption and so he shone with bri¬ 
lliance all round. 

48. O excellent Brahmanas, thus the origin of Soma has 
been recounted by me. Listen to and understand his race that 
is being recounted to you, O excellent Brahmanas. 

♦The reading Bd. P. v. 2.3.66-44: Pratighasram.. .budhah, ‘Buddha rises in 
the east everyday.’ 



698 


Vayu Purana 


49. It 

holy and de-...>■*- 

Soma, one is relievec 



is relieved of all sins. 


CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 
The Lunar Race 1 : The Amavasu Dynasty 


Sutasaid : 

I Buddha was Soma’s son and his son was Pururavas. He 
was very brilliant and munificent in charitable gifts. He per- 
formed Tajnas with vast amounts distributed as Daksina. 

2. He was an expounder of Brahman (Vedas), destro¬ 
yer of foes and invincible in battle. He regularly performed 
Agnihotra and granted gifts of lands to sacrificial priests. 

3. He was truthful in speech and intelligently engaged in 
holy rites. Handsome in features, he indulged in sexual inter¬ 
course in great privacy. He was an extraordinarily dutiful son, 
and in beauty of form was unequalled in all the worlds. 

4. Eschewing her pride in personal prestige, the renowned 
UrvaSi wedded that righteous, truthful (king), conversant with 
Dharmas and expounder of Brahman (Veda) 

5-8. The vigorous king stayed with her (in all for sixty- 
four years) spending ten, eight, seven, six, seven, eight, ten and 
eight years in the beautiful Caitraratha park, on the 
banks of Gariga, in the excellent forest Nandana, in the 
extensive Alaka, at the foot of the Gandhamadana mountain* 
on the peak of the excellent mountain Meru, in the northern 
Kurus, and in the village Kalapagrama respectively. With great 


1. The present chapter which corresponds to Bd.P. 2.3.66, opens with 
the episode of Pururavas, the founder of the Lunar race and Urvasi, the 
celestial nymph. This episode gives the background of the famous 
“Dialogue” sukta in the RV. This romantic story inspired Kalidasa to 
write his immortal play Vikramorvattya . 



29.9-15 


699 


joy, the king accompanied by Urvasi sported about in their main 
forests and parks (usually) frequented by Suras (gods). 

The Sages asked : 

9. UrvasI was a Gandharva lady. Forsaking Devas, 
how did she attain the king, a mere human being ? O (sage)' 
of extensive learning, please explain it to us. 

Suta replied : 

10. She was overwhelmed by the curse of Brahma and 
therefore had to approach a human being. The beautiful lady 
(became the wife of) Aila Pururavas under certain stipulated 
conditions. 

11. In order to redeem herself from the evil effects of the 
curse, she stipulated that she should not see him naked 
except at the time of sexual intercourse or when swayed with 
passionate love. 

12. (She said further) “O King, two rams will always 
be kept near our bed. 1 My sole diet will be ghee which I shall 
take only once a day. 

13. If these conditions are fulfilled, O king, as long as 
you strictly adhere to these stipulations, I shall stay with you. 
This is our mutual agreement”. 

14. The king scrupulously adhere^ to her conditions. Thus 
that beautiful lady stayed with Pururavas. 

15. Deluded by her curse, UrvasI became a human lady 
and stayed with him devotedly for sixty-four years. The Gand- 
harvas became worried due to this. 


1. Urvasi, as her name indicates, seems to have hailed from the ancient 
central Asian town Ur. It appears that fashionable ladies from Ur had a 
fascination for rams in the fourth millennium B.G. In his excavation at Ur, 
Sir Leonard Wooley discovered in a queen’s tomb of 3300 B.G. a pair of 
rams, “beautifully and intricately made. Their bodies were covered with 
fleece of shell... .their heads and legs were of gold” (quoted on p. 8 in A. J. 
Karandikar’s introduction to his Marathi book Background of the Mahabharata 
—Mahabhdratdci PdrSvabhdmi 9 Poona, 1980. This fascination for rams may be 
the cause of the inclusion and importance attached to this term in the 
marriage-contract between Pururavas and UrvaSi. 



Vayu Purana 


700 


Gandharvas said : whereby that 

Bn* ^ 

come back to Devas. 

17-19. Then the foremost of the eloquent ones (Gnndhar. 

Vas) Jrtorito tot some conditions must have 
°- bv her there. I shall tell you the means 

been supulated V {he king due to the breach of agree¬ 

ment 6 ^shall immediately engage myself to achieve your task”. 
Mer saying thus, that (ViSvavasu) of great fame went to the 

^ "SeSlTihere at night and took away one of the two 
rams. The lady of sweet smiles had been no less than a mother 

^2h^On 0 realising that the Gandharva had come, the re¬ 
nowned lady (Urvasi) lying on the bed told the kmg, My 
son is being taken away”. 

22 Thus requested, the king thought, “The queen ^ will 
see me naked and there will be a breach of the agreement. 

23. Then the Gandharvas took away the second ram as 
well. When the second ram was taken away, the queen spoke 


IU Alia. , , 

24. “O Lord, O king, my sons are taken away as though 
they are the sons of a helpless woman”. Thus taunted the king 
got up and rushed out (though he was) naked. 

25-26. The king rushed out seeking the sheep taken away 
by the Gandharvas, whereupon a great Maya (i lusion) was 
produced by them. The great palace became illuminated sud 
denly and she saw the naked king. On seeing the king naked, 
the Apsara lady (Urvasi) who could assume any form she wished, 
vanished (from there). 

27. On realising that she had vanished, the Gandharvas 
abandoned the rams there and disappeared themselves. 

28. On seeing the abandoned rams, the king, the lord, took 
them with him and returned. Unable to see her there, the king 
became extremely dejected and lamented. 

29-30. Seeking her here and there, the king roamed over 


29.31-41 


701 


the earth. The powerful king saw her at Kuruksetra. She was 
taking her bath in the deep waters of Puskarini (lotus pond) 
in the holy centre of Plaksatirtha. She appeared very splendid, 
sporting there in the company of five Apsaras. 

31-32. The lady of splendid evebrows saw the king not 
very far. Urvasi then spoke to her friends: “Here is that 
excellent man with whom I lived.” She pointed out che king 
to them. Then those ladies, the Apsaras (with five braids of 
hair) appeared in front (of him). 

33. On seeing her (Urvasi) the king was delighted. He 
began to lament in diverse ways, “o cruel lady, come (unto 
me). Stay willingly, stand by your words.” 

34-35. These and similar subtle words they exchanged. 
Urvasi then spoke to Aila : “O lord, I have been rendered 
pregnant by you. Undoubtedly your son will be born within 
a year.” The king stayed for a night with her. 

36. The king went back to his city with great delight. 
When a year elapsed, the king of great fame came to Urvasi 
again. 

37. After staying with her for a night, the lofty-minded 
king became overwhelmed by passionate love. In a pitiable 
tone he spoke: “Be mine for ever”. 

38. Urvasi then said to Aila: “The Gandharvas will grant 
you (that) boon. O great king, choose that boon and tell them 
this yourself: 

39. T choose the boon of Salokya (having the same world) 
with the noble-souled Gandharvas’ ”. The king accepted the 
suggestion saying “So be it”, and requested the Gandharvas 
for the boon. The Gandharvas replied, “So be it”. 

40. After filling the Sthali (mud-pot) with fire, the 
Gandharvas spoke to him: “O king, performing the sacrifice 
with this, you will attain that world.” 1 

41. He took the fire and went back to his city along with 
the prince. He placed the fire in the Arani and went to his 
abode along with his son. 

1. As w. 40-45 show, this Puraria attributes to Pururavas, the institution 
(or encouragement) of the performance of Yajha out of the fire created from 
Arafii ( of Asvattha wood) by attrition. Bd.P. 2.3.66.19 gives the credit of 
introducing three fires (Daksinagni etc.) to Pururavas. 




Vdyu Purdna 


702 


, .r _ c r /» He found an Asvattha 

"«“ **•■“ -.. 

B^T.ts , r3r4i'= 

“ ,f'?h° f iT"Mak e an Ami out of the ASvattha, 
eh- h and 

summon as ours. The king churned and prepared 

sssjw. * “ 

g^f^U^SS^here was only a single fire. 

Aila made (introduced) three fires. 

46.47 O excellent Brahmanas, the king Ailahad such a 
prowess. He ruled over his kingdom in Prayaga, the holiest of 
fands embellished by the great sages, on the northern banks o 

Yamuna, in the city of Pratisthana. 

48-49 (He had) six sons having the brilliance comparable 
to that of Indra and well-known in the regions of Gandharvas 
They were Ayu, Dhiman, Amavasu , 1 Visvayu, Satayu and 
Gatayu—all born of Urvasi. Amavasu’s son was king Bhima, 
the conqueror of the whole universe. 

50. S rim an, the successor of Bhima, was a king with go en 
lustre (otherwise known as Kancanaprabha). The scholarly 
and powerful Suhotra was the son of Kancana (i.e. Kancana- 
prabha). 

51-55. Jahnu was the son of Suhotra, born of Kesika s 

womb. _ . . 

While his elaborate sacrificial rite was going on, Ganga 
turned her course and flooded that territory on account of the 
vision of the inevitable future (events). Seeing the sacrificial 
enclosure flooded all round by Ganga, the son of Suhotra, 
the granter of boons, became infuriated. Flashing red eyes he 
spoke to Ganga: “O Ganga, have the recompense of this outrage 


1. Amavasu was the founder of Kanyakubja kingdom—Pargiter, AITH, 
p. 144. 



703 


29.56-67 

immediately. I shall make all your efforts in vain. I shall drink 
up your waters.” On seeing the waters of Gahga drunk up 
the saintly king, Suras and sages brought out the blessed 
river as his daughter (and known asjahnavl). Jahnu married 
Kaverl, the grand-daughter of Yauvanasva. 

56-57. It was a result of the curse of Yuvanasva that 
Ganga was produced by him. Kaverl, the most excellent of 
all rivers, became the praise-worthy wife of Jahnu. Jahnu 
begot a beloved righteous son named Suhotra, of Kaverl. 
Suhotra’s son was Ajaka. 

58. Ajaka’s successor was Balakasva of great fame. Gaya, 
Slla and Kusa are remembered as sons born to him. 

59. Kusa had four sons brilliant due to their Vedic know¬ 
ledge. They were Kusasva, Kusanabha, Amurtarayasas and 
Vasu. 

60. The excellent king Kusastamba desirous of a son, 
performed a penance. When a thousand years were completed 
he saw Satakratu (Indra). 

61-62. On seeing him who performed severe penance, the 
thousand-eyed Purandara decided to become his son, as he was 
competent to do so. The enemy of Paka (i.e. Indra) became 
his son and took the name Gadhi. He was called Kausika also, 
being a member of the family of Kusa. 

63. Kusastamba’s wife was Paurukutsa and Gadhi was 
born of her. Lord Gadhi gave his eldest daughter, the splendid 
and blessed Satyavati, to Rcika who was a descendant of Bhrgu 
(Kavya?). 

61-67. Her husband, himself a descendant of Bhrgu and 
the delighter of the Bhrgu family, prepared Cam (consecrated 
cooked rice) for the sake (of the birth) of a son to himself 
as well as to Gadhi. The courageous sageRcIka, the descendant 
of Bhrgu, called (his wife Satyavati and said): “O splendid 
lady, this Caru should be taken by you and this by your mother. 
A brilliant leader of Ksatriyas will be born to her. He cannot 
be conquered by Ksatriyas in battle. He will be the destroyer 
of prominent Ksatriyas. This Caru will give you, O splendid 
lady, an excellent Brahmana as a son. He will be courageous 
and quiescent, possessing penance as his wealth (i.e. he will 
become a great sage).” 





704 


Vayu Purana 


• *u’e ♦„ Viiswife Rcika, the scion of the 
69. After saying entered the forest, 

family ofBhrgu, ever g .. . k j n g Gadhi came to 

^ hermitage in order ,o see hi. daughter. He was aceom- 

P “TO b L“yavla bright .he two types of Cm, given by the 
sage to her mother. Delightedly but without excitement she 
tofd her what her husband had mentioned to her (about 

thC 'n As fate would have it, the mother gave the Contend¬ 
ed for her to her daughter. Out of ignorance, she took in the 

Cam intended for her daughter. 1 f 

72. Then Satyavatl Conceived in her womb a foetus that 

was splendid but competent to destroy Ksatnyas. With her 
illuminated body, she became terrible to view. 

73. On seeing it and pondering over it by means of Yogic 
power, Rcika, the excellent Brahmana, spoke to his fair- 
complexioned wife: 

74 . “O gentle lady, due to the interchange of the Cams , 
an extremely terrible son of cruel deeds will be born as your son 
and your mother will be successful (in getting a good son). 

75. Your mother will give birth to such a saintly son. The 
entire Brahman (Vedic knowledge) has been instilled into it 
by me. 

76. Thus warned by her husband, the blessed lady Satya¬ 
vatl propitiated her husband: “May my son never be like 
this. Let another be a base Brahmana”. Thus requested, the 
sage said : 

77. “O gentle lady, this has never been thought of nor 
desired by me or by you. The son may be one of terrible 
activities due to the fault of his father or mother”. 

78. Thus addressed, Satyavatl spoke again these words: 
“O sage, if you wish, you can create many worlds. What then 
a mere son? 


1. This explains why Parasuraraa, though ]a Brahmana, was of a 
militant nature and Visvamitra, though K?atriya by birth, attained 
Brahm ana-hood. 



29.79-90 


705 


79. O holy lord, O master, it behoves you to grant me a 
son who will be quiescent and straightforward. O Lord, 
say ‘Let such a son be born’. 

80. O excellent Brahmana, nothing other than this can be 
done to me”. Thereafter, by means of the power of his 
penance, he made her delighted. 

81. “O fair-complexioned lady, it makes no difference as 
far as I am concerned whether it is the son or the grand¬ 
son. O gentle lady, everything shall be in accordance with 
the words spoken by you.” 

82. Therefore Satyavatl gave birth to a son, the scion of 
the family of Bhrgu. He was Jamadagni, the quiescent and 
self-controlled. He was interested in penance. 

83. Formerly when there was an interchange of Raudra 
and Vaisnava Cams in the Yajna of Bhrgu, he ate ( Jamanat) 
the Vaisnava nre and so he came to be known as 'Jamadagni'. 

84. Having obtained Visvamitra as his successor, Gadhi 
the delighter of KuSikas (members of the family of Kusika) 
attained the status equal to that of Brahmana sages. He was 
selected to be such by Brahma. 

85-86a. The meritorious Satyavatl, engaged in truthful 
rites, became the great river well known as Kausikl. Kausiki 
the most excellent and distinguished river began to flow thus. 

86b-88. There was a king in the race of Iksvaku. His 
name was Suvenu. His daughter was a blessed lady named 
Renuka otherwise known as Kamali. Rclka’s son, Jamadagni, 
endowed with the power of penance and fortitude begot of 
Kamali alias Renuka, the terrible son Rama who was the 
most excellent of those who had mastered all lores and the 
science of archery as well. He became the destroyer of 
Ksatriyas and shone like the blazing fire. 

89. In this manner, the lofty-minded Jamadagni, the fore¬ 
most among those who know Brahman, was born of Satya 
vatl, thanks to the semen virile of Aurva Rcika. The middle 
son was Sunahsepha and the youngest was Sunahpuccha. 

90. The pious-souled Visvamitra is remembered by the 
name Visvaratha also. By the favour of Bhrgu, he was born 
of Kau£ika, as the perpetuator of the race of Kausika. 


706 


Vayu Purana 


* i ic remembered as the eldest of all the 

-TvJSTiTi- a »g«. In .ho Yajfia of 
sons of ViSva • , d , appo i nte d) as the sacrificial 

H ”T£'H " Vifvamitra, by Dova, 
animal. He 8^.^ <$ una h* eph a is remembered as 

Si son of *£ 

sonsofVHvImitra^The Gotras (spiritual lines) of those noble- 
souled Kauiikas are innumerable . 1 2 

94 . 97 . These following are remembered as Kausikas: 
Parthivas, Devaratas, Yajflavalkyas, Samarsajas, Udumbaras, 
Udumlanas, Tarakas, Ymnamuncatas, Lohmyas, -Renavas, 
Karisus, Babhrus, Panins, Dhyana-Japyas, Snlavatyas, Hiranya- 
ksas Syankrtas, Galavas, Devalas, Yamadutas, Salankayanas, 
Baskalas, and many other descendants of the intelligent Visva- 
mitra. They entered into matrimonial alliance with the 


families of other sages. 

98. Some other families of the Brahmarsi Kausika, the 
holy descendant of Pururavas are: Sosrumas and Saindhava- 


yanas. 

99. Astaka, born of Drsadvat!, was also Visvamitra’s son. 
Astaka’s sons (and descendants) constituting the Jahnu family 
have already been recounted by me. 


The Sages enquired : 

100. What are the characteristics of Dharma, penance and 
learning whereby Brahmana-hood was attained by Visvamitra 
and other kings ? 

101 . What are the various names under which the 
Ksatrivas who had attained Brahmana-hood (are known ?). We 
wish to know the special features of the penance and charitable 
gifts (whereby they had attained the same). 


1, This confirms the story in the Aitareya Brahmapa, though Sunahsepa’s 
release from bonds by his prayer of Varuna is not mentioned here. 
Vifvamitra adopted him as a son. 

2. The list of Gotras of Kaufika clan given in w. 91-97 is incomplete 
(dot ML P. A Study, pp. 406-409). 



707 


29.102-114 

102. Thus requested, he ( Sula ) spoke these meaningful 
words: 

Even if a man is desirous of acquiring Dharma and his 
xnind is engaged in Yajfta, he does not attain the fruit of 
holy rites if he gathers the requisites thereof by means of illegal¬ 
ly acquired wealth. 

103-106. A sinful soul, a base man, may give charitable 
gifts to Brahmanas after proclaiming his intention to perform 
righteous deeds to the people out of hypocrisy. An uncontrol¬ 
led man overwhelmed by passion and delusion may perform 
severe Japas and in the end may give charitable gifts for the 
purpose of sanctifying himslf. But these charitable gifts offered 
by him do not yield fruits. The charitable gifts of a wicked- 
souled man indulging in violence, do not stay (i.e. do not yield 
fruits) even if he engaged himself in holy rites. Similarly the 
Danas offered by one who has amassed wealth by painful 

violent deeds also do not fructify. 

107-108. Riches acquired by just (proper) means must be 
gifted to pious, deserving persons. If one performs ; Tajnas and 
makes charitable gifts without harbouring any specific desire in 
his mind, he attains the fruits of that Dana. His ; Dana results 
in happiness. One attains enjoyment through Dana and goes 

to heaven through truthfulness. 

109 By means of well-performed penance one pervades 
the worlds and stays. After fixing himself firm in the worlds 
that brilliant person enjoys everlasting (bliss). 

HO. tojl is more beneficial than Dim Penance is more 
beneficial than Ujm. Renunciation is more benefictal than 
penance, and JMm (perfect wisdom) is remembered as better 

,h “ U-m. I. is reported that the twice-born castes who were 

ones, Rathitara, Runda, Vl?l?u ^ r Qualities who attained 

are remembered as sages wit . *1 

1. Th in; an evidence of social mobility in ancient India. 

2. Bhargavyoma in Bd. P. 




V&yu Purina 
708 

agehood do. to penance. All these saintly kings attained great 

^Henceforth I shall recount the race of Ayu, the noble 
soul. 


CHAPTER THIRTY 1 2 

The Origin of Dhanvantari*', Varanasi Cursed ; 

Rafis Exploits 

Suta said : r - 

1 -2. O Brahmanas, five noble-souled sons of great strength 
were born of Prabha as the sons of Svarbhanu. Nahusa was 
the first among them. The next one is remembered as Putra- 
dharma 3 . Dharmavrddha’s (K?atravrddha’s?) son was Suta- 
hotra (Sunahotra?) of great fame. _ 

3. Sutahotra’s successors were three extremely righteous 
ones, viz. KaSa, Sala and lord Gjrtsamada. 

4-5. Sunaka was the son of Grtsamada and his son was 
Saunaka. In his race Brahmanas, Vaisyas and Sudras were 
born as a result of their diverse Karmans. O Brahmana, Salas 
son was Arsti$ena and Caranta was liis son. 

6. The Saunakas and the Arstisenas were Brahmanas 
endowed with qualities characteristic of Ksatriyas. Kasa’s 
sons were Kasaya, Rasta and Dirghatapas. 

7. Dharma was the son of Dirghatapas. The scholarly 
Dhanvantari was his son. He was of great brilliance due to his 


1. This Chapter corresponds to Ch. 2.3.67 in Bd. P. The references are to 
verses of the chapter in Bd. P. 

2. As stated at the end of the last chapter, this chapter describes the race 
of Ayu who ruled at Kasi. Dhanvantari, the famous physician-king, the 
founder of the systematic science of Ayurveda was bom in Ayu’s lineage. 
Hence the title specifically refers to him in preference to his forebears. 

3. Ksatravrddha in Bd. P. A line is missing here. Bd. P. supplies the 
names of the remaining three sons, viz. Rambha, Raji and Anenas (Bd.P. 
Op . Cit. v. 2). 



30.8-15 


709 


penance. He was born to that intelligent king, when he had 
become old. 

Then the sages asked Suta in the following words. 

The Sages asked: 

8. How was Dhanvantari, a god, born among human 

beings? . 

We wish to know this. Please explain this matter which is 

pleasing to us. 

Suta said : 

9. O Brahmanas, may the origin of Dhanvantari be heard. 

He was born formerly when the ocean was being churned for 

the sake of nectar. 

10. He was born prior to everyone. 1 He was enveloped 
in a halo of glory all round. On seeing him with perfectly 
shaped limbs, (gods) stood surprised and said, “You are Aja 
(the unborn) ”. Heivie he is remembered as Aja. 

11. Aja spoke to Visnu: “O lord, most excellent of 
gods, I am your son. Please assign me my share (in 

^ 12-14 Thus addressed, the lord looked at him and said: 
‘•The share in Tajna has already been allotted by Suras 
who are worthy of Yajhas. The Hama in accordance with 
the Vcdic mantras has already been laid down y g 
sages. It is never possible to arrange for anoth ^° m ™ d 
to it O god, vou are a later born son- (of mine). O lord, 
to it. W go y 2 You will become famous m 

your name alone is a mamra 

y0 ^" M U in.be womb you will have ^Siddhi 

(spiritual powers) of ““““Vttain Deva-hood. 

pSm «£ for you by means of Cams. 
mantras, ghee and scents as offerings. 

before the emergence of the pot of nectar' a be.ter 

-ttS »»; *** •«.»»«»<* » you ' (MP - 



710 


Vayu Purana 


16 You will propound the Ayurveda system of medicine. 
j£, bJldto happen sorely. It ha S been already ordamed 

by the lotus-born deity (Brahma). 

„ I„ the second Dvapara Yuga, you „i 1 undoubtedly 

be born." Then after granting him the boon, V W u vantshed 

from there. 

18 At the advent of the second Dvapara Yuga, the king 
of KLi Dirghatapas belonging to the family of Sunahotra, 
performed a penance with desire for a son. 

19 The king propitiated Deva Aja (i.e. Dhanvantari) for 
the sake of a son. The delighted Dhanvantari offered the king 
the choice of a boon. The King requested: 


20. “O lord, if you are satisfied, be pleased to be born as 
my righteous son.” After agreeing to it saying “So be it he 
vanished there itself. 

21. God Dhanvantari was born in his house. The great 
king, king of Ka$I became the destroyer of all ailments. 

22. Sage Bharadvaja created the science of Ayurveda 
along with its therapeutics. 1 The king divided it into eight 
parts and taught them to his disciples. 


23. Dhanvantari’s son was famous by the name 
Ketuman. Ketuman’s son was the powerful king Bhimaratha. 
He was famous by the name Divodasa 2 and he was the king of 
Varanasi. 

24. In the meanwhile, the city of Varanasi had become 
desolate and a Raksasa named Ksemaka occupied it. 


1. Though our text does not mention it, Bd.P. 2.3.67. 23-24 informs us 
that Dhanvantari learnt Ayurveda (ihz science of medicine) along with its 
therapeutics from Bharadvaja. Dhanvantari divided it into eight sections 
and taught them to different disciples. 

2. He is regarded as the contemporary of Dasaratha of the Iksvaku 
dynasty of Ayodhya. It was during his reign that god Siva occupied it by 
first making it desolate through crafty machination of one of his chief 
Ganas (aptly called demon) Ksemaka. To get a flourishing capital city 
vacated for one’s honey-moon in the manner described later (w. 36-53) 
is not creditable to a great god ie. Siva. 



30.25-35 


711 


25. Formerly that city had been cursed by the noble-souled 
Nikumbha, ‘The city (of Varanasi) will be desolate for a 
thousand years’. He had repeated the curse many times. 

26. As soon as the city was cursed, Divodasa the king, 
founded a beautiful city on the banks of Gomatl, near the 
extremities of his realm. 

The Sages said : 

27. Why did Nikumbha curse Varanasi in the days of 
yore ? Nikumbha was a righteous soul. Why did he curse the 
holy centre of Siddhas ? 

Suta said : 

28. After gaining the city, King Divodasa, the saintly 
king of great splendour lived in that flourishing city. 

29. In the meantime, Mahesvara who had married (Uma) 
stayed near the Devas* and desired to do what was pleasing to 
the goddess. 

30. His attendants and the saints assuming various forms 
continued to delight the great godddess by means of their 
diverse forms mentioned before. 

31 .. Mahadeva used to be delighted with them, but Mena 
was not at all pleased. Everyday she began to abhor the lord 
and goddess. 

32. (She said to Uma) “Your husband Mahesvara is 
carrying on ill-mannered activities in (my) presence. O sinless 
girl, he is by all means very indigent. Without wearying him¬ 
self out, he sports and dallies”. 

33. On being thus taunted by her mother, she did not 
brook it as was but natural to women. After smiling (at the 
words of her mother) the goddess, the granter of boons, went 

near Hara (Siva). , i_-j 

34. With a dejected face the goddess spoke to Mahadeva. 

“O my lord, I will not stay here. Take me to your abode . 

35. Thus requested, the great god, Mahesvara of great 
splendour, surveyed all the worlds. O excellent Bra a$as, 


♦A. reads SvaSurantike ‘near (at the residence of) his father-in-law' 







712 


Vayu Puratta 


liked Varanasi, the holy centre of the Siddhas on the earth, as 

his residence. • j i i- 

36 On knowing that that city was occupied by Diyodasa, 

he called Ksemaka, the chief of Ganas who was by his side and 

37 “O lord of the Ganas, Go to Varanasi and make it 
desolate. You must employ soft and subtle means. That king is 
extremely valorous* . 

38-39. Nikumbha then went to the city of Varanasi and 
revealed himself to a barber named Mankana in his dream and 
said, “O sinless one, I shall bring welfare unto you. Assign a 
place for me. Make an image of my form and place it at the 
outskirt of the city.” 

40. O Brahmanas, the barber did everything m accordance 
with what he was told in dream. After getting the permission 
of the king, he did everything duly at the gate of the city. 

44_42, Everyday splendid worship was offered with scents, 
incense, garlands etc. Food was offered. The whole thing was 
wonderful. Thus the lord of Ganas was worshipped there 
everyday. 

43. He used to grant thousands of boons to the people of 
the city, such as sons, gold, longevity and similar desires. 

44. The senior queen-consort of the king was well-known 
by the name Suyasa. That chaste lady was urged by the king 
and she came (to that deity) with a desire to have a son. 

45. She performed (his) worship on a grand scale and 
requested him for sons. She frequented (the shrine) again and 
again for (the boon of getting) a son. 

46. There was a reason behind Nikumbha’s not granting 
sons. If the king were to be infuriated something could be 
done. 

47-50. After the lapse of a long period, the king became 
furious. (He thought) ‘This spirit at the main gate delightedly 
bestows hundreds of boons on the town-people but does not 
do anything (for me). In my city he is worshipped by my 
people. He has been worshipped by my queen there for that 
specific reason. Though he eats much, he does not grant me 
a son. He is ungrateful. Hence he does not deserve further 


30.51-65 


713 


worship at all by me. So, I shall destroy the abode of the 
chief of Ganas. He was evil-minded (indeed).’ 

5 1 . Having determined thus that wicked, sinful and evil- 
minded king destroyed that sacred place of the chief of Ganas. 

52-53. On seeing the shrine shattered, the lord (of Ganas) 
approached the king (and said), “O king, since, without any 
offence on my part, my shrine has been destroyed by you, the 
city will be void and desolate all of a sudden”. Then, due to 
that curse Varanasi became desolate. 

54. Nikumbha brought Mahadeva to that desolate cursed 
city. Mahadeva rebuilt that desolate city by means of (the 
powers of) his great soul. 

55. The city was befitting the Vibhuti (prosperity and 
glory) of the goddess and the lord. The goddess sported there, 
even as lord Mahesvara too sported there. 

56. But the goddess did not derive (permanent) pleasure 
due to her surprise at the (peculiar) house. For the sake of 
playing with the goddess, lord Isana spoke these words. 

57-58. “I shall not abandon my abode. My abode is 
Avimukta 1 (unabandonedl ”. He laughed and spoke again to 
her: “My abode is Avimvkta. O Goddess, I shall not go away 
(from here). You may go. I shall sport here”. Hence indeed 
it is Avimukta since it was said so by the lord himself. 

59. This is the story of how the city of Varanasi was 
cursed and then glorified as 'Avimukta' . In it lives the lord 
revered by all Devas in the three Yugas. The pious-souled 
Mahesvara is accompained by the goddess also. 

60. He vanished during the Kali age. That city of the 
great soul is reoccupied by the people when the lord vanishes. 

61-63. Thus Varanasi was cursed and was re-inhabited. 
King Divodasa killed king Bhadrasrenya’s one hundred 
sons who were noted for their mastery in archery and occupied 
(his capital). The kingdom of Bhadrasrenya was usurped by 
that powerful king. But the son of Bhadrasrenya named Dur- 
dama was let off by Divodasa, out of mercy, t in 'ing a 

was only a boy. _ ^ 

64-65. Heroic Pratardana was born of Divodasa and Drsa- 

1. This explains why Varanasi is called ‘Avimukta . 



Vayu Puratfa 


714 

. The son (of BHadrairegya) desirous of wreaking revenge 
(kingdon,). Pratardana had two tons, Vatsa and 

G T t" was Alarka and his son was Sanaa,i. Those 
Jlii vcsos are sung about ,he saintly ktng Alarka. 

fi7 69 “Alarka ruled as excellent kmg of KaSi for sixtysix 
v, '1'vears He was endowed with handsome features and 
telintaLl hisyou,h(.ll along). Heattainedhis groa, longc- 
the CTace of Lopamudra .” At the end of the period of 
curse/he killed the Raksasa Ksemaka and rebuilt the beautiful 

^O^Wati’s successor was the righteous king named 
Sunitha. Sunltha’s successor was the pious Suketu. 

71. It is heard that Suketu’s son was Dharmaketu. Heroic 

Satyaketu was the successor of Dharmaketu. 

72. Satyaketu’s son was the king named Vibhu. Suvibhu 
was the son of Vibhu and Sukumara was his son. 

73. Sukumara’s son was Dhrstaketu. He was very virtuous. 
Dhfstaketu’s successor was the king Venuhotra. 

74. Venuhotra’s son was Gargya. He was very famous. 
Vatsya was the son of the intelligent Vatsa. 

75. The sons of these two were very virtuous Brahmanas 
and Ksatriyas. They were strong, valorous and famous for their 


leonine exploits. 

76. Thus these kings of Kail have been enumerated. Now 
listen and understand the (descendants) of Raji. Raji had a 
hundred sons. Two of them were very powerful and well-known 
on the earth as the group of kings “Rajeya”. Those Ksatriyas 
caused terror to Indra too. 

77. When a terrible war broke out between Devas and 
Asuras 1 , both of them spoke to Pitamaha (god Brahma). 

78. “O lord of all the worlds, O great lord, who will be 
victorious in the battle between us. Please tell us. We all wish 
to hear.” 


Brahma said : 

79. There is no doubt in this that they on whose behalf 


1. This is the twelfth (and the last) war between Devas and Asuras as 
far as Pura^ic records are concerned. 



715 


30.80-90 

lord Raji takes up arms in the battle and fights, will con 
quer the three worlds. con 

80. Where there is Raji, there will be LakcmT if . 

■ «•!*)• Wh “ C *'7 “ is forti.uds. Si™ 

abides where there is fortitude and where there is Dhmna, there 
is victory. 

81. On hearing about the victorious (-ness of) Raji, Devas 

and Danavas approached the excellent king. They eulogised 
him as they wished for success. b - 

82. With a delighted heart, all Devas and Danavas 
requested the king. Please take up your excellent bow for 
enabling us to be victorious.” 


Raji replied : 

83. I will defeat you all in the battle, as well as 
Devas led by Sakra. I shall become the righteous-souled Indra 
and then shall I fight in the battle. 


Danavas said : 

84. Our Indra is Prahlada. We shall be victorious on his 
behalf. O king, please stand by this agreement urged by our 
Lord. 

85. Even as he was about to say, “So be it” he was urged 
by Devas also. He was invited by Devas saying, “After 
conquering you will become Indra.” 

86-88. He killed all the Danavas in front of Indra (who 
was armed with thunderbolt). He was endowed with self-con¬ 
trol and the greatest prosperity. Lord Raji killed all Dana¬ 
vas and redeemed the lost glory of Devas. Accompanied by 
Devas, Satakratu (Indra) spoke to Raji, “I am Raji’s son”, 
and continued as follows, “O king, there is no doubt in this 
that you are Indra of all Devas. O destroyer of enemies, O, 
Indra, I shall become renowned as your son”. 

89. On hearing the words of Sakra, he was deceived by 
him by means of his Maya. The delighted king said, c So be 
it”. 

90. When that king who was on par with Devas attain¬ 
ed heaven, Raji’s sons took away all the legacies from Indra. 


Vayn Purdna 


716 

, fnrriblv occupied most of the 

91 . Those hundre l so abodeofthe consort of Sacl. 
region of Svarga (heaven). lhe powerful Indra whose 

When a long Jifrccs was conBscaicd 

kingdom was seized and whose 

spoke to Brhaspati: a i lot Purodasa (sacrificial 

93 . .. 0 Brthnw* s . ze onhe fruit „f Badari (the 

°“^TXby 1 can sustain myself with my splendour 

OBrnfua, he ^ 

of prowess, emaciated, eon,bunded 

by the sons of Raji.” 

ftfa of “o Sato if only I had been urged by you earlier in 
95 . O bam, o y haDDe ned. O sinless one, there 

this matter, this wou ™ P* (he sake Q f pleasing you. 

is ooihng^ttat s KM ^ splendoured one, I shall ende¬ 

avour" for your welfare so that you will regam your share m the 

Yajnaas well as vour kingdom ere long. 

97 . o Sakra, I shall go (now). Let not your mind be 
dejected. 

Thereafter, .he performed such great rites as increased 

Indra’s splendour. . 

98 The highly intelligent (Brhaspati) created e usion m 

the intellects of those (sons of Raji). They became devoid of 
Dharma and mad with passion. 

99. They became haters of Brahmanas. Hence they became 
deprived of their virility and exploit. So (Indra) regained the 
glory of Suras and his former excellent position (of Indra-hood). 

100. He killed all the sons of Raji who were overwhelmed 
with lust and anger. He who listens to this story of Raji or the 
holy rehabilitation of Satakratu will never meet with evil. 


31.1-5 


717 


CHAPTER THIRTYONE 1 
The Story of Tayali 2 

The Sages said : 

1 . How was his daughter given to the king by Maruta, 3 
the great soul ? Of what prowess were the daughters of 
Maruta born with great souls 4 (?) 

Sfila said: 

2. Endowed with great splendour yet desirous of food, 
the king performed the sacrifice Marul-Soma to Prajesvara every 
month, for sixty years. 

3. Thereby the Marut-gods were pleased by the Marut- 
Soma sacrifice of that king, and granted him never-ending 
food with requisites for the fulfilment of all desires. 

4 . His food, cooked once, never got exhausted during that 
day and night even though given to crores (of people) right 
from sunrise. 

5. Mitrajyoti was born of the daughter of the intelligent 
Maruta. From him were born (sons) of great strength, knowers 
of Dharma and seers of salvation. 


1. This chapter corresponds to Bd.P. 2.3.68. For comparison or reference 
only the verse number is quoted. 

2. This immortal story with a profound moral is repeated in many 
Puranas. The story is originally given in details in Mbh Adi. Ghs. 84 and 
85. The immortal verse uttered by Yayati : 

najdtu kdmah kamdndm upabhogena Sdmyali / 
havifd kfsiia-vartmeva bhuya eva'bhivardhate // 
has been quoted in Puranas. It has been the main theme of an epoch- 
making Marathi novel Tayati by V.S. Khandekar, which secured the much 
coveted Bharatiya Jnanapitha Prize. 

3. Verses 1-11 speak of Maruta and Mitrajyoti and his descendants. But 
they are unrelated to the main story of this chapter. 

4. The reading jdtdmarutakanyakdh in the text tianslated above is contra¬ 
dictory and obscure. If emended : jdtd maruta-kanyayd (as inBd. P. 2.3.68.1) 
meaning ‘(of what heroic ability were the noble -soulcd persons) born of 
the daughter of Maruta\ it gives cogentness. The references to the Bd.P. are 
to the above-mentioned chapter. Only verse number is quoted in t ese 
notes. 





Vaju Purdna 

718 

j--.rrw.ctiV rites (the duties of house- 
6 . After renouncing detachment Maintaining the duties 

holders), they resore thev attained absorption in Brahman. 

° r *. - ~ —r 

• TherSter was bora Ksatradharma and from h,m 
Pradoaksa (Prellpaka in Bd. P.) of great penance. 

-8 Pratipaksa’s son named Safijaya was well-known. Jaya 
was the"son of Safijaya and Vijaya was born of him. 

9 Vijaya’s son was Jaya (the second) and his son is 

remembered as Haryandvata and Haryandvatas son was the 

vabrous king Sahadc son ^ virtuOUS . SOU led. He was well- 

known as Adlna. Adlna’s son was Jayatsena and his son was 


SaA n!' Sahkrti’s son was the pious-souled Krtadharma of 
great fame. These were folly endowed with Ksatra qualities . 

Now understand (the descendants) of Nahusa. 

\i. Nahusa’s successors were six. They had the brilliance 

comparable to that of Indra. These sons of great prowess were 
born ofViraja, the daughter of the Pitrs. . 

13. They were Yati. Yayati, Sarhyati, Ayati and the 
twins Viyati, Krti, (Bd. P.) who were the fifth-born (?) Yati 
was the eldest of them and Yayati was the younger brother. 

14. Yati attained Ga (Gau), the daughter of Kakutstha as 
wife. Samyati became a sage. Attaining absolution, he became 


one with Brahman. 

15. Among the (other) five, Yayati became a king. He 
attained Devayanx, the daughter of Usanas, as his wife. 

16. He married the Asura lady Sarmistha, the daughter 
of Vrsaparvan. Devayani gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu. 

17. Sarmistha, the daughter of Vrsaparvan, gave birth 
to very powerful sons comparable to divine sons, viz. Druhyu, 
Anu and Puru. 

18. The delighted Rudra gave him a divine golden chariot 
that shone brilliantly and that could never get stuck up (im¬ 
peded). He gave him two great inexhaustible quivers also. 


♦were the descerdants of Ksatradharma ?’ 



31 . 19-26 


719 


19. That chariot was fitted with horses as fast as the mind 
It was in this chariot that he drove at the time of his marriage. 
With the same important chariot he conquered the earth. 

20. Yayati was invincible in battle to Devas, Danavas 
and human beings. That chariot belonged to all the Paurava 
kings. 

21. It remained with them upto the time ofKaurava Jana- 
mejaya born of a good land(?) The chariot got lost through the 
curse of the son of Garga, the intelligent sage, when Pariksit’s 
son became a king. 

22. The unwise king Janamejaya (the first) who was evil- 
minded and was known as Loha-gandhin 1 (having the odour of 
iron) killed the (young) son of Gargya. 

23. The saintly king with iron odour began to run here 
and there. He was abandoned by the citizens and the people of 
the land. Nowhere did he derive happiness. 

24. He was extremely miserable. He did not get peace 
anywhere. Excessively dejected, he sought refuge in the sage 
who was the cause of his curse. 1 2 

25. The sage of liberal mind was famous by the name 
Indrota. This Indrota, the excellent Brahmana, a descendant of 
Sunaka, made the king perform an Asvamedha for the sake 
of purification. 

26. After reaching his abode, the iron-ore odour was 
quelled. 3 That divine chariot left him and reached Vasu, the 
king of Cedi. 


1. Emend as in Bd.P. v. 22, as syntactically the text here is obscure. 
Thetext : Lohagandham naradhipam is Amended as Lohagandhx naradhipah , as 
in Bd.P. 

2. The text is confusing. The king did not take resort to Gargya who 
cursed him (see v. 22above) but Indrota Saunaka (see the next verse). 
The reading in Bd. P. 68.24: sa priyicchaunakam rfim-'hc resorted to the 
sage Saunaka* is relevant and deserves adoption. 

3. Bd. P. v. 26 reads avabhrtha for avasatha hereof and means, ‘The king 
died when he reached the Avabhrtha stage of the sacrifice’. The Bd. P. 
reading is preferable for if the curse of iron odour was removed and the 
king was rehabilitated, the divine chariot should have continued with him. 




720 


Vayu. PurSna 


£,‘*fSn“.rK.»r-v» family, gave that excellent 

Y,yW ’ ,h y°" of 

Nabl tpokc th« words .o his cldcs, a„d most cxce.lem son 

Y * -O -e»r ^-“'T “ 

^(tTsSTlte ami fully satiated with youthful 

age 30 . O Yadu, accept all my sins along with my old age. 

Take mv old age”. Yadu replied to him : 

31. -I ha« promised to give alms to Brahmanas but 
have not given. That can be achieved only by exertion. (So) 

I will not take up your old age. 

32 There are many defects and ailments in old age affect¬ 
ing (the abilility to) drink and eat. Hence, O king, I am not 

enthusiastic enough to accept your old age. 

33-34. In the prime of youth, Ido not wish to become a 
pitiable figure with white moustache and beard, shattered (in 
every limb) by old age, (skin) with many a wrinkle, with the 
body bent down, faced with a miserable state, the very form 

indicating weakness, and incompetent to perform any action. 

I would be overwhelmed (attacked) by great frightful effects. 

I do not desire that old age. 

35. O King, O knower of virtues, you do have many sons 
even more beloved than lam. May they take it up. Please 
request some other son”. 

36. On getting this rebuff from Yadu, (Yayati) the fore¬ 
most among the most eloquent ones, became infuriated. Censur¬ 
ing his eldest son, he said thus: 

37-39. “What other Asrama do you have? What other 
holy rite do you have for which you disregard me and say 
thus? O evil-minded one, O new instructor !” After saying 
this the angry king cursed Yadu : “Since you, though born of 
my bosom, do not pass on your (youthful) age unto me, O fool, 
your progeny shall not get the kingdom.” (Then he said to 
Turvasu) “O Turvasu, accept my sin along with my old age’ . 


31.40-48 


721 


Turvasu said : 

40. O father, I do not like old age that destroys the 

(worldly) pleasures of love. There arc many defects in old age 

affecting (the ability to) drink and eat. Hence, O king, I am 
not cnthusiatic enough to accept your old age. 

Tayati said : 

41. You, though born of my bosom, do not exchange your 
(youthful) age with me; O Turvasu, your progeny will meet 
with utter ruin. 

42-43. O deluded one, you will be a king among people 
of mixed religious rites and practices*, born of anti-caste 
marriages and other mixed castes, who are meat-eaters and 
others. There is no doubt that you will be a ruler of the brutish 
Mlecchas, barbarians and oulcastes who are after outraging 
the modesty of their preceptors’ wives and who (are destined 
to be) born as loweranimals. 

Suia said : 

44. After cursing his own son Turvasu thus, Yayati spoke 
these words to his son Druhyu born of Sarmistha: 

45. “O Druhyu, you accept my old age that destroys your 
complexion and beauty. Give unto mein exchange your youth 
fora period of one thousand years. 

46. When the thousand years are completed, I shall 
return your youth and take back again my sin along with the old 
age.” 

Druhyu said : 

47. An old man does not enjoy (a ride on) elephants, 
chariots and horses, nor can he enjoy a woman. He has no one 
to be in contact. Hence I do not like the old age. 

Tayati said : 

48. Since you, though born out of my own bosom, do not 

*asamkirpa ca dharmepa is obscure as *asamkirpa is a compliment and not 
part of a curse. Bd.P.v. 43 reads : 'sanhirpefii ca dharmepa . ‘of mixed or 
impure religious practices’ is better. Hence accepted here. 




722 


Vayu Purina 


“ h «' You will bo perpetually staying iu a place where people 
move about iu canoes and rafts. You will always be there as a 

non-king though born of a royal family. 

50 (He said to Ann) O Ann, you accept my sin along 

with my old age. Thus I can move about for a thousand years 
with your youth. 


51. (Defective verse ) 1 2 An old man gives (the gift of age) 
to a child. (If I give up my youth) I shall become impure with 
your old age. An old man does not perform Homas at the 
proper time. I do not like that (type of) old age. 

Xay all said : 

52-53. Since you, though born out of my own bosom do 
not give unto me your (youthful) age, all those defects of old 
age mentioned by you will visit (afflict) you. Your children will 
die on attaining youthful age. You will have to devote to the 
scattering of fire like this (after cremating your children). 

54-56. (He then spoke to Puru) O Puru, you accept my 
sin along with the old age. O dear one, old age, wrinkles and 
greyish hairs have overwhelmed me as a result of the curse 
of Kav-ya Usanas (Sukra). I am not satiated with the pleasures 
of youth. I shall enjoy the worldly pleasures with your youth. 
When a period of thousand years is completed I shall return 
you your youthful age. I shall also take back my own sin 
along with the old age. 

Suta said : 

57. Thus requested, the son immediately replied to his 
father, “O father, I shall do as you wish. 


1. ardjabhrdjaoamias tvam in the text is obscure. Bd.P. v. 51 reads : ardjd 
rdjavamSas tvam which is better and is accepted here. 

2. yVrpaJ iiSuvaram dalle is obscure though translated above. For this Bd. 
P. 52 read s: 

jvvah iisur ivalaktah —*An old man is weak like a child*. 



31.58-69 


723 


58. O king, I shall accept your sin along with your old 
age. Take from me my youthful age. Enjoy the pleasures as 
you wish. 

59. I shall become disguised by your old age, assuming 
your form and age. Giving up my youthful age, I shall carry 
out what would be suitable (to the age assumed) ”. 

Yayati said : 

60. O Puru, I am pleased with you. Welfare unto you. 
Delightedly I grant this unto you. All the subjects in your 
kingdom shall flourish and enjoy all pleasures (or your progeny 
will realise their desires, be affluent and rule over a kingdom). 

Suta said : 

61 . Permitted by Puru and by the grace of Bhargava, 
king Yayati transferred his old age to Puru. 


62. By means of the youthful age, Yayati, the son of 
Nahusa, became highly delighted and enjoyed all worldly plea- 


si ires. 



68-69. In the parks 
with (the celestial dam 


W. He scrutinised .11 sexual 



724 


Vdyit Pur an a 


pleasures to find out <he hidden delta'. When the ting saw 
to *e desire to enjoy was increasing the more he enjoyed 
he approached Puru and took back his own old age. 

70 After enjoying the pleasures and desires, the king was 
both eonteuted and dejected. The king then remembered the 
stipulated time-limit of one thousand years. 

71. Counting (even the small units of time such as) 
Kolas and Kdffhds, he considered that the time limit was 
complete and so he spoke to his son Puru: 

72. “O son, O suppressor of enemies, with your youthful 
age, all worldly pleasures have been enjoyed by me in accor¬ 
dance with my zeal befitting the time and in a way conducive 
to happiness. 

73. O Puru, I am delighted. Welfare uptu you, you take 
back your own youthful age. Accept the realm too. You alone 
have been my beloved son who carried out what is pleasing to 


me”. 

74. King Yayati, the son of Nahusa, took back his old age 
and Puru regained his own youthful age. 

75. When the king evinced his desire to crown his youngest 
son Puru, people of all castes with Brahmanas as the chief 
of them, spoke these words. 1 2 

76. “O lord, why do you set aside (the claim of) your 
eldest son, the excellent Yadu, the grandson of Sukra, the son 
of De.vayani, and bestow the kingdom on Puru ? 


77. Yadu is your eldest son. Turvasu was born next to 
him. Sarmistha’s eldest son is Druhyu, then comes Anu and then 
only Puru. 

78. How can the younger son deserve the kingdom super¬ 
seding (the claims of) the elder ones? Hence we urge you to 
abide by the (traditional) Dharma. 5> 


1. Bd. P.v. 69 reads : alad-dofa-nidarfanal ‘because he failed to notice the 
defects (of passionate indulgence)’. This is a better reading as it states why 
he went with Visvaci. 

2. Verses 75-86 show that subjects did notallow injustice even if commit¬ 
ted by the king. Some sort of public sanction seems to be necessary for 
appointing a new king. 



31.79-90 


725 


Yayati said: 

79. O people of all castes with Brahmanas as leaders! 
Let all of you listen to my speech why I do not intend to give 
the kingdom to the elder ones. 

80. Only that son who carries out the words (orders) of his 
father and mother is considered praiseworthy. My behest was 
not obeyed by the eldest son Yadu. 

81. That son who is antagonistic to his father is not 
honoured or approved by good men. He is the real son who 
does his duties to his parents. 

82. I have been slighted by Yadu and also by Turvasu. 
Much discourtesy was shown by Druhyu and Anu too. 

83. I have been specially honoured by Puru who had 
carried out my behest. Though he is the youngest, he shall be 
my successor. It was he who accepted my old age. It was he 
who fulfilled all my desires. Everything has been done by Puru 
who carried out his duties as a son. 

84. This boon has been granted by Sukra, Kavya, Usanas, 
himself—‘O highly intelligent one, that son who is favourable 
to you shall be the king to succeed you.’ 

85. Permitted by you all, may Puru be crowned as the ruler 
of the kingdom. The son who is endowed with all qualities and 
who is always loyal to his parents deserves all welfare. He is to 
be the lord (the king), though he may be the youngest. 


86 . “Puru who is your favourite son and who has done 
what is pleasing to you, deserves this kingdom. Due to the 
boon granted by Sukra, nothing more can be said (against this 

decision).’’ _ . , 

87-89. Thus addressed by the delighted citizens and the 

people of the realm, the son of Nahusa crowned his own son 
Puru in his own realm. He established Turvasu in the south¬ 
eastern territories. The king established the eldest excellent 
Yadu in the south-western territories. Druhyu and Anu were 
established in the west and the north. After conquering he 
earth consisting of the seven continents and the oceans ’^ 
son of Nahusa, king Yayati, divided it intofive regions and gave 

them to his five sons. _ , „ 

90. The whole of this earth consisting of the seven 


726 


Vayu Pur&t}a 


t anf1 , many ) towns is being ruled over by them, the knowers 

S^SL*-***" adh ' rence to thcir own 

raP 9r iV Thu”tan<iinS lhe earth 10 his so “ “ d tr “ sfer ™5 

his royal glory to them, king Yayiti, the son of Nahusa, be- 

Ca ” 2 d 'ua , *.Easid«hi S bowand arrows, entrusting Ins kins- 
me „ wdth all duties and responsibilities and his sons with the 

kingdom, the king became glad. 

93 In this connection the following Galhas (verses)* have 
been sung by the great king Yayati, who after desiring pleasures, 
withdrew from them all like a tortoise that withdraws all ns 
limbs (within itself). 

94. “Never can lust subside by enjoyment of pleasures. 
Just as the fire gets ablaze all the more by ghee-oblations, so 
also desires get increased by indulgence. 

95. All the grains and barley seeds, all the gold, all the 
cattle and all the women in the world are not sufficient for even 
one (person). He who realises this, does not become deluded. 

96. When one maintains the purifying (auspicious) atti¬ 
tude to all living beings in thought, speech and action, one 
attains (realizes) Brahman. 

97. When one is not afraid of others, when others are not 
afraid of him, when one neither desires nor hates (anything), 


one attains Brahman. 

98. Happiness comes to one who eschews Trsna (cove¬ 
tousness) , which cannot be got rid of by evil-minded ones, 
which does not subside even when one grows old and which is 
a foul disease full of fatal faults. 

99. When one grows old, the hairs grow old; the teeth 
decay along with old age; but the hope for longevity and 
acquisition of wealth never grow old. 

100. The happiness arising from enjoyment of lust or by 
attaining the great pleasure in heaven does not deserve even a 
sixteenth part of the happiness resulting from-the destruction of 
covetousness”. 


1. Verses 94-100 are the immortal verses quoted in various works and 
they constitute the moral of this episode. 



727 


31.101—32.6 

101. After saying this, the saintly king went to the forest 
along with his wife. He performed a great penance on Bhrgu- 
tunga 1 and performed hundreds of holy rites. Earning great 
fame, he attained,Svarga. 

102. His races are five thus. They are holy and rever¬ 
ed by Devas and sages. The whole earth is pervaded by them as 
if with the rays of the sun. 

103. An excellent Brahmana who reads this entire narra¬ 
tive of Yayati or listens to it, shall become wealthy, long-lived 
and renowned. He will be blessed with children. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 
The Birth of Karlaviryci 2 

Suta said : 

1. I shall recount the race of the eldest (son of Yayati) 
Yadu, of excellent splendour. Listen and understand, even as I 
recount it in detail and in the proper order. 

2. Yadu had five sons, all comparable to the sons of Devas. 
Sahasrajit was the eldest. (The others were) Krostu, Nila, Jita 
and Laghu. 

3. Sahasrajit’s son was the glorious king named Satajit. 
Satajit had three sons who were well known as very virtuous. 

4. They were Haihaya, Haya and the king Venuhaya. It 
is heard that Haihaya’s successor was Dharmatattva. 

5. Dharmatattva’s son was Kirti and his son was Samjneya. 
Samjfieya’s successor was the king named Mahisman. 

6. Mahisman’s son was the valorous Bhadrasrenya who 
was the king of Varanasi and has already been mentioned. 

1. A mountain in Nepal on the eastern bank of Gandak. Here was 
the hermitage of Bhygu. (De 34). 

2. This chapter describes the Haihaya line of Yadu in which the greatest 
ruler of the Narmada valley, Kartavirya Arjuna, was born. This chapter is 
captioned after that illustrious king. This chapter corresponds to Bd. P. 
2.3.69 & verse-numbers in the notes refer to that chapter. 



728 


Vayu Purana 


7 Bhadrasrenya’s successor was the king named Durmada 

and Durmada’s successor was an intelligent (king) well known 

by the name Kana k a«cc^sor (son$) wcre four and they were 

famous in the worlds-KptavIrya, Kartavirya, Kptavarma and 
k! the fourth. Krtavlrya’s son was Arjuna. Born wuh a 
thousand arms, he was a king who ruled over the seven conti- 


nen |o He performed a very severe penance for ten thousand 

vears Kartvlrya thus propitiated Datta, born of Atri. 

7 11 13 Datta granted him four excellently glorious boons. 

At the outset, (Arjuna) chose the boon of (being endowed 
with) a thousand arms. The second was (the ability of) the 
prevention (of the world) given up in evil by good people.* 
(The third was the competence) to protect the earth righteously 
after conquering it in the same (righteous) way. 

The fourth was victory in numerous battles after killing 

thousands of enemies but meeting death in a battle (fighting) 

with a superior warrior. 

14. The entire earth consisting of seven continents and 
many towns and surrounded by seven oceans, was conquered 
by him in a manner befitting a Ksatriya. 1 2 

15. When he started fighting in a battle, banners and 
chariots befitting it and a thousand arms used to appear by 
means of the Maya of that intelligent one. 

16. It is heard that without any difficulties ten thousand 
Yajiias had been performed by that intelligent king in all the 
seven continents. 

17-18. All the Yajnas performed by that mighty-armed 
king were profoundly splendid. All of them were provided with 
golden altars with golden sacrificial posts. All of thorp 
were graced by the presence of blessed Devas seated in aerial 


1. Bd.P. 2.3.69. reads : ability to prevent one from evil the moment he 
plans it. 

2. Verses 14-37 describe the exploits, munificence, righteousness and glory 
of Kartavirya. The Gathas sung by Narada about him (vv. 20-22) record 
in a nutshell Arjuna’s achievements. Generally these Gathas are quotations 
from ancient traditional verses. 



32 . 19-28 


729 

chariots; all of them were always rendered splendid and attrac¬ 
tive by Gandharvas and Apsaras-s (celestial damsels). 

19. After observing the conduct and the grandeur of that 
saintly king, Narada and Gandharvas sang the following 
verse(s) of glory of that king. 

20. “Certainly no man can emulate (none can attain) 
the goal or status of Kartavlrya by means of Yajnas, Danas, 
penances, exploits and learning. 

21. In all the seven continents he is seen moving about 
with his sword drawn and the excellent bows and arrows kept 
ready as well as seated in his chariot. Though he is the king, he 
behaves as though he is the follower.* 

22. While he was protecting the subjects righteously, none of 
his subjects lost his wealth, no one was grief-stricken and no 
one had any confusion, thanks to the prowess of that great 
king”. 

23. That king became the sole monarch and emperor of 
the seven continents for eightyfive thousand years. 

24. (In his realm) he himself was the protector of cattle 
and the fields. As a Yogin, Arjuna became Parjanya (Lord of 
clouds and rains) and showered in plenty. 

25. With his thousand arms rendered tough by frequent 
contact with the bowstring, he shone like the Sun with his 
thousands of autumnal rays. 

26. Having conquered the royal assembly of (the serpent 
king) Karkotaka in Mahismall with a thousand elephants, he 
established his capital there. 

27. (Defective) The lotus-eyed king used to check the for¬ 
ceful (speedy) waves of the sea during the rainy season (when 
the sea is stormy). In a happy mood, he sportingly spewed out 
water and made an (artificial) rainy season. 

28. Shaken and tossed about by him during his (water- 
sports), Narmada, wearing garlands with golden fillets 
approached the king in an apprehensive mannar, with eyebrows 
like waves producing the gentle (murmuring) soun 

*Bd.P. ibid v 21 reads yogat (by means of his Yogic Power) for nyo gdt 
in our Text. 



730 


Vayu Parana 


29 Formerly, following its (Narmada’s) course, that (kmg) 
had plunged into the great ocean and flooded the forest near 

the shore creating artificial rainy season. 

30 When the great ocean was agitated by his thousand 
arms, the great Asuras in the nether-worlds used to become 
stunned and motionless. 

31. Giant fishes and great serpents concealed under great 
billows were crushed and scattered in the flood of foam, the 
eddies and whirlpools which were unbearably furious. 

32. Agitating it by means of his thousand arms, the king 
made the ocean resemble the milky sea churned by Devas and 
Asuras. 

33. (Defective verse) On seeing the terrible, prominent 
king, the (aquatic beings) were afraid that the ocean was once 
again being churned by the Mandara mountain for the sake of 
Amrla (nectar) and at once felt uprooted (utpafita in A ). 

34. Great serpents bent down their heads and stood mo¬ 
tionless like the stumps of the plantain trees standing still in the 
evening hours, when the wind does not blow. 

35. (Defective verse) Proudly he went to Lanka. With 
his bow and five hundred arrows he overpowered Ravana along 
with his army. He defeated and brought him to Mahismatl and 
imprisoned him there. 

36. (Sage) Pulastya himself went to Arjuna and propitiat¬ 
ed him. The king released Paulastya (Ravana) at the request 
of Pulastya. 

37. The sound produced by the twang of the bowstrings by 
his thousand arms was like the thunder at the time of the close 
of the Yugas, when the trees* of the clouds of dissolution seem 
to burst. 

38. Sad indeed that his thousand powerful arms were cut off 
by Bhargava (Parasurama) in battle, as though they were gol¬ 
den palm trees. 

39. Once upon a time, the thirsty Sun-god begged alms of 
him.. The Lord of the people bestowed on the Sun-god the seven 
continents as alms. 


*V r k}a in the text needs emendation as Vrnda as in Bd. P.v. 38. It means 
‘a collection, amass* (ofclouds). 



32.40-50 


731 


40. With a desire to consume (everything), the Sun-god 
blazed at the tips of his arrows and burnt cities, cowherd 
colonies, villages and all the towns. 

41. Thanks to the prowess of that chief of men (Arjuna) 
the (Sun-god) of great fame burnt the mountains and forests of 
Kartavirya. 

42. The Sun-god in the company of Haihaya (Kartavirya) 
burnt everything including continents along with forests. He 
burnt the empty hermitage of Varuna’s son completely. 

43. Varuna had obtained this glorious and excellent son 
formerly. He was famous by the name of sage Vasistha other- 
wise known as Apava. 

44-45. Out of anger the powerful Apava cursed Arjuna 
then, 1 O Haihaya, since you have not spared this forest of mine 
another man will set aside even this difficult task achieved by 
you. He will be Kuntl’s son named Arjuna. 2 He will not be a 
king. 

46-47. O Arjuna, the extremely powerful Rama, the fore¬ 
most among those who strike with weapons, will cut off and 
shatter your thousand arms. The powerful. Brahmana and Sage 
of great strength will kill you.” Then, as a result of the curse 
of that intelligent (sage), Rama became the cause of his death. 

48. Such a boon had been chosen by the king himself for¬ 
merly (from Datta). He had a hundred sons, five of whom were 
great warriors. . 

49-50. They were Surasena, Vrstyadya, Vr?a and Jaya- 
dhvaja. All of them were well-trained in the use of miraculous 
weapons. They were heroic, strong, pious-souled and re- 


1. The curse motif and that of boon were very popular with Puraria- 
writers to explain an unlikely or miraculous, event. Here both are used to 
explain Kartavirya’s death at the hands of Parasurama. Kartavirya is stated 
to have sought such a boon from Datta (supra v. 13) and received a curse 
from Apava Vasistha (w. 46-47) for destroying (i.c. helping the Sun-god 
to destroy) his hermitage. 

2. Apava’s curse was of a twofold nature. Kartavirya Arjuna will 
meet physical death at the hands of Parasurama and he will be superseded 
in reputation by another Arjuna (Kunti’s son) for a similar act (viz. burn¬ 
ing of Kharujava forest). 



Vayu Purana 
732 

nowned. They ruled over Avan* King Jayadhvaja's eon war the 

va'orous Talajangli ^ Jons who constituted the dan of 

Talaianghas. Five families among those noble-soulcd Hashayas 
very famous, via. the numerous Virahotras (V.t.ho ra m 
M.P.), Bhojas and Avarlis, Tundikeras and the valorous 

T51 S" 8 Wahotra's son was king Ananta. Durjaya was his son. 

His son was Amitradarsana. , . , . ,, 

54. That king had the boon of never losing his wealth. 

The great king protected the subjects by means of his prowess 
55-56 An intelligent person who recounts the story of 
the birth of Kartavirya, shall regain lost wealth. He will not 
lose wealth (further). He will be rich. His Dharma will flourish 
and he will be honoured in heaven like Tvastr or like a man 
of charitable inclination. 


CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 
The Dynasty ofjyamagha and Vrsni 

The Sages said : 

1. Why was the world (hermitage) of the noble-souied 
Apava burnt by Kartavirya forcibly? 1 Please explain it to 
us who ask. 

2. We have heard that the saintly king was a protector of 
his subjects. Being a guardian, therefore, why did he destroy 
that hermitage? 

Suta said : 

3. Aditya (the Sun-god) desirous of satisfaction (of hunger) 
approached Kartavirya in the guise of a Brahmana (and said), 
“Please give me food. Undoubtedly I am Adilya.” 


1. Verses 1-13 explain in details again why the hermitage of Apava 
Vasi?tha was burnt by Kartavirya. As these verses deal with the curse of 
Apava, they should have formed a part of the last chapter after v. 39. 
Vv. 1-13 hereof are unrelated to the present chapter (Race of Kro?tii) 



33 . 4-14 


733 


The King said : 

4. O Lord Sun, please tell me with what you will be 
satisfied. What type of food I should give to you; I shall serve it. 

The Sun said: 

5. O most excellent one among donors, give unto me all 
the immobile beings as my food. I shall be satisfied only there¬ 
by O king, and not by anything else. 

The King said : 

6. O the most excellent one among those who blaze, no 
fiery splendour of human beings can burn down all immobile 
beings. I bow unto you. 

Aditya replied : 

7. I am delighted. I shall give you an inexhaustible 
quiver of arrows that are conducive to all happiness* and that 
never fail. When discharged they will burn because they are 
charged with my brilliance. 

8. When it is commanded, it will dry up the clouds and 
the oceans. When it is dry, I will reduce it to ashes and shall be 
delighted thereby, O king ! 

9-11. Then Aditya gave Arjuna those arrows. Securing 
them, (Arjuna) burnt all the great immobile beings, hermitages, 
villages, cowherd colonies, cities, penance groves, beautiful 
forests and parks etc. and then circumambulated the Sun-god. 
The earth burnt down by the splendour of the Sun, became 
tree-less and grass-less. 

12-13. In the meantime the great sage (Apava) who had 
been residing under water for ten thousand years, completed 
his holy observance. Then the ascetic of great splendour emer¬ 
ged out (from water). The great sage then saw his hermitage 
burnt down by Arjuna. Out of anger he cursed the saintly king 
as already recounted by me to you. 

Sula said : 

14. Listen to the race of the saintly king Krostu consi- 

*sarvato-mukhan ‘capable of facing i.e. going in all direction’ in Bd.P 
2.3.70.7 is abetter reading than sarvatosukhan hereof. 



734 


Vdyu Purarn 


sting of excellent men. In hi. tally was born Vrsni, the 

founder £^£2-. Vrjinivin of great fame 
(The oeoole)' liked die son of Vfjinivan, Svaht, the foremost 
among those possessing Svaha (i.e. performers of Yajiiassvherem 

.Sraha the f orem ost among donors was the son 

ofSvtihi. (The people) liked Ghftamprasuta, the eldest and 

the best son of Rasadu. . , , 

17 He performed many types of great \ajnas with ade¬ 
quate Daksiiias. His son Citraratha was also endowed with (the 
inclination) to perform diverse holy rites. _ 

18. Thus the heroic Citraratha performed many \ajnas 
giving vast wealth as Daksina. His successor was Sasabindu, 
who followed (the footsteps) of saintly kings. 


19. He was an emperor of great prowess. He was ver^ 
powerful and he had many children. In this connection, this 
genealogical verse has been cited by those who know ancient 
traditions. 


20. “Sasabindu had ten thousand sons. They were all 
very intelligent. They possessed vast wealth and great splendour. 
They were worthy (of their father). 

21-22. Six of diem were very important; they were known 
as ‘ Prthusatkas ’ (six men who had theword Prlhu i.e. great added 
on to their name). They were—Prthusravas, Prthuyasas, 
Prthunjaya, Prthuklrti and Pjrthundata. All the sons of Sasa¬ 
bindu were kings. All the Puranas praise Antara who was the 
son of Prthusravas. He was the same Antara as was the son of 
Yajna formerly.’ 5 

23. After getting the earth (i.e. having become king) the 
same pious-souled excellent, righteous (king) performed a 
hundred horse-sacrifices. 

24. His son was Marutta 1 who followed (the footsteps of) 
saintly kings. Heroic Kambalabarhis is remembered as Marutta’s 
son. 


1. Our text has dropped two generations between Antara (Ak§ara in 
Bd.P.) and Marutta— vide Bd.P. 2.3.70.23-25. 



33 . 25-36 


735 


25-26. Scholarly Rukmakavaca was the son of Kambala- 
barhis. This Rukmakavaca had formerly attained excellent glory 
by killing (many) warriors wearing coats of mail and armed 
with bows, with his sharp arrows. He attained great fame as a 
performer of horse-sacrifices and gave profuse wealth (as Daksina) 
to Bralimanas. 

27. From king Rukmakavaca were born five very strong 
sons of great prowess who killed heroic enemies without turning 
away (from the battlefield). 

28. They were Rukmesu, Prthurukma, Jyamagha, Parigha 
and Hari. The father established Hari and Parigha in (the land 
called) Videha. 

29. Brahmcsu 1 (? Rukmesu) became king, and Prthurukma 
became his dependent. Banished from the kingdom by them, 
Jyamagha 2 lived in a hermitage. 

30. He was quiescent (by temperament). He lived in the 
terrible forest but he was actuated by a Brahmana. Taking up 
his bow he went to the middle of the land, seated in his chariot 
and waving his flag. 

31. He (wandered) along in the marshy place on the 
banks of Narmada. After passing through Mekala mountains 
and the mountain Rksavan, he entered Suktimanya (?) 

32. Jyamagha’s wife was Saibya who was very strong. 
Though the king had no son, he did not take a second wife. 

33. He became victorious in a battle and won a girl there¬ 
in. The king then came to his wife and said, “Here is your 
daughter-in-law”. 

34. On being addressed thus she said, “This daughter-in 
law of yours is loveable. She will be the wife of your son who 
will be born (who is yet to be born).” 

35. By performing a severe penance, the beautiful chaste 
lady Saibya gave birth to his son Vidarbha in her old age. 

36. Vidarbha begot of that daughter-in-law two scholarly 

1. Brahmefu is a mistake for Rukmesu . In AIHT p. 146 Paravrt is 
named as the successor of Rukmakavaca. 

2. Jyamagha’s dynasty was famous but he is personally noted as a hen- 
Pecked husband in Puranas, vide vv. 32-34, also Bd.P. 2.3.70. 33-3b 



736 


Vayu Purana 


princes, Kra.hu and Kausita who were heroic and experts 

“Tme very virtuous (king Vidarbha) Inter begot a third 
son i Jphda. Vastu teas the son of Lotnapada and hts son was 

A "S Cidi was the son of Kausika. The Caidya kings are 
remembered at his dependents. Kunt. was the son of Kra.hu 

who was Vidarbha s son. „ . j.j very 

39 Dhrsta was born as the son of Kunti. lie was very 
proud and valorous. Dhr?ta s son was the pious-soulcd JMrvrti, 

thC 40 ayC His f son was Dasarha who was very strong and valiant. 
Dasarha’s son was Vyoman and his son is called JimuU. 

D 41. Jimuta’s son was Vikrti and his son was Bhimaratha. 

Bhimaratha’s son was Rathavara. 

42 He was a donor interested in Dharma (holy rite) per¬ 
petually. He was well-behaved and invariably truthful. His son 

wasNavaratha. Dasaratha came after him. 

43 His son was Ekadasaratha. Sakum was his son. From lum 
was born the archer Karambhaka. Devarata came thereafter. 

44. King Devaksatra of great fame was the son of Devarata. 
Devana, the delighter of Ksatriyas, was born as the son of 


Devaksatra. ,. . 

45-46. Madhu was born of Devana. His son was Medna- 

rtha-sariibhava. Madhu had other sons as well, viz. 
Manu of great brilliance, Manuvasa, Nandana of great splen¬ 
dour and Mahapuruvasa. Purudvan, the most excellent man, 
was the son of Puruvasa. 

47. Purudvaha was born of Bhadravati as the son of Puru¬ 
dvan. AiksakI was the wife (of Purudvan). Sattva was born of 
her. FromSattva was born Sattvata who was endowed with 
Sattvaguna. He increased the fame (of the race). 

48. After perfectly understanding this creation (race) of 
the noble-souled Jyamagha, one obtains childern and attains 
Sayujya (identity) with the intelligent king Soma. 


34.1-11 


CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 

The Race of Vrsni 1 


737 


Sula said : 

1-2. Sattvata’s wife Kausalya gave birth to handsome 
sons, viz. Bhajin, Bhajamana, Divya, Devavrdha the king, 
Andhaka, Mahabhoja, Vrsni and Yadunandana. They established 
four races. Listen to them in detail. 

3. Bhajamana begot of Srujayl two sons, Bahya and 
(the next) Bahyaka. Bahyaka married firry aya's two daughters 

4. His wives, the two sisters, gave birth to many sons 2 , 
viz. Nirni,, Panava, Vrsni and Parapuranjaya. 

5-6. (Defective verse) Bhajamana begot of Srhjayl other 
sons also, viz. Ayutayutajit, Sahasrajit, Sataji.t and Vamaka. 
Out of those who were born of Bhajamana, king Devavrdha 
performed a severe penance. 

7. He had this thought in his mind, ‘May a son endowed 
with all good qualities be born to me 5 . After concentrating on 
this in Yoga, he touched the waters of the river Parnasa. 3 4 

8. On being touched by him, the river, the most excellent 
of all rivers, desired for the welfare of the king. 

9-10. Anxiously engrossed in thought, the river decided 
thus : <C I do not find any woman in whom a son like this, 
endowed with all good qualities, will He born to the king 
Devavrdha. Hence I shall myself become his wife (Sahavrata— a 
woman who performs holy rites in one’s company). She assu¬ 
med hands 1 (i.e. human form) in accordance with her intention. 

11. Taking the form of a girl, Savitrl(the rivcr)rcpeated the 

1. This chapter corresponds to Bd.P. 2.3.71. Hcncc only versc-numbcrs 
of this chapter arc mentioned for comparison. 

2. The list of sons in Bd.P. (vv. 3-6) differs. It gives the names of 
the sons as follows : Nimloci, Kirnkana, Dhr§ti, Parapuranjaya. 

3. The river Banas in Rajasthan—a tributary to Chambal. De 146. 

The Purana writers had a romantic concept of showing rivers falling in 

love with Kings and Sages and sometimes marrying them in uman ^rra 
such as Ganga with Santanu, Narmada with Kartavirya rjuna. osi, 

Bahuda and other rivers had similar affairs. 

4. Has,a translated here is obscure. Bd. P. 2.3.71.11 reads h T Ulha for hosla 
hereof. It means (in Bd. P.) II ‘(her emotional attachment) welled up in her 

heart*. 



738 


Vdyu Parana 


great wot* (?) Sh« though. of the kiug. The king desired her 

l “Is'l 3 T he liberal-minded (king) rendered her pregnant. 
She »,«ived a brilliant (son). In the ninth month, the most 

Sclent of rivers gave birth to a son endowed with all good 

i • « desired bv Devavrdha. About this race, the 

S£S- .ho kLv the Pnraaas,sing thisGatha (glorihcatory 

”'"445 people of noble souls glorifying the good qualities 
of Devavrdha say-“He is seen at close quarters exactly as he 
is heard from a distance. Babhru is the most excellent among 
men. Devavrdha was .equal to Devas. Seventy thousand and 
sixtyfive men of the line of Babhru and Devavrdha attained 
immortality (liberation from Sariisam). 

16 That highly fortunate, most valiant hero among Satura¬ 
te w’as a performer of sacrifices, thechief of the most prominent 
ones among the donors of liberal gifts, a brave warrior, a 
patron of Brahmanas, truthful in speech, scholarly and (most) 
famous (in the world).” 

17 (Defective verse) Sumahabhojayas and Imartikabalas 
were born in his race 1 2 (?) Gandharl and Madri were the two 
wives of Vrsni. 

18-19. Gandharl gave birth toSumitra and Mitranandana. 
Madri gave birth to the sons Yudhajit, Devamldhusa and 
Anamitra. The two (last mentioned) were excellent men. Nighna 
was Anamitra’s son. Nighna had two sons. 

20. They were the blessed Prasena and Sakrajit. Surya“ 
(the Sun-god) was an intimate bosom friend of Sakrajit . 3 


1. lasydnvaye sumahabhojaycmarlikabaldh in the text is obscure. Bd. P. 
2.3.71.18 reads : 

iasydnvayah sumahdn bhojd ye bhuvi viirutdh H 
‘His race is very great. The kings of his line are well known on the earth 
as Bhojas’. 

2. Pu r va in the text is wrong. Surya (as in A and Bd. P.) is accepted here 
as the following verses also confirm it. 

3. Compare the Story of the Syamaniaka gem in Bh.P. X. Chs. 56 and 
57; Bd. P. 2.3.71.22-99. 




739 


34.21-35 

21. Once, at the close of a night, the king who was driving 
in his chariot, got down near the bank (of a river) in order 
to perform the worship of the Sun with water libation. 

22. While he was worshipping, Vivasvan, the Sun-god, the 

lord with his brilliant halo, stood before him but his form was 

not clearly visible. . , 

23-24 Then the king addressed the Sun-god who was 

standing in front of him: “O lord of the luminaries, I see you 
in front of me also in the same form with brilliant halo as I sec 
you in the sky. What special significance is there m your 

romins: to inc 3.s 3, friend. . . 

25 On hearing this, the lord took off the excellent jewe 

Svamantaka from his neck and tied it round the king’s neck. 

Y 26 The king then saw the Sun-god in his actual (phys.cal) 
form. He gazed at the form for the duration of a Muhurta 

27 When the Sun-god was about to start (on ms journey) 

traverse the worlds . Svamantaka 

28. The Sun-god thereupon gave him t } 

jewel. Wearing it the king re-entered the cit>% there 

29. The the 

comes the Sun-god”. The people m the king 

city and the harem all were suip handed over the 

30. Out of affection, the king Sah J prascna M t . 

excellent divine jewel Syamanta a to us the ]and 

31. The clouds shower at the P™P C ” e . f ofany 
where the jewel Syamantaka is present. There 

epidemic or sickness. : ewe \ Syaman- 

32. Govinda (Kra'a) desire , it Though he was 

taka from Prascna. But he did not get 

powerful, he did not take it y 0 J Prascna went a- 

hunting. Fm’the'laL' of Syaman, 'aka he me, a terrible death 

from a lion. „ rl ,„ rs killed that lion. Taking 

34. Jambavan, the king or bears. 

that jewel with him ^^'^dAndhakas thought it to be the 

35 . The elders of Vrsnis ana 


740 


Vayu Parana 


work of Krsna. Considering him covetous of the jewel, they all 

suspected him alone (as the perpetrator of the crime). 

36 Unable to endure the false accusation, the lord, the 
powerful slayer of foes, roamed about in the forest (to trace 

P r? 37-40' He went over all the places where Prasena was 
hunting. With the help of trustworthy men, he followed the 
footsteps of Prasena and searched the great mountain Rksavan 
and the excellent mountain Vindhya. He became completely 

exhausted due to the search. The noble-minded (lord) then saw 

Prasena (lying) killed along with his horse. He did not get the 
jewel there. The lion was seen lying dead not far from the dead 
body of Prasena. Apparently the lion had been killed by a bear 
as indicated by the footprints. The scion of the family of Yadu 
(i.e. Krsna) traced by means of footprints of the bear and 
found out the cave of the bear. 

41. He heard the voice of a young woman deep inside the 
great cave. O Brahmanas, the nurse had been playing with 
the infant son of Jambavan along with the jewel. The words 
“Ma rodih ” (Do not cry) were uttered by her. 


The Nurse said: 

42. The lion killed Prasena. The lion was killed by Jamba* 
van. O tender child, do not cry. This Svamantaka is for you. 


43. (The words were clearly audible.) As soon as every¬ 
thing was made clear by those words, he entered the cave. He 
had already seen Prasena (lying dead) torn to pieces very near 
that cave. 

44. Quickly entering the cave of the bear, the liberal- 
minded lord saw Jambavan, the king of bears. 

45. Vasudeva fought with Jambavan in his cave. For 
twentyone days Govinda had a hand to hand fight (with him). 

46. When Krsna entered the cave, the attendants of Vasu¬ 
deva returned to Dvaravati and reported (to others) that 
Krsna (also) was killed. 

47. After defeating the powerful Jambavan, Vasudeva won 
the hand of his daughter Jambavatl with the permission of the 
king of bears. 


741 


34.48-60 

48 Overwhelmed by the splendour of the lord, Jambavan 
gave the jewel as well as his daughter Jambavati to Visvaksena 

(Krsna). 

49. It was to clear himself that the lord took the Syaman- 
taka jewel. Consoling the king of bears, he came out of the 

CaV 50. After redeeming the jewel thus and clearing himself of 
the scandal by his own efforts, the lord handed over the jewel 
to Satrajit in the presence of the Sattvatas. 

51. Madhusudana (Krsna) thereafter duly married the 
<rirl Jambavati. Janardana got himself acquitted of the false 

accusation. „ , . r 

52 He who knows this story of the false accusation of 

Krsna and the subsequent acquittal will never be accused frau- 

dUle 5 n 3 tly A hundred sons were born to Satrajit from his ten wives 
who were sisters. Among them three were famous. Bhangakara 
was the eldest. The others were the heroic \ ratapati, and 

Apasvanta the beloved (Supriya). , , .... 

P 54 Bhangakara*s wife named Dvaravati had good children. 

She gave birth to three daughters endowed with beauty and 

^“t^bhimawas .he-mo* excellent of all ladies. She 
w as steadfast in performing holy rites and severe penances. The 

fa,h 5 C 6 5 T e The ,0 i.we?that Krspa (redeemed and) gave to 
Satrajit was worn by Babhru 

-Ub Satadhanva of the 

Bhoja family. <£ n tndhanva killed Bhadrakara 

58. Therefore <he ^uy Wh^v ^ ^ 

(? Bhangakara) at night. He stole tnejc 

to Akrura. took that ecm and entered 

59. Akra^api^P^^^ 8 ^ not be 

into an agreement (with Sata 

made known to anyone else by yon. ^ ^ ^ ym 

60. Should you be attacked b) Jv ~ my ... 

Undoubtedly the whole of Dv< 


742 


Vayu Pur ana 


61 When her father was killed, the grief-stricken Satya- 
bhama of great fame got into a chariot and went to Varana- 

Vat g2 Telling her husband about the (criminal) act of Sata- 
dhanvan of Bhoja family, the distressed (lady) Satyabhama 

stood near him and shed tears. 

63. After offering (obsequies such as) the water libations 

to the Pandavas who were (supposed to have been) burnt (in 
Varanavata), Hari (Kr?na) employed Satyaki to be on a par 
with his brothers (in performance of remaining rites). 

64. Hastening back to Dvaraka, the glorious slayer of 
Madhu spoke these words to his elder brother Balarama ( Haliti — 
one armed with ploughshare). 

65. “Prasena was killed by the lion, Satrajit was killed by 
Satadhanvan (all for the sake of the jewel, Syamantaka). I 
seek that Syamantaka (as the legal owner). O Lord, strike him. ; 

66 . Hence get into the chariot quickly. After killing the 
mighty Bhoja, O migiity-armed one, the Syamantaka will be 
ours.” 

67. Then a tumultuous fight ensued between Bhoja and 
Krsna. Satadhanva (i.c. Bhoja) could not sec Akrura anywhere 
round. 

68 . Both Bhoja and Janardana were on horseback (while 
fighting). Akrura did not wholeheartedly help him although he 
was competent and he could have done so.* 

69-72. Hence (Bhoja) became frightened and thought of 
running away. Bhoja’s mare was a divine one named Vijnata- 
hfdaya (that which understood the heart or mental feeling 
of the rider). She had a speed of a hundred Yojanas. It was 
seated on this mare that he fought with Kr§na. On his speedy 
mare Bhoja went a hundred Yojanas away. On seeing the quick 
motion of the chariot, Krsna harassed Satadhanvan. Then the 
mare became extremely exhausted. O Brahmanas, the vital airs 


*The line : iakto'pi sddhyad vardhakyan ndkruro * bhyupapadyata is obscure. 
Bd. P.V. 70 reads : 

iakto'pi Safhyad hdrdikyo nd'kruro'bhyupapadyata / 

‘Though he was competent to do so, Akrura, the Hardikya, did not do 
so through perfidy*. 



34.73-84 


743 


of the mare rose up into the sky (i.e. it died). Then Krsna 
spoke to Rama. 

73. “O mighty-armed one, stay here. The defects of the 
horses (mares) have been observed by me. I shall go on foot and 
bring away the excellent jewel Syamanlaka”. 

74. Going on foot alone, Acyuta, the knower of great mira¬ 
culous weapons, killed Satadhanvan, the king of Mithila. 

75. He could not see the Syamantaka (on his person) even 
after killing the mighty Bhoja. When Krsna returned, the bearer 
of ploughshare (i.e. Rama) asked him, “Give me the jewel”. 

76. “I don’t have it”, said Krsna. Then the infuriated 
Rama repeatedly cried “Fie upon you”, and spoke to Janar- 


dana. 

77. “I tolerate it (and excuse you) as you are my brother. 
Welfare unto you. I am going. I have nothing to do with 
Dvaraka nor with you nor with the Vrsnis.” 

78. Then Rama, the suppressor of enemies, entered Mithila. 
With all desirable presents, the king of Mithila himself wel¬ 


comed and honored him. 

79. In the meantime Babhru (Akrura), the foremost among 
the intelligent ones, performed unimpededly different kinds of 
Yajnas. 

80 The son of Gadhi, the king of great fame, adopted a 
coat of mail in the form of Diksa (initiation for sacrifices) for 
self-protection, in order to preserve the Syamantaka jewel. 

81. In the performance of these Yajnas (which continued) 

for a period of sixty years, he utilised (donated) vast wealth, 

excellent jewels and different kinds of materials. 

82. These Yajnas of that noble-souled (King) became 
famous by the name “Akrura Yajha”. Much food and wealth 
was given as Daksina. All of them fulfilled the cherished 

dCS1 83^ ° Thereafter lordly king Duryodhana went to Mithila 
and underwent divine training in mace fighting under Bala- 

W ’1r O Brahmapas, after a great deal of 

pleading (Balabhato), - fought ^ “^"ong with 
leading persons among \ r?nis 
the noble-souled Krsna, 


744 


Vayu Purana 


85 After killing Satrughna along with Bandhuman in battle 
AkrGra, the powerful leader of men, went away along wnh 

Mdhakas. excellent m en, Satrughna and Bandhuman, 

the sons of Bhangakara, the leader of Andhakas. They 
u h n nf Nara the daughter ofSvap kalka - The y were ver V 
. **?«■■ - 

Bh tfA s r he was apprehensive of a split amongst his kinsmen, 

< AWra >- * h ' d ' Pa " UrC ° f 
Akrura, Indra did not shower ram there. 

89 The whole land was oppressed by drought and 
was about to perish. Then Kukuras and Andhakas pacified and 

consoled Akrura. . „ 

90. When (Akrura), the lord (the most prominent) of 

charitably disposed persons, returned to Dvaravati, Indra 
showered everywhere, even within the ocean. 

91 In order to please Vasudeva Akrura, the glorious leader 

of Yadus, gave him his virgin sister of approved good con- 


duct. 

92. After knowing by means of his Yogic power that the 

Syamantaka jewel was with Babhru, Kysna Janardana said to 

Akrura in the open assembly. 

93. <c O honourable Lord, please hand over to me the jewel 
which has come into your possession. Please do nothing ignoble 
unto me. 

94. The anger raging in my heart for the last sixty years 
has become great and deep-rooted. A long time has elapsed 
by now.” 

95. Then at the instance of Krsna, Babhru, the highly in-* 
telligent one, handed over the jewel without any demur in the 
assembly of all the Sattvatas. 

96. The suppressor of enemies (Krsna) obtained the jewel 
from Babhru in a straightforward manner. With a delighted 
mind, he gave it back to Babhru again. 

97. The son of GandinI (i.e. Akrura) obtained Syamantaka, 
the excellent jewel handed over by Krsna. Wearing it (round 
his neck) he shone like the Sun. 


745 


34 . 98-112 


98. He who knows this story of the false accusation and the 
subsequent excellent clearance of the Lord will by no means 
become a victim of false accusation. 

99-100. From the youngest son Animitra (? Anamitra) of 
Vr?ni Sini was born. His son was Satyaka who was truthful in 
speech and endowed with truthful temperament. The son of 
Satyaka (Satyaki) was Yuyudhana and his son was Bhuti. 

101. Yugandhara was Bhuti’s son. Thus the descendants of 
Bhuti, the Bhautyas have been recounted. Ppsni had two sons, 


Svaphalka and Citraka. 

102. Wherever the pious-souled great king Svaphalka stay¬ 
ed, no sickness or fear of drought oppressed the people. 

103. O excellent Brahmanas, once Indra did not shower 
rain in the realm of the lord, king of KasI, for three years. 

104. He made the highly honoured Svaphalka stay there. 
Due to the presence of Svaphalka, Indra showered rain there. 

105. Svaphalka married the daughter of the king of KasI. 
She was a praise-worthy (uncensured) lady named Gandml. 
Everyday she gifted a cow to a Brahmana . 1 

106-108. It is said that she remained in the womb of her 
mother for many hundreds of years. She did not come out. 
The father said to her even as she was in the womb, “Be bom 
quickly. Welfare unto you. Wherefore do you stay there? 
Remaining in the womb itself the girl said, I shall be ben n 
if a cow is given everyday. O Father, do you desire it? me 
father said, “So be it” and fulfilled her desire. 

109. Akrura is remembered as her son. He was munificent, 
a performer of Yajnas, learned, heroic and fond of guests. 
Svaphalka himself was very liberal in giving Daksina. 

110-111. Svaphalka had other sons also—Upamangu, 
Mangu, Mrdura, Arimejaya, Giriraksa, Yaksa, _ Sat ™g h “ a > 
Arimardana, Dharmabhrt, Srstacaya, Vargamoca, Ava 
Prativaha. He had a beautiful daughter Vasudcva also. 

112. Akrura begot of UgrasenI two sons who delighted the 
family. They were Deva and Anupadcva. They were equal to 

Devas. 


1. A popular etymology of the name ‘Gandim’. 



Vayu Purdna 


746 

, were • Pj-thu, Viprthu, Asvagrlva, 
113 -114. Citrak; 1 s 50 na , Aristanemi, ASva, Suvarma, 
ASvabahu, ^ hhriAbhurni and Bahubhumi. Sravistha 
Varmabhrt, ^ ’ (daughters). 

andSravanawercthe tw 1 of) Ras! bore four sons 

115. The daughter ( ^ Samika and Balabharhis. 

to Satyaka, viz. Kak ^’ da>s J son . Vr§ti’s son was Kapotaroma 

116. Vrsti was iS ‘ aK 

and his son was Revala ' , , and a friend of Tumburu. He 

117. HU »« Vfdanodat.dundubhi.' 

is famous by the name d h i s son was Punarvasu. 

““.SS— a horse-sacrifice for 
The excellent man (K-i g) i> that saC rifice, while the rites 
the sake of a son. In the born in t h e middle of 

a sch0,ar ’ W 

^r^oL perfo^of V^ Ahuki ^ „ 

>*>• H r ha Xu. ones. They say ,ha. 

r'SJy) was aspeaker of untruth, non-performer 
rfYaai or^™' of thousands (as Daksipi). No one was 
unclean o, unrighteous. No one was -"loaded or emaciate. 

We have heard that Dhrti was the son of Ahuka. 

124-126. (Partially defective) With his white-livened 
retinue the king who was like Ahuka, marched towards the 
eastern’ direction displaying (accompanied by) one million 
and eighty youthful horses (cavalry). He surpassed Bhoja 
twentyiOne thousand elephants the ropes of which (elephants) 
were made of gold and silver (wires?). An equal number o 

thousands (of elephants) of Bhoja (were posted) in the north. 

(The bells of these elephants) made a tinkling sound. 


His 


1. AlHT, p. 150 records ‘Nandanodaka-dundubhi’ as his name, 

other name ‘Andhaka’ is not recorded there. _ f 

2. According to the genealogy on p. 105 of AlHT , Ahuka is the son o 

Punarvasu. 



34.127-140 


747 


127. Ahuka gave his sisterAhuki toAhukandha. Adaughter 
and two sons were born to Ahukandha*. 

128. The sons were Dcvaka and Ugrasena. Both of them 
were brilliant as if born of divine womb. Heroic sons compar¬ 
able to Devas were born to Dcvaka. 

129. They were Devanarhdeva, Sudeva and Devaranjita. 
Their sisters were seven whom he gave to Vasudeva. 

130-131. They (the sisters) were Vrkadeva, Upadeva, 
Devaraksita, Srldeva, Santideva, Mahadeva and DevakI who 
was the seventh. She was very beautiful to look at. Ugrasena 
had nine sons, the eldest of whom was Kamsa. 

132. The others were Nyagrodha, Sunama, Kadvasahku, 
Bhumaya, Sutanu, Rastrapala, Yuddhatusta and Supustiman. 

133. Their sisters were live: Karmavati, Dharmavati, 
Sataiiku, Rastrapala and the comely lady Kahva. 

134. Ugrasena, who was born of Kukura family and had a 
large number of children, was famous. 

A man remembering this race of Kukuras of unmeasured 
splendour shall make his own race vast and be endowed with 
children. 

135. Bhajamana’s sons were Rathimukhya, Viduratha 
Rajyadhideva, Sura and Vidura. 

136-138. The sons of Sura were more powerful. They were 
Vata, Nivata, Sonita, Svetavahana, Sami, Gadavarma, Nidata, 
Sakra and Sakrajit. Sami’s son was Pratjksipta and his son was 
Svayambhoja. Hrdika was born of Svayambhoja. Hpdika’s ten 
sons were all of terrible exploits. 

139-140. Krtavarma was the eldest and Satadhanva was 
the middle one. The other sons were Devarha (Dcvabahu in 
Bd. P.), Vanarha, Bhisak, Dvaitaratha, Sudanta, Dhiyanta, 
Nakavan and Kanakodbhava. A scholarly son Kamalabarhisa 
was born to Devarha. 

♦This seems to be a wrong statement. Ahuka gave his sister (to the 

prince of Avanti). Ahuka married princess of Kas'i. From her he had two 

sons Devakaand Ugrasena. Bd. P. 2.3.71.128 clearly states 
ahukat kaiya-duhitur doait putrau sambabhuoatu(i 

Vide AIHT, p. 105. 




Vdyu Purana 


748 

„„ Acamauias and the famous Susamaujas. 

141. His sons were Asamauj ^ in adoplion) to 

Krsna gave Sudamstia an born ( a jalapulrdya). Thus 

Asamaujas to whom no son 

Andhakas have been rccoun . who daily glorifies 

1 An There is no doubt in tms uu . , f 

r Andliakas rams an extensive race for himself. 

01 begot Devamanuji of Asmaki. Sura begot of 

p'i ft he son) Dcvami<Jhusa. 

MasI (Mansi in • •) ^ b ^ n of Bhasi (Marisi in Bd. 

144. Ten m (• • , ^ura. The mighty-armed Vasudeva 

P.), the daughter o wja ..’ known as Anakadundubhi. 

Wa \ 4 tu“o„ ashewasborn, DunMHi (divine drum) 

,1 A loud sound of anakas (military drums) 

ru^».-en A^showcrofflowe^felliu the house 

oflsra. In the entire human world there was no one equal to 

him in handsome features.- 

147 149 The fame of Vasudeva who was lorcmost of men, 
was as' brilliant as that of the moon. The other sons were 
Devabhaga, Devasravas, Anadrsti, Kad*, Nandana, Bhrujma 
Syama, Samlka, and Gandusa. Four daughters, all excellent 
ladies, were also born, viz. Prtha, Srutaveda SrutakirU and 
Srutasrava. There was another (daughter) Rajadhidevi. All 
these five became mothers of heroic sons. 

150-15!. Kunti of Bhoja family adopted Prtha as his 
daughter. Pandu married her. Sura had given her in adoption 
to the aged Kuntibhoja as he had no child. Hence Prtha be¬ 
came known as Kunti and daughter of Kuntibhoja. Pandu the 
chief of Kurus, a great hero, took her as wife from him. 

152. Prtha gave birth to three sons who were brilliant 
like fire. They were heroes with none to match them in the 
whole world. They were equal to Indra in exploit. 


1. Sucandra and Vasurupa according to Bd.P. v. 143. 

2. Vasudeva's unparallcded handsomeness is recorded in Jaina works 
also. According to Jaina records Vasudeva was banished by his father, as 
complaints were lodged to him by citizens of Mathura about the seductive 
effect of his beauty on their women. A Prakrit work called Vasitdeva-Hi$d 1 
{circa A.D. 600) makes Vasudeva a hero whose wanderings were a marriage 
campaign. The work, however, is a Prakrit version of Gunadhya’s Paisaci 
Brhat-Katha , though here the hero is Vasudeva instead of Naravahanadalta. 



34.153-171 


749 


153. Prtha gave birth to Yudhisthira from Dharma, to 
Ultima (Vrkodara) from Maruta and to Arjuna (Dhanahjaya) 
from Indra. 

154. It is well-known that Nakula and Sahadeva were 
bom of Madravatl. Both of them were endowed with hand¬ 
some features and inherent strength and good qualities. 

155. The powerful and heroic lord of Karusa named 
Dantavaktra was born of Srutadevaas the son of Vrddhasarman. 

156-158. Santardana was born of Srutaklrti, the wife of 
the prince of Kekaya. Cekitana and Brhatksatra were the 
other two mighty (sons). Brothers Vinda and Anuvinda who 
were very powerful, were born of the king of Avanti (?) as 
sons of Rajadhidevl. 

The king of Cedi 1 , Sisupala, was born of Srutarava as the 
son of the saintly king Damaghosa. His manliness is well known. 
He was formerly the ten-necked (Ravana), the slayer of enemies. 

159-161. Yadusrava and Rujakanya were his younger 
brothers. Vasudeva had thirteen excellent ladies as wives. Of 
them Pauravi, RohinI, Madira, Apara, Bhadra, Vaisakhi and 
DevakI the seventh (were the chief queens). Two lady attendants 
Sugandhi and Vanaraji and two others (also were married to 
him). Rbhinl and Pauravi were the daughters of Valmlka. 2 

162-163. The blessed lady, the eldest wife of Anakadundu- 
bhi, RohinI gave birth to eight children. The eldest son was 
Rama. The others were Sarana, Nisava, Durdama, Damana, 
Subhra, Pindaraka and Kusltaka. She had a daughter named 
Citra. 

164-165. His grandsons born to Rama were famous as 
Nisila and Utsuka. Rama had other sons as well: Parsvl, 
Parsvanandl, Sisu, Satyadhrti, Mandabahya, Ramana, Girika, 
Gira, Suklagulma, Gulma and Daridrantaka. 

166-171. Sarana had five daughters who were bom prior 
to these. They were Arcismati, Sunanda, Surasa, Suvaca and 
Satabala. The following are remembered as the sons and 
grandsons of RohinI : Bhadrasva, Bhadragupti, Bhadra- 

1. Bundelkhan<Ja and the adjacent territory from former Central Pro¬ 
vinces (now the whole of Cedi is included in new Madhya Pra es 

2. ‘Younger sisters of Bahlika* as per Bd. P.V.163. 



750 


Vayu Purana 


vighna, Bhadrabahu, Bhadraratha, Bhadrakalpa Suparsvaka, 
Stinin, Rohitaiva, Bhadraja, Durmada and Abhibhuta. 

The sons and daughters of Madirawere : Nanda Upananda 
Mitra, Kuksimitra, Acala, Sthita (?), Pusti and Sudeva (sons) 
and Citraand Upacitra (daughters). 

Upabimba, Birhba, Sattvadanta and Mahaujas, these four 
were the powerful and famous sons of Bhadra. 

172-173. Sauri (i.e. Vasudeva) begot the excellent son 
KauSika ofVai&khi. He begot six sons of Devaki. They were: 
Susena, Klrtiman, Tadaya (Udars! in Bd.P.), fhadrasena 
Yajudaya the fifth, and Bhadravit the sixth. Kamsa killed all of 

them. 

174. Under these circumstances Visnu, the lord of the 
worlds, lord of the subjects, was born as the long-lived Krsna. 


175. After him was born Subhadra who used to speak 
pleasantly. She was otherwise known as Kr§na. This girl of the 
family of Vrsnis named Subhadra became famous as Krsna. 

176. The heroic Abhimanyu was born of Subhadra and 
Partha (Arjuna). Listen and understand the names of the 
other heroic sons born of Vasudeva and his seven highly for¬ 
tunate wives. 


177-178. The heroic son Bhayasakha was born of Sahadeva. 
Sarhgadeva gave birth to Tambu. Sauri (thus) begot a son 
who made the family flourish. Four more sons of his, viz, 
Upasanga, Vasu, Deva and Raksita were killed by Kamsa. Thus 
he had ten sons. Kamsa killed all of them. 

179. Upadeva gave birth to all these blessed sons : 
Vijaya, Rocana and Vardhamana. (Bd. P adds : Devala.) 

180. Vrkadevi gave birth to noble-souled Svagahava. 
(This lady was known by these names as well) Agahl, Svasa, 
Sisirayini and Surupa. 

181. Devaki of beautiful nose gave birth to Bhu (Srl- 
krsna?) as her seventh son. (Afterwards) she gave birth to the 
blessed Gavcsana, who could fight in battle in wonderfully 
diverse ways. 


182. Sauri (Vasudeva) begot of Saibya the immutable 
(economical ?) son (Kausika alias Sraddhadeva) who formerly 


34.183-192 


751 


implanted a forest 1 , O Brahmanas. 

183. Sugandhi and Vanarajl (the servant-maids mentioned 
before) were also the wives of Sauri. Pundra and Kapila were 
Vasudeva’s sons bom of Sugandhi (Bd.P.v. 186). Of themPundra 
became a king and Kapila went to the forest. 

184. Of the other lady (Vanarajl) Vasudeva had another 
powerful son who was a foremost wielder of bow. He was a 
king called Nisada. 

185. Mahabhaga was the famous son of Devarata. They 
call the son born of Devasravas as one honoured by scholars. 

186. Nivarta begot of Asmaki the sons Anadrsti of great 
fame, Sraddhadeva of great strength and Sakrasatrughna. 

187. (Defective verse) 2 Sradhadeva was well known as 
the founder of Nisadha (Nisada) (?) kingdom. Ekalavya of 
great prowess was nurtured and brought up by Nisadas (hunting 
tribes). 

188. With pleasure Krsna gave his sons Carude§na and 
Samba who had all praiseworthy characteristics and who had 
learned the use of miraculous weapons, to Gantjusa who was 
childless. 

189. Tantija and Tantimala were Kanaka’s own sons. 
Vasudeva of great exploit gave them to Vastavani who had no 
child. Sauti gave his heroic sons Sauri and Kausika to him. 

190. (Other members of this family were) Tapas, Krod- 
hanu, Virajas, Syama and Srnjima. Syama was childless and he 
went to the forest. He contemptuously treated his status as a 
member of the Bhoja clan. He secured the status of a Rajarsi 
(a royal sage). 

191. He who reads this story ofKrsna’s birth after regu¬ 
larly observing rites, and also narrates it to Brahmanas shall 
attain great happiness. 

192. Lord Narayana of great splendour, lord of Dcvas, 
the lord of subjects (Prajapati) was formerly born among men 
out of sportfulness. 


1. Reading in A adopted. 

2. Bd.P.v. 190 gives a better reading and means; ‘Ekalavya, the 
highly lucky son was born to Sraddhadeva. He was brought up by Nisadas 
(a forest tribe) and so he was well known as Nai§adi. 






752 


Vayu Purana 


,qo ^ ]otus-eycd loed was bom or Dcvaki and Vasudeva, 
193 . ine r t. should be known that lie had divine 
eheufa ,0 the,- with g , ory . 

•T^E«X becoming .he son of Adi,i (DevaU). the 
deliver (or scion, of the Yadava elan JKrml - «"*« 
j vUnu the younger brother oflnd 

^ 195 Though Narayana took birth, he is still Avyaya (the 

unchanging). The Lord Narayana is still eternal even after be- 

C ° m m ^It was he who created the primordial being Prajapati 
formerly. Even after becoming the son of Aditi ^evaki) the 
delighter (or scion) of the Yadava clan (Ki'sna) is well known 
as god Visnu, the younger brother of Indra 

g ,„ 7 j, w as he who blessed Adiu will, h.s grace and was 
bom as her son for the purpose or.laying Daityas. Danavas and 

Raksasas, the enemies of Suras. _ . r . 

198 The family of the intelligent Vasudeva, born of the 
race of Yayati, became certainly meritorious and holy because 
Lord Narayana resorted to it. 

199. While Janardana was being born, the oceans tiernbl- 
ed, the mountains shook and the sacrificial fires blazed. 

’ 200. While Janardana was born, the winds blew auspici¬ 
ously. All dust subsided. All the luminaries shone more brilli¬ 
antly. 

201. The astcrism on ihc day when Janardana was boin 
was Abhijit by name. The night was called Jayanti (the 8th of 
the dark half of Sravana with the constellation Rohini rising at 
midnight). And the Muhurta (the specific period at the lime 
of his birth) was Vijaya by name. 

202. The unmanifest, eternal Lord Hari, Narayana, Krsna 
fascinated the people with his eyes as lie was born. 

203. The lord of Dcvas (Indra) showered flowers from 
the firmament. Eulogising Madhusudana (Krsna) with auspi¬ 
cious words thousands of great sages and Gandharvas offered 
prayer unto him. 

204. Vasudeva saw lord Adhoksaja (whose form is beyond 
the ken of the physical sense-organs) born at night as his son 
endowed with the characteristic curl of hair called Srivatsa and 
accompanied by various divine signs in heaven. 


34 . 205-215 


753 


Vasudcva thereafter requested: “O lord, withdraw your form. 

205. I say this, O dear one, as I am very much afraid of 
Kaiiisa. My sons, your elder brothers, were very wonderful in 
appearance but were killed by him”. 

206 . On hearing the words of Vasudeva, the lord withdrew 
his form. Permitted by him (the lord), the father took him to 
the abode of Nandagopa. Abiding by the suggestion of Ugra- 
sena, 1 he gave (the child) to Yasoda then. 

207. Yasoda and Dcvaki had been pregnant simultane¬ 
ously. Yasoda was the wife of Nandagopa, the Lord of (herd of) 
cows. 

208. Yasoda had given birth to a daughter in the same 
night as Krsna was born as the lord of the race of Vj-sni. 

209. Protecting the son born to him, Vasudeva of great 
fame, handed him over to Yasoda and took the daughter with 
him. 

210. Handing him over to Nandagopa, (Vasudeva) spoke, 
“Save me. This (adopted) son of your shall be the bestower 
of ali happiness to Yadavas. This is that (long expected) 
child of Dcvaki. He shall put an end to all our pain and misery.” 

211. Anakadundubhi took that girl to the son of Ugrascna 
(i.c. Kaihsa) and informed him: '‘This is the girl of auspicious 
characteristics”. 

212 . Karnsa had not known (till then) that a child had 
been born lo his sister. The wicked-minded one became de¬ 
lighted and spared that girl. 

213. The foolish one muttered within himself: “If it is a 
girl she is already slain 1” That daughter grew up well respected 
in thcabodc ofVrstds. 

214-215: (Defective) Just as gods bring up gods'-, they 
protected her like a son. They said that a daughter had been 


Bd. P.v. 212 reads "gopa 


1. *iigrasena-mate 1 in the text is confusing. 

(who was staying) in the house of Ugrascna . 

2 The text 'Putravat paripalyanto dead devan yathd /* translated above .s 
irrelevant to the context. It gives cogent sense if emended as m Bd. P. 2.3-72, 
220, as follows : 

putravat pdlaydmase devi dtvim tnuda tadd 

‘Then the goddess (Devaki) gladly brought up the goddess (Ekadasa) 
like (her own) son.’ 





754 


Vdju Purana 


duly born: “(Goddess) Ekadasa is born for the protection of 
Keiava. With delighted minds all the Yadavas will worship her. 
Krsna, the lord of Devas, of divine physical form is well protected 
by her.” 

The Sages said : 

216. Why did Kamsa, the king of the Bhoja family, kill the 
sons of Vasudeva even when they were (mere) infants? It be¬ 
hoves you to explain this to us. 

Silta said: 

217-218. Listen why the foolish Kamsa killed the infant 
sons of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva) immediately after their 
birth. (I shall explain) how, out of fear, the mighty-armed 
Krsna was taken elsewhere immediately after birth and how 
Govinda, (though) the supreme person was brought up among 
the cows. 

219. It is reported that Kamsa, then the crown prince, 
acted as a charioteer of the self-possessed Vasudeva along with 
Devaki (in their marriage). 

220. Then there arose in the sky a divine voice of some 
incomprehensible person. It was distinctly loud and clear and 
was witnessed by all people. Thereby Kamsa remained panicky 
perpetually (throughout his life). 

221. “O Kamsa, the seventh (?) child of this lady whom 
you drive in your chariot out of affection, will be the cause of 
your death.” 

222. On hearing that (aerial) voice, the foolish Kariisa 
became distressed. Unsheathing his sword, he evinced his desire 
to kill her. 

223. The mighty-armed and valorous Vasudeva spoke to 
Kamsa, the son of Ugrasena, out of friendliness and affection. 

224-228, “It does not behove anyKsatriya to kill a woman 
at any time. O scion of the family of Yadus, I have seen a way 
out in this matter. O King, I shall hand over to you the 
seventh child that will be born of her. You may do whatever 
you deem fit then. Even now, O liberal one in giving Daksina, 



34.229-235 


755 


you can do as you wish 1 . I shall (even) promise that I will give 
you all her childern. O excellent man, this promise will never 
be falsified”. Thus implored and propitiated Kariisa (agreed to 
the proposal of) seizing all the children, Vasudeva rejoiced in 
having got back his wife (alive). So Kamsa, the foolish man of 
sinful deeds, went on killing the sons (one after the other). 

The Sages said : 

229. Who is this Vasudeva who begot Visnu ? Who is this 
Devaki, the lady of fame, who gave birth to Vi§nu? Who is 
this Nandagopa and who is this famous lady Yasoda whobrought 
him up? 

Sul a said : 

230. All the men (of the Yadu race) were the incarnations 
of Kasyapa and all the women of Aditi 2 . The mighty-armed 
lord (thus) fulfilled the desires of Devaki. 

231. The lord entered a human body and moved about on 
the earth. By means of his Yogic Maya the Yogic-souled lord 
infatuated all living beings. 

232. When Dharma declined, Visnu himself incarnated in 
the race of Vrsnis in order to reestablish Dharma and to annihi¬ 
late Asuras. 

233-234. He married the girl RukminI, Satya the daughter 
ofNagnajit, Satyabhama the daughter of Satrajit, Jambavatl, 
Rohini, Saibya, SudevI, Madri, Suslla, Kalindl, Mitravinda, 
Lak§mana, JalavasinI and others. 

235. Thus he had sixteen thousand wives. After consult¬ 
ing Devas, Sakra had sent down to the earth the most 


1. The words tvam tvidanim in the text are absurd as they would mean free 
pei mission to Kariisa to kill Devaki. They need emendation as natvidamm , as 
in Bd.P. ibid v. 233. It means “Do not behave now in the way you wish”. 
Vasudeva wanted to save DevakPs life and hence requested Kariisa not to 
kill her. 

2. This is a strange statement. Bd.P. v. 238 states that Vasudeva and 
Devaki were Kasyapa and Aditi in their former life. Our text oes not 
answer who was Nandagopa and Yasoda but Bd.P.v. 239 informs t at 
Nanda was a Vasu called Drona and Yasoda, his wife Dhara. Bh. P. 
X.8.48.51 confirm it. 



Vayn Pur aria 
756 

excellent ones among the celestial damsels of whom it is said 

there arc fourteen groups. 

236 In order to become the wives of Vasudeva, they, 
were born in royal palaces. These were the blessed ladies 
famous as Visvaksena’s wives. 

237-240. Pradyumna, Carudcsna, Sudcsna, Sarabha, Ca.ru, 
Carubhadra, Bhadracaru, and Caruvindhya were the sons ot 
Rukmini. She had a daughter Carumall. 

Sanii, Bhanu, Aksa, Rohita, Mantraya, Jarandhaka, Tamra- 
vaksas, Bhaumari and Jarandhama were the sons of the Garuda- 
bannered lord (Krsna) and Satyabhama. They had four sisters, 
viz. Bhanu, Bhaumarika. Tamraparni and Jarandhama. 

Now listen to the children of Jambavatl. 

241. Bhadra, Bhadragupta, Bhadravindra and the famous 

Saptabahu were the sons; Bhadravati and the famous Sambo- 
dhaniwerc the daughters. These should be known as Jamba vati’s 
children. 

242. Sangramajit, Satajit, and Sahasrajit are glorified as 
the sons of Sudcvi and Visvakscna (i.c. Kr?na). 

243. ' Vrka, Vrkasva, Vfkajit, Mitrabahu and Sunltha were 
the sons. Vrjinl and Surangana 1 were the daughters. These 
are the children of the daughter of Nagnajit (i.e. Satya). 

244. Thus know that he had thousands of sons. (Some say) 
that Vasudeva had hundred thousands of sons. 

245. Ten thousand and eight of them (or eighty thousand 
of them) were heroic and experts in battle. The family of 
Janardana has been recounted to you factually. 

246. Brhatl (known also as) Nartakonncyl was united (in 
wedlock) with Sunaya. She was the daughter of Brhaduklha 
(he rioble-soulcd scion of the family of Suni (Sauneya). 

247. Her sons were three in number. They were well known 
as shining splendidly in war, viz. Augada, Kumuda and Sveta. 
She had a daughter too named Sveta. 

248. Avagaha 2 , Citra and the heroic Citravara (were 


1. The reading varaiit’ana in Bd.P. v. 252 implies that excellently 
beautiful Vrjini was the only daughter of Satya. 

2. Bd. P.v. 237 reads Avagahasya and implies Citra, Sura and Citravara 
as his sons. 



34.249-257 


757 


famous members of the Vrsni race). Citravaras son was Citrasena 
and his daughter was Citravatl. 

249. Tumba and Tumbabana were the two sons of Janas- 
tamba. Vajrara and Ksipra are remembered to be the sons of 
Upanga. 

250. Bhurlndrasena and Bhuri were the two sons of Gavesa. 
Yudhisthira’s daughter Sutanu was well-known. 

251. The famous son of Asva named Vajra was born of her. 
Vajra’s son was Pratibahu and Sucaru was his son. 

252. Kasma (Princess of Kasi—Bd.P.) gave birth to the 
son Suparsva and Samba to Tarasvin. The sons of the noble- 
soul ed Yadavas were three crores. 

253. Six million of them were extremely valorous and very 
strong. All these men of great prowess were born of the parts 
of Devas. 

254. They were born in the family of Yadavas in order 
to exterminate the Asuras of great penance who had been 
born among human beings in this world and were harassing 
them. These Asuras had been killed in the battles between 
Devas and Asuras. 

255. There were eleven distinct families of the noble-souled 
Yadavas. But in the family of Visnu (i.e. Krsna) all of them 
merged as though into one family. 

256. Visnu was their authority and the leader for them. 
All of them, all human beings*, obeyed his behests and aoided 
by his directions. 

257. Thus the progeny of Vrsnis has been glorified 
succinctly and in details. The glorification of these bestows fame 
and fulfilment of cherished desires. 


•The text is a bit obscure. If 'uwnOmW in the 2nd line is e.ncndcd 1 as 

‘suras and human bcin 0 s aic 


* sura-mdnusdh 1 (as in Bd. P.v. 262) it means ^ 

bound by those who abide by his (Krsna’s) behests 



758 


Vayu Purana 


CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 1 

Wars between Suras and Asuras: Bhrgu curses Visnu: 

The Eulogy of Sambhu by oukra 

1-3. Understand the Devas who had assumed human 
nature and born as they are being glorified. 

Samkarsana, Vasudeva, Pradyumna, Samba andAniruddha— 
these five are glorified as the race 2 (of Vrsnis). 

The Seven Sages, Kubera, the Yaksa Manivara, Salaki, 
Badara, the scholarly Dhanvantari, Nandin Mahadeva (?), 
Salankayana, Jisnu (Visnu in Bd. P.), the primordial god 
along with these divine beings (are being narrated). 

The Sages said : 

4. Why did Visnu incarnate? How many incarnations are 
remembred? How many are the future manifestations of the 
great soul? 

5. Why is he born in Brahmana and Ksatriya families at the 
closing periods of the Yugas? Why does he incarnate again 
and again among human beings ? Please explain it to us who 
(being curious to know) enquire of you. 

6. We wish to hear completely and in detail all the acti¬ 
vities of the intelligent Krsna, the slayer of enemies in different 
bodies (incarnations). 

7. O Suta, O holy lord, it behoves you to narrate in the 
proper order his various activities, the different manifestations 
as well as his nature to us. 

8. How did that lord Visnu (well-renowned) among 
Suras as the slayer of their enemies, adopt the state of being 
the son of Vasudeva, in his family? 

9. O Suta, what (special) meritorious act was performed 
by the deathless Devas who invariably perform meritorious 
deeds, as a result of which (the lord) left the region of Devas 
and came over to the world of mortals? 


1. This chapter corresponds to Bd. P. 2.3.72; the references are to 
the verse numbers of that chapter. 

2. The list shows the influence of Pancaratra school in that period. 



35.10-20 


759 


10. Why did the leader of Devas and human beings, 
Hari, the source of origin of the worlds Bhuh and Bhuvah, 
install his divine soul in a human womb? 

11. It is he who makes the mental cycles of human beings 
revolve and function. He is the foremost among the wielders of 
discus. Why did he decide to be born among human beings? 

12. It is he who affords protection to all the worlds and 
the whole universe. Why did that lord Visnu descend to the 
earth and emulate (an ordinary) cowherd? 

13. He is the Atman of all living beings. He has created 
and sustained all the great Bhutas (elements). He is the 
Srigarbha (having glory and splendour, Sri, within him). How 
was he retained in the womb by a woman of the earth? 

14. It was he who measured the three worlds in three 
paces at the request of Devas. It was by him that the three 
paths of the worlds consisting of the three Vargas (i.e. Dharma, 
Kama and Artha?) were laid down. 

15. At the time of dissolution of the universe he assumed 
the form consisting of waters and drank up the whole universe. 
He made the whole world a vast sheet of water through the 
visible and invisible paths. 

16. In the Puranas he is (eulogised as) Puranalma (the 
ancient soul). He assumed the physical form of a Boar. 
He is the most excellent of Suras who redeemed the earth 
and gave it over to Suras. 

17. Hiranyakasipu, a demon of yore, who possessed great 
prowess, had been killed by him assuming a leonine body 
divided into two (as half man, half lion). 

18. Formerly, the omnipresent lord became the Aurva fire 
(also called) the Samvartaka fire (fire of dissolution), and 
stationed himself in the nether worlds within the ocean. He 
drank Havis (sacrificial offerings) in the form of water. 

19. It is he whom they (the sages) call in every Yuga as 
the lord with a thousand feet, thousand rays, the lord having 
thousands (of forms), and thousand heads. 

20. When the whole world was a vast sheet of water, the 
abode of god Brahma (Pitamaha) came out of his navel even 
as fire comes out of Arani. It (the abode) was a Pankaja(a lotus, 


760 


Vayu Purina 


but literally ‘one bom of mud’) but it was not born of any 

21 It was by him that Daityas were killed in the 
Tarakamaya battle 1 after adopting a body consisting of all (the 
spirits of) Devas and holding all weapons. 

22. The haughty Kalanemi was defeated and struck down 
by him (the lord) seated on the back of Garuda. 

' Resorting to his eternal Yogic power and enveloping (every¬ 
thing in dense darkness, he reclines (on his serpent couch) on 

the northern part of the ocean of milk, the ocean that yielded 

nectar. He (wards off) the great darkness (of ignorance). 

23. (Defective verse) Thanks to the intensity of her penance, 
formerly Aditi ratained him in her womb like Arani (holding 
fire within it). When Indra was surrounded by the hosts of 
Daityas, it was he who saved him by contemptuously warding 
them off from the womb? 

24. When the Wind-god 2 (?) deprived (Daityas) 
of their hold (from all positions) in the world and made 
Daityas remain sub-merged in waters, the primordial Lord 
made Devas the resident of heaven and made Indra (Puru- 
huta) the Lord of Devas. 

25-26. It was the same Adideva 3 who laid down the process 
of preparing the Ahavanlya fire by means of Garhapatya and 
Anvaharya rites. He created the altar, the Kusa grass, the 
proksaniyaSruva (the sacrificial ladle with which the offering is 
taken or holy water sprinkled) and the materials for Aval hr! ha 
(the final ablution). He laid down the rules of selecting the 
three persons 4 (?) entitled to offer Havya in a sacrifice. 

27. He made Suras the partakers of Havyas and 
Pitfs the partakers of Kavyas. In order to enjoy (him- 


1. The battle that ensued after the abduction of Tara by Soma. 

2. Puranas do not attribute this feat to the Wind-god. Bd. P. 2-3.72.23 
reads padaniyo for yada’nilo hereof. Bd. P. reading means ‘He made the 
regions of world as the abodes of the people’. 

3. Verses 25-29 give to Visnu the credit of founding the institution 
of sacrifice. 

4. The reading 'alha trxn iha yakakre (translated here as ‘selecting three 
persons’) is wrong. Bd. P. 2.3.72.26 reads atharsin Scaivayafcakre ‘then he 
created sages’ (for participation in sacrifices). 



35.28-36 


761 


self) by the sacrificial procedure, he himself became Yajfia, in 
the sacrificial rite. 

28-29. By dint of his supreme power, he created and made 
resplendent the requisite material for sacrifices such as Yupas 
(sacrificial posts), Samits (holy twigs), Sruva (sacred ladles), 
Soma (the creeper or its juice called soma), Pavitra (the special 
holy ring of Kusa grass), Paridhi (the holy twigs of Palasa etc. 
laid round the sacrificial fire), the sacrificial fires, sadasyas 
(members of the sacrificial assembly), Yajamana (the performers 
of sacrifices) and excellent sacrifices like horse sacrifice and 
others. 

30-31. After creating the three worlds in order in accor¬ 
dance with the Yugas, he made all- the following things: 
(Measures of Time such as) Ksanas (moments), Nimesas , 
Kdsfhas , Kalds , and all the three periods of time (past, present, 
and future), periods of time such as Muhurtas (periods of 48 
minutes each), Tithis (days of the.lunar fortnight), months, days, 
years, seasons, various specific yogas of time, the three kinds of 
Prarnanas (means of valid knowledge) etc. 

32-34. He created the span of life, Ksetras (?fields), increase, 
characteristics, beauty of form, intellect, wealth, heroism, the 
ability to comprehend the sacred lore, the three castes, the 
three Vidyds (Lores), the three fires, the three periods of time, 
the* three rites, the three Mayas* and the three Gunas (Sattva, 
Rajas and Tamas). It was by his infinite power (of creation) 
that he created the worlds, gods. All the Bhutas and Ganas 
were created by him who is the Atman (soul) of them all (living 
beings and Bhuta Ganas). 

35. He sports in the sense-organs of men by means of his 
Yogic power. He is the lord of diverse things. He is present 
everywhere. He is the leader of arrivals and departures {Gala 
and Agata) i.e. all sorts of movements. 

36. He is the goal unto those endowed with piety and 
virtue and is inaccessible to those of sinful deeds. He is the 
source of origin of the system of four castes and protector of the 

same. 

* Probably Malms ‘units of time’ as in Bd. P. 2.3.72.32, 



762 


Vayu Pur ana 


,738 He is the knower of the four Vidyas, viz. Amtkpkt, 
fi rm and DmirnHi, and the supporter o! .he four Al,a,ms 
JZL of life). He is the apace between quarters, the sky, the 
X, the walers, ,lie fire, the wind, the quarters, the two 1„. 
“ina te, the sun and the moon. He .s the lord of the Yogas 
“ d the night wanderers (Rakjasa?). In the Vedas he .s spoken 

of as the great lord and as the great penance. 

39 It is he who is greater than penance; they call him 
the supreme one, the possessor of the great soul. He ts the lord, 
first among the Adityas (sons of Aditt). He ts the lord, the 

destroyer of the Dai tyas. . . t_t 

40 At the close of the Yugas, he is the anmh.lator He 
is the slayer of the destroyers of the worlds. He ts the bridge 

(or the boundary) of all the boundaries of the worlds. He is 

the purest among all those of pure rites. 

41. He is the Vedya (one who should be known) for the 
Vedic scholars; he is the lord of all powerful persons. He is the 
Soma to all living beings; he is the Agni (Fire-god) for those 
of fiery splendour. 

42. He is the mind of men; he is the penance of the asce¬ 
tics; he is the modesty of those satisfied with good policy and 
he is the splendour of the refulgent. 

43-44. He is the Vigraha (body) 'of all embodied beings. 
He is the goal of those who achieve their goal 1 . 

Vayu is born of Akasa (Ether). Hutasana (Fire) has Vayu 
as its vital essence. Devas have their vital essence in fire and 
Madhusudana (Krsna) is the vital essence of Agni. 


Rasa (the lymphatic juice) becomes blood; flesh is deve¬ 
loped out of blood. 2 

45-47. From flesh fat is produced and bone is developed 
from fat. Pith and marrow are developed from bone and 
semen virile is generated from marrow; foetus is developed 
from semen through the assimilative activity of Rasa —bodily 
fluid (or through the activity rooted in sexual pleasure). At 


1. Or : He is the velocity of those which are in motion. 

2. Verses 44b-57 deal with embryology with special emphasis on Visnu’s 
power. 




35.48-57 


763 


first it is in fluid state. This is called the Saumya Rati. It 
is called the second Rasi when it is heated by the warmth 
(temperature) in the womb. Semcnshould be known asof the 
nature of Soma (Moon) and menstrual blood as of the nature 
of fire. 

48. These two secretions (evolutes) follow Rasa (lympha¬ 
tic juice). In semen (the mixture of semen and menstrual 
blood) there are Soma (Moon) and fire. Semen comes under 
the category of Kapha (phlegmatic humour) and menstrual 
blood comes under the category of Pitta (bilious humour). 

49. The receptacle of Kapha is heart. Pitta is held in 
navel. Heart in the centre of body is the place of mind. 

50. Lord Hutasana (Fire) is stationed in the umbilical 
cavity. Mind should be known as Prajapati (Brahma) and 
Kapha is considered as Soma (Moon). 

51. Pitta is considered as fire. Hence the universe consists 
of Agni and Soma. The foetus thus originating stays there like 
a patch of cloud. 

52. Vayu enters and becomes united with the great soul. 
It is divided into five within the body and develops (the 
foetus). 

53. The five divisions are Prana , Apana , Samdna , Udana and 
Vyana , Among them Prana moves round and develops the 
great soul. 

54. Apana m is situated in the lower half of the body. Udana 
circulates in the upper half of the body. Vyana is called so 
because it pervades the whole body. Samdna is present in all 
the joints. 

55. Thereafter, the five elements, viz. Earth, Wind, 
Ether, Water and Fire the fifth one, are attained by the foetus. 
Then it becomes perceivable by the sense-organs. 

56. All the sense-organs enter into that (foetus) and per¬ 
form their respective functions. They call it then the earthly 
(physical) body and the wind is called Pranatman (having the 
characteristic form of Prana, the vital air). 

57. The pores of the body have Ether as the source of 
their origin. It is from the element water that the liquid form- 


764 


Vdyu Purana 


. t, n ,\ exudation) in the body take place. The fiery clement 

a „o„ (ami form of moonlight (?) T1,C groups of 


enters the eyes in 


objects function due to his prowess. 


The Sages enquired: 

58 How did Visnu, the Purusa who creates all these and 
all the worlds, attam i.uman state in the mortal world? 

59 O intelligent one, this is our doubt. Our wonder is 
excessive. He is the ultimate goal of those who attain their goal 
(Moksa) How did he come to assume the human body? 

V 60 We wish to hear about the very wonderful exploits of 
Visnu in the proper order. Visnu is described to be so by the 
Vedas and Devas. 

61. O highly intelligent one, please tell us the story of 
the wonderful nativity of Visnu. May the wonderful and pleasing 
narrative be recounted. 

62. The manifestations of the noble soul of reputed strength 
and prowess are wonderful. The inherent power of Visnu who 
has become miraculous on account of his wonderful deeds be 
please narrated. 


Suta said : 

63. I shall glorify the manifestation of the noble soul, how 
that lord of great penance was born among human beings. 

64. His incarnations in the human world as a result of 
Bhrgu’s curse were seventyseven in number*. He incarnates at 
the closing periods of the Yugas for realising the purpose of 
Devas. 

65-66. Listen and understand (the details of) the divine 
personality of Visnu, as I recount it. When the Yuga-Dharma 
(practice of Dharma —virtue—peculiar to a Yuga) gets rever¬ 
sed and declined and the time becomes slack and inactive, the 
Lord incarnates in order to stabilise righteousness (Dharma) 
in human beings. (These incarnations are) due to the curse of 


*The text sapta-sapla-tapah prokta is not supported in the subsequent 
narrative. Bd. P. 2.3.72.63 reads bhfgu-slri*vadha-dofetia ‘due to his (Visnu’s) 
fault of killing (sage) Bhfgu’s wife*. As the episode is given in the following 
verse the reading deserves adoption. 



35.67-74 


765 


Bhrgu brought about by (the mutual struggle between) 
Devas and Asuras. 

The Sages enquired : 

67. How can he incarnate as a result of the mutual 
struggle between Devas and Asuras? We wish to know this, 
How did the mutual clash between Devas and Asuras take 
place? 

Suta replied : 

68 . Listen and understand even as I narrate it, the clash 
between Devas and Asuras in the manner it has taken place. 

Formerly, Hiranyakasipu, a Daitya, ruled over the three 
worlds. 1 

69. Thereafter the suzerainty over the three worlds was 
hereditarily established by Bali. There was great friendship 
between Devas and Asuras. 

70. For ten Yugas all the inhabitants of the universe mixed 
together without any interruption. Both Devas and Asuras 
abided by the directions of those two (Daityas). 

71. (Later on) a terrible, violent dispute arose between 
Devas and Asuras. It caused horrible devastation to both of 
them. 

72. Many battles were fought between them for their 
respective share in the patrimony. 2 It is remembered that in 
this Varaha Kalpa twelve battles ending with the participation 
of Sanqlamarka (took place). 

73. Listen to them even as I am recounting them succinctly 
by their names. The first war is called Narasimha (that 
caused by the Man-Lion). The second was Vamana the act of 
the Dwarf (incarnation of Visnu.) 

74. The third war is'Varaha (that of the Boar incarnation); 
the fourth was at the time of the churning of the ocean for 
nectar. The fifth was the terrible war of Tarakamaya (on the 
abduction of Tata byCandra). 

1. Verses 68-70 show that Asuras and Suras were cousin-clans who lived 
amicably under Asura Kings also. See vv. 88-92. 

2. Verses 72-87 describe the twelve wars between Devas and Asuras, 
which made Visnu to incarnate to help Devas. The list of Visnu’s incar¬ 
nations is different ( vide Introduction —Vaisnavisra). 







766 


Vayu Purana 


75 The sixth war was Atfibaka and the seventh war was 
remembered as Traipura (that of the burning of the three 
cities) The eighth war was Andhakara and the ninth one was 
Dhvaja (Flag). 

76. The tenth war should be known as Varta (Vartra ?) 
(pertaining to V r tra); the next one is Halahala. The twelfth 
war among them is remembered as the terrible Kolahala. 

77. Hiranyakasipu, a Daitya, was killed by Narasirhha. 
Bali was bound by Vamana when the three worlds were over¬ 
taken (were measured by Vamana s steps). 

78. Hiranyaksa who was of very great strength and prowess 
and who had never been defeated in wars, was killed in a duel 
(by Visnu in his incarnation as the Boar), when the clash with 
Devas ensued. 

79 . It was then that the Earth was lifted up on his curved 
fang by the (divine) Boar. 

At the time of the churning of the ocean for nectar Prah- 
lada was defeated in battle by Indra. 

80. Virocana, the son of Prahlada, always attempted to 
kill Indra. In the Tarakamaya war he was killed by Indra 


by means of his exploits. 

81. Jamblia who had acquired the boon of avadhyatd (the 
state of not being killed or immunity from death) along with 
special miraculous weapons was killed in the sixth war by Visnu 
who entered the body of Sakra. 


82. When Devas were unable to protect the city of three 
gods* (?) all Danavas along with (the demon) Tripura were 
killed by the three-eyed god Siva. 

83-84. In the eighth war, Asuras, Raksasas who were 
Andhakarakas (causing blindness, invisible ?) were defeated 


+Tri-daioatam is obscure as the city called Tripura belonged to Asuras. 
Bd.P. 2.3.72.81 breads 

aiaknuvalsu devefu param sodhum adaivatam / 

‘When Devas became unable to endure (the greatness of) Asuias. If 
‘para ' in this line be emended as ‘ pur am *, adaivatam puram would means ‘the 
city of demons’and that would suit the context better. Scribes many times 
forget to indicate the signs of the vowels -k-, 




35.85-95 


767 


by Devas and human beings in alliance with the Pitrs. All these 
well protected Danavas were wholly exterminated by Mahendra 
helped by Visnu. 

85-86. The mighty-armed Vipracitti began to fight with 
Mahendra hiding himself by means of his Maya. Indra aimed 
at his banner and cut him down. 

In the war called Kolahala, Raji was surrounded by all 
Devas. He killed all Daityas and Danavas who formed an 
alliance. By means of the nectar (generated) from Yajna 1 
Sanda and Amarka were defeated by Devas. 

87. These twelve battles took place between Devas and 
Asuras resulting in exhausting both Devas and Asuras. They 
brought about misfortune to the people also. 

88. Hiranyakasipu shone as the ruler and. king of the three 
worlds for one hundred and seven million two hundred and 
eighty thousand years. 

89. By succession Bali became the king and he ruled for 
one hundred and three million and sixty thousand years. 

90. 2 Prahlada ruled in the company of Asuras for as many 
years as the period of Bali’s administration. 

91. These three were very famous as the Indras of Asuras. 
They were very mighty. All these worlds were under Daityas 
fora period of ten Yugas. 

92. Then the entire kingdom was free from enemies for a 
period of ten Yugas. Then the three worlds began to be pro¬ 
tected by Mahendra without any change. 

93-94. When the kingdom of the three worlds (inherited) 
by Prahlada was taken away by the lapse of time, when the 
kingdom of the three worlds came to Indra (the chastiser of 
Paka) by rotation, Yajna forsook Asuras and went over to 
Devas. 

When Yajna went over to Devas, those Asuras spoke to 

Kavya (Sukra), their preceptor: 

95. “Even as we are looking on, Yajna went over to 


1. Production of nectar from Yajna is not known. Bd. P. 2.3.72.87 reads 
yajnasya'vabhTthe ‘at the time of the valedictory avabhrtha bath . 

2. This verse should have been 89 as Prahlada succeeded his father 
Hiranyakasipu. 








768 


Vayu Purana 

Devas, forsaking our kingdom. We cannot stay here. We shall, 
therefore, enter Rasatala (nether worlds) today 

96 Thus addressed, he became depressed. In consoling 
words’ he spoke to them: “O Asuras, do not be afraid. I shall 
sustain you by means of my spiritual brilliance. 

97. Rainfall, medicinal herbs and the two things, the Earth 
and Wealth—all these are retained by me. Only a fourth of it 
is with Suras. I shall hand over to you everything that I 

hold”. . , , , . 

98-99. On seeing Asuras sustained by the intelligent 

Kavya, Devas consulted among themselves. They were dis¬ 
pirited and desired to be victorious then. They said: “This 
Kavya, spoils everything we do, by his strength. Well, we shall 
go there quickly lest he should strengthen them further. Killing 
them forcibly, we shall compel those who are left off to flee to 
Patala.” 

100. With great fury Devas rushed at Danavas and killed 
them. Being harassed by them, Danavas hastened to Kavya 
(for protection). 

101. Kavya saw that the sons of Dili were attacked by 
Devas and that they were in great distress because they were 
wounded in battle by various weapons 1 . 

102. On seeing Devas also standing there he reflected 
over the fate. 2 Remembering the previous incidents, he spoke 
to them (Asuras): 

103. “All the three worlds were conquered by Vamana by 
means of three paces. Bali was bound. Jambha was killed. 
Virocana was slain. 

104. In twelve great and terrible battles they were killed 
by Suras. By various means most of the important persons 
have been killed. 

105. Only a few of you have been spared in these latest 
battles. I shall now employ a great strategy. Please wait for a 
short while. 


1. Bd. P. v. 103 reads : samrak$ata samstrastdn ‘protected the frightened 
/(sons of Did)* 

2. Daivam in Bd. P. 




769 


35.106-117 

106. I shall go to Mahadeva for acquiring Mantras for the 
sake of your victory. Brhaspati is performing Homa and wor¬ 
shipping Agni by means of Mantras. 

107. Hence I shall go unto the lord Nllalohita (Siva) for 
the sake of Mantras. I shall bless you all after my return. 

108. All of you perform penance in the forest clad in bark 
garments. Dcvas will not kill you until I return. 

109. After obtaining the Mantras that will never go against 
us, from Lord Mahesvara, we shall fight Dcvas again. You 
will surely gain victory.” 

110-112. After deliberating thus Asuras spoke to Devas : 

‘AVe have set aside our dispute with you. All of you can 
occupy the worlds. We shall be clad in bark garments and we 
shall perform penance in the forest”. On hearing these words of 
Prahlada, Suras believed that he was speaking the truth. 
Then Devas returned without fighting. They rejoiced. When 
Daityas laid aside their weapons, Devas went back to their 
respective places from where they had come. 

113. Then Kavya said to them: “Wait for some time per¬ 
forming penance without enthusiasm, waiting for an opportunity 
to achieve the object in view. All Devas including Vasava 
are in my father’s hermitage.”* 

114. After instructing Asuras thus, Kavya approached 
Mahadeva. After bowing to the lord, the cause of origin of the 
universe, he said: 

115. “O lord, I wish to secure such Mantras as are not in 
the possession of Brhaspati. I want them to be the bestowers of 
fearlessness on Asuras. I wish to defeat Devas . 

116. Thus requested, the lord said : “O Brahmana ! do 
you wish for the Mantras ? Perform then the holy rites indicated 
by me, with purity of mind and observing celibacy. 

117. For full thousand years you must stay in a topsy turvy 
position inhaling the smoke from the holy sacrificial fire-pit. 
Welfare unto you. If you perform (a sacred tite) like this, you 
will obtain the Mantra from me.” 


*This is a strange statement. Bd. P. reads relevantly :sam P ratik;ata 
danavah : “O Danavas, stay waiting (in my father s hermitage). 






770 


Vdyu Purana 

118-119. Thus advised by the lord of Devas, Sukra of 
great penance, touched the feet of the lord and said: “Yes, my 
lord I shall perform the holy rites and observe all the other 
things as instructed.” Then he was engaged by the lord in¬ 
haling the smoke from the holy fire-pit. 

120-121. When Sukra had gone to Mahesvara and was 
staying there observing celibacy for the acquisition of the Man¬ 
tras with the welfare of Asuras in view, Devas understood 
that the kingdom was set aside by Asuras as a measure of 
strategy. Finding that loophole, the infuriated Devas attacked 
them. They had sharp weapons in their hands and Brhaspati 
led them all. 

122. On seeing Devas armed with weapons again Asuras 
became frightened and fled suddenly. 

123-125. “We have laid down our weapons and conceded 
victory unto them. Our preceptor is observing holy rites. 
Devas have abrogated the terms of agreement. They are desirous 
of slaying us, (their) enemies. Welfare unto you all, we arc now 
without a preceptor (to guide us). We had been credulous. We 
remained quiet performing penances. We are clad in bark and 
coarse garments. We have no holy rite. We have nothing to 
grasp and hold on to. By no means are we able to conquer 
Devas in war. In this nasty situation* it is better that wc seek 
refuge in the mother of Kavya. 

126. We shall wait here till the return of the preceptor. 
We shall tell him everything. When Kavya returns we shall 
fight with Suras.” 

127-131. Saying this to one another, they sought shelter with 
the mother of Kavya. They had been frightened but the boon 
of fearlessness was offered unto them as they sought shelter. 
(The mother of Kavya said :) “O Danavas, do not be afraid, 
do not be afraid. Cast off all fear. You need not be afraid as 
long as you are with me.” On seeing ’Asuras frightened, 
Devas pursued them earnestly without caring for strength or 
weakness. On seeing the frightened Asuras being harassed by 
Devas, the gentle lady (the mother of Kavya) became infu¬ 
riated and said to them : “I shall cause Anindratva (the state of 


*Bd. P. : ayuddhena ‘without being involved in fighting.* 




35.132-142 


771 


Indralcssness i.c. destruciion of Indra) She made Indra imme¬ 
diately benumbed and stunned and she went on with her other 
activities. 

132. On seeing Indra in that helpless condition after being 
rendered motionless like the sacrificial post, Devas became 
afraid and fied from there. 

133. When the groups of Suras had gone, Visnu said to 
Indra: “O lord of Suras, welfare unto you. Enter me. I shall 
take you away.” 

134. Thus advised Purandara (Indra) entered Visnu. On 
seeing him saved by Visnu, the infuriated lady spoke these 
words: 

135. “O Maghavan, here itself I will burn you down 
along with Visnu even as all the living beings observe. May the 
power of my penance be witnessed.” 

136. The lords Indra and Visnu, on being oppressed by her, 
conversed (under their breath). Visnu asked Indra—“How can 
both of us get free jointly ?”. 

137. Indra replied : cc O lord, kill her before she burns us 
both. Especially I have been attacked. Hence, kill her. Do not 
delay.” 

138. Then on seeing her (thus intending to kill them) Visi^u 
got ready (even) to kill that woman. Caught in adverse cii- 
cumstances, the lord hurriedly remembered his discus. 

139. While she was hastening to kill them, the discus 
(Sudarsana), the destroyer of the enemies of Suras, hastened 
still more. On realising the ruthless attempt of the woman (tne 
mother of Kavya) Visnu became furious. Taking up that we 
apon the husband of Ma (i.e. LaksmI) cutoffhcr head. 

140. On seeing that terrible slaughter of a woman (his 
wife) the holy lord Bhrgu became furious. Then Vi?nu was cen¬ 
sured and cursed by Bhrgu for the murder of his wife. 

141. “Since (according to Dharma) a woman should not 
be killed and that you have killed one even though you are con¬ 
versant with what is Dharma, you will have to take birth 

among human beings seven times”. 

142. Thereafter, as a result of that curse he incarnates 
again and again in the world (of mortals) for the we are o a , 
whenever virtue (Dharma) declines. 






772 


Vayu Purdna 


143 After speaking those words of cuise to Visnu, he (i.e. 
Bhrgu) took up the head (of the lady) himself and joined it to 

her body. Taking up water he said: 

144 “O truthful lady, I am hereby resuscitating you who 
had been killed by Visnu'. If all virtues and holy rites have 
been understood and practised by me, come to life. If I speak 
the truth, come to life, thanks to that truth . 

145. Thus addressed with the emphasis on truth, the gentle 
lady regained her life. Then he sprinkled her with cool water 
and uttered, “Get up”. 

146. On seeing her getting up as if from sleep, all living 
beings loudly applauded “Well done ! Well done !” Such an 
applause of invisible (incorporeal) voices arose from all the 
quarters. 

147. Even as all living beings were observing, the lady was 
resuscitated to life by Bhrgu. That was really miraculous. 

148. On seeing his wife resuscitated lo life by Bhrgu with¬ 
out the least agitation Sakra was not at all happy, because he 
was afraid of Kavya (all the more). 

149. Indra had no sleep at all (after the incident). The 
intelligent chastiser of Paka (i.e. Indra) called his daughter 
Javantl and spoke to her. 

150. “O daughter, this Kavya is performing a terrible 
penance for the sake of my destruction (lit. Indra-lcss-ncss). I 
have been rendered much dispirited by that (Bralimana) of 
great fortitude. 

151. Go and honour him with auspicious (services) remov¬ 
ing his fatigue and by rendering alertly and deligcntly service 
pleasing to his mind”. 

152-154. The gentle lady Jayanti, the daughter of Indra, 
of auspicious conduct, saw Kavya engaged in meditation. 
Although he was weak, he was quiet and self-possessed, endowed 
with fortitude, as her father had already mentioned to her. She 
rendered every service to Kavya in accordance with the behest 
of her father. In sweet and pleasing words she eulogised him. 
Frequently she massaged his body and served him in various 
other pleasant ways. Thus she stayed there for many years. 

155. When the terrible rite of inhaling the smoke lasting 


35.156-164 


773 


for a thousand years was completed, the delighted Bhava asked 
him to choose a boon freely. 

156-1G0. He said thus : “O Brahmana, such an obser¬ 
vance (of a vow) as this has been performed by you alone and 
not by anyone (so far). Hence you will excel all Dcvas in 
penance, intellect, learning, strength and brilliance. O son 
of Blirgu, whatever I possess by way of the esoteric secret of 
Yajhas, Upanisads etc. along with their ancillaries and esoteric 
secrets (RcJiasya) will be known to you alone, from the beginn¬ 
ing to the end and not to anyone else. Thereby you will be¬ 
come an excellent Brahmana surpassing air*. Thus granting 
the boons one after the other, to the son ofBhrgu, he granted 
him invincibility, lordship of wealth and immunity from death. 
On attaining these boons, Kavya became exhilarated. Hairs 
on his body stood on their end due to excessive pleasure. 

161. Due to his excessive joy, the following hymn to the 
lord Mahesvara manifested itself. Prostrating (before the Lord), 
he eulogised Nilalohita (Lord Siva): 

The Hymn to Smnbhu 1 (Lord Siva) 

162. ‘‘Obeisance to Sitikantha (Blue-throated god) to 
Surupa (of good form), to Suvarcas (of good brilliance), to 
Ririhdna (one who exhibits the mystic mudra of frequently lick¬ 
ing with the tongue), to Lop a (the destroyer), to Vatsara (the 
presiding deity of the year), to the Jagatpati (the lord of the 
universe). 

163. To Kapardin (having matted hair), to Ordhvaroman 
(having hair standing up erect), to Haya (the horse), to Kararia 
(the instrument), to Snmskrta (the consecrated), to Sulirlha (the 
holy centre), to Deva-deva (Lord of Devas), to Ravihas (velocity 
personified). 

164. To Usnisin (one with a turban or turban-wearer), to 
Suvnktra (one with a charming face), to Siihasrak$a (god with 
a thousand eyes), to Mijhvan (bountiful), to Vasureta (distributer 


1. Praising deity by giving him/her various attributes is found common 

in the Mbh. and Puranas. This hymn of Siva is strongly influenced by 
Rudradhyaya from Tail . Samhila IV . 5 as most of the epithets of Rudra 
mentioned therein are incorporated here. 



774 


Vdyu Purana 


(?) of wealth), to Rudra (terrific roarer), to the performer of 
Denance to CiravSsas (wearer of bark garments). 

165 166 To Hrr.srn (the short), to MuklakeSa (one with un¬ 
tied tresses of hair), to Sendni (the commander-in-chief of the 
army of gods), to Kavi (the poet), to Rajavrddha (the old ruler), 
to Taksaknkndana (one who plays with Taksaka), to GinSa 
(Lord of mountains), to Arkanetra (god with the sun as the eye), 
to the ascetic, to Jdmbava*, to Suvrtta (one of good antecedents), 
to Suhasta (one with good hands), to Dhanvin (one wielding a 
bow), to Bhargava (a good archer). 

167. To Saliasrabdhu (one with a thousand i.e. infinite arms), 
to Sahasr&malacaksus (one with a thousand clean eyes), to Sahasra- 
kuksi (one with a thousand bellies), to Sahasracarana (one with 
a thousand feet). 

168. To SahasraSiras (one with a thousand heads), to Bahurupa 
(multi-formed), to Vitoarupa (immanent in the universe), to 
$ vc ta (the white one), to Purusa (primordial man). ^ 

169. To Nisangin (one with a quiver), to ICavacin (one 
wearing a coat of mail), to Sukfma (the subtle one), to Ksapana 
(the destroyer), to Tamra (the copper-coloured), to Siva (the 


benevolent one). 

170. To Bubhru (the tawny-coloured), to Pisanga (reddish 
brown), to Pingola (yellowsih brown), to Atuiio, ( the pink 
coloured), to Mahddeva (the great god), to Sana (the des¬ 
troyer), to Visoanlpasiva* (the auspicious omnipresent god). 

171. To Hiranya (the golden one), to Sista (the self-con¬ 
trolled one), to Srestha (the excellent one), to Madhyama (the 
middling), to Pinakin (wielding the bow Pinaka), to I$uman 
(possessing arrows), to Citra (the miraculous one or one of 
variegated colours), to Rohila (reddish-tinged). 

172. To Dundnbhya (worthy of being honoured with the 
sound of war-drums), to Ekapada (single-footed), to Arha (the 
deserving), to Buddhi (the intellect), to Mrgavyadha (one who 
has assumed the form of a hunter of deer in Daksa’s sacrifice), 
to Sarpa (the serpent), to Sthdnu (motionless like a tree-trunk 
in meditation), to Bhisana (the terrible). 


*Bd. P. reads : Ajyapa (imbiber of ghee-offering). 



35.173-180 


775 


173. To Bahurupa (the multiformed), to Ugra (the fierce), to 
Trinetra (the three-eyed), to livara (the supreme ruler), to 
Kapila (tawny-coloured or identical with Kapila), to Ekavira 
(the single hero), to Mrlyu (the death), to Tryambaka (tlie three- 
eyed). 

174. To Vdstospali (the protective deity presiding over the 
foundation of a house), to Vinaka (one beyond heaven), to 
Sankara (the benefactor), to Siva (the auspicious one), to 
Aranya (the forest-dweller), to Grhastha (the householder), to 
the Brahmacarin (the religious student observing celibacy). 

175. To the Sdnkhya (one accessible through the Sdnkhya 
system of philosophy), to Toga (one realizable through the Yoga 
system), to Dhydnin (the meditating one), to Diksila (the initia¬ 
ted), to Antarhita (unmanifest, hidden), to Sarva (destroyer of 
the world), to Mdnya (the honourable), to Malin (one wearing 
garland). 

176. To Buddha (the enlightened one), to Suddha (the 
pure), to Mukta (the liberated one), to Kcvala (the sole one 
without a second), to Rodhas (staying on the mountain slope), 
to Cekitdna (the sentient), to Brahmisfha (merged in Brahman), 
to Maharfi (the great sage). 

177. To Caluspada (one having four feet), to Medhya (one 
worthy of sacrifice), to Dharmin (the virtuous), to wearer of an 
armour ( Varmin as in Bd.P. v. 178), to Sighraga{ one goingfast), 
to S ikhantjUn (one with tuft of hair), to Kapala (one holding 
the human skull), to Damsfrin (one with curved fangs), to 
VUvamedhas (of universal intellect). 

178. To Apratighata (the unimpeded), to Dipta (the illumi¬ 
nated), to Bhdskara (the creator of lustre), to Sumedhas (of 
excellent intellect), to Krura (the cruel one), to Vikrta (the 
deformed), to Bibhatsa (the hideous), to Siva (auspicious). 

179. To Saumya (the gentle one), to Pwiya (the meritorious) 
to Dhdimika (the righteous), to Subha (the auspicious), to 
Avadhya (one who cannot be killed), to Mrtahga (one whose 
body is dead?), to jVitya (the eternal one), to Satvata (the perpe¬ 
tual one). 

180. To Sddya (one with a beginning), to Sarabha (the eight¬ 
footed fabulous animal), to &ulin (the trident-bearing god), to 
Tricaksus (the three-eyed god), to Somapa (the imbiber of Soma 


Vdyu Purana 


776 

juice), to Ajyapa (the imbiber of ghee), to Dhimafia (the inhaler 

of smoke), to Of mafia (drinker of hot stuff).' 

181 To Sud (the pure and clean), to Kcnhana (one repea- 
tedly licking), to Sadyojala (born in a trice), to Mrtyu (death), 
to PifitaSa (the meat-eater), to Kharva (the dwarfish), to Megha 
(the cloud), to Vaidyula (the lightning). 

182. To Vyafrita (having no dependent), to Sravisfha (the 
most famous), to Dharata (one engaged in brilliant light), to 
Antariksa (the firmament), to Ksama (the competent), to 
Sahamana (the enduring), to Satya (the truthful), to Tnpana (the 
blazing one). 

183. To Tripuraghna (the destroyer of the three cities), to 
Difita (the illuminated), to the Cakra (the discus), to Romasa 
(the hairy one), to Tigmayudho. (having shaip weapons), to 
Medhya (the cleanest), to Siddha, to Pulasti. 

184. loRocamana (one who is appealing), to Khantfa, to 
Sphita (the flourishing), to Rsabha (the bull, the chief one), to 
Bhogin (the enjoyer), to Yunjamana (the united one), to Santa 
(the quiescent one), to Ordhoarctas (of sublimated sexuality). 

185. To Aghaghna (the destroyer of sins), to Makhaghna 
(destroyer of Daksa’s sacrifice), to Mnyu (god of death), to 
Yajhiya (one belonging to sacrifice), to KrSdnu (fire), to Praceia , 
to Vahni (thefire, bearer of offerings), to Kifala(l) 

186. To Sikatya (belonging to sand?), to Prasanna (the 
delighted), to Varcnya (the most excellent), to Caksus (the eye), 
to Ksipragu (having a fast bull), to Pramedhya (the excessively 
pure), to Piva (the corpulent one?) 

187. To Rafaoghna (the destroyer of Raksasas), to PaSughna 
(destroyer of animals), to Vighna (the obstacle), to Sayana (the 
lying one), to Vibhranta (the revolving one), to Mahanta . 
(having great end), to Anti (the nearest one), to Durgaina 
(difficult to attain). 

188. To Dak$a (the dexterous), to jaghanya (the last one), 
to the lord of the worlds, to Andmaya (the non-ailing), to Ordhva 
(the topmost one), to Samhatya Adhisthita (to one established 
in masses). 

189. To Hiranyabdhu (of golden arms), to Satya (the truth¬ 
ful), to §amana (the tranquiliser)to Asikalpa (one like a 



35.190-199 


777 


to Ririnya (?), to 


sword), to Mdgha (the month Magha), 

Ekacaksus (the one-eyed). 

190. To Sresfha (the excellent one), to Vdmadeoa, to liana 
(supreme ruler), to Dhimati (the intelligent one), to Mahdkalpa 
toDipla (the illuminated), to Rodana (the crying), to Hasa (the 
laughing). 


191. To Vrtadhanoan (Drtfhadhanvan — having firm bow), to 
Kavacin (one wearing a coat of mail), to Rathin (having a 
chariot), to Varuthin (having a host of army), to Bhrgundlha (the 
lord of Bhrgu), to Sukra, to Vahniriffa (?), to Dhimdn (the 
intelligent). 

192. To Ag/ia (the sin), to Agha§a7hsa (the despiser of sin), 
to Vipriya (having no beloved), to Priya (the beloved). O 
Digvdsas( having the quarters as garments), obeisance be to you, 
the wearer of elephant hide and destroyer of Bhaga. 

193. Obeisance to the lord of Pahis (individual souls), to 
the lord of living beings. Obeisance to Pranava , the Rk, the 
Yajus and the Saman, to Svadha and Sudha (nectar). 

194. Obeisance to you of the form of Vasafkara. Obeisance 
to you, O Antatmsn (soul of all ends). Obeisance to you, the 
creator, the sustainer, and the annihilator, to the Hotr and the 
destroyer. 

195. Obeisance to you, of the form of Kala, past, 

present and future. Obeisance to Vasu, Sadhya, Rudra, 

Aditya and Asvin. 

196. Obeisance to you, the Visva (Visvedevas), to 

Maruts, the Atman of Devas. You are Agni, Soma, Rtvik, 
Jjya (sacrifice), the sacrificial animal, the Mantra and the 

medicine. 


197. You are Daksina> Avabhrtha (sacred ablution of con¬ 
cluding rites), and the Tajna itself. You are Tapas (penance), 
Satya (truth), Tyaga (renunciation) and &ama (self-control). 

198. Obeisance to you, the embodiment of nonviolence 
and non-covetousness. You are of good demeanour, the surpass¬ 
ing one. Obeisance to you, the Yogatman (ofYogic Soul), the 
soul of all living beings. 

199. Obeisance to you, of the form of all worlds, the earth, 
the firmament, the heaven, Mahar, Jana, Tapas and Satya 
(Lokas). 


778 


Vayu Purana 


200. Obeisance to you, the unmanifest, the great, the ele¬ 
ment, the sense organs, the Tanmatras, the end of the Mahat. 
Obeisance to you, of the form of the Reality. 

201. Obeisance to you, the eternal one, the Arthalinga (of 
meaningful index?), the subtle one, the sentient, the pure, the 
omnipresent, the permanent soul. 

202. Obeisance to you in the three worlds beginning with 
Bhuh and ending with Svah (i.e. Bhuh, Bhuvah and Svah) and 
in the four worlds beginning with Satya and ending with Mahahi 
(i.e. Satya, Tapas, Jana and Mahah). 

203. O lord, you are friend and sympathiser of Brahmanas. 
In this prayer of obeisance both correct and incorrect things 1 
have been uttered by me. It behoves you to forgive everything 
thinking like “He is my devotee”. 


CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 
Glorification of Vijnu's Greatness 

Sutasaid : 

1-2. After propitiating Isana, Nilalohita, the lord of 
Devas, Sukra spoke words of prayer bowing to him with palms 
joined in reverence uttering Brahman (Vedic Mantras). Siva 
who was delighted, touched the body of Kavya with his hand, 
accorded him a full vision of His own form and vanished there 
itself. 

3. When the lord of the Devas 2 had vanished, he spoke 
the following words to Jayanti who was standing near him, 
with palms joined in reverence. 


1. The reading ‘sadasat' needs emendation as ‘ yadasat' as in Bd.P. 2.3.72,. 
195 as there is no point in begging pardon for saying correct things. 

2. The obscure reading dtveSinucare is probably a scribal error and should 
be emended as deoe sinucare ‘God (Siva) along with his retinue’. Bd. P. 
2.3.73.3 supports the emendation suggested. 




36.4-13 


779 


4. “O beautiful lady, whose (daughter) are you? When 
I was distressed, you too were distressed. Who are you? What 
for did you take care of me when I was performing the great 
penance ? 

5. O lady of beautiful hips, O fair-complexioned one, I 
am delighted with your steady devotion, humility, self-control 
and affection. 

6. O beautiful damsel, what do you wish? What is your 
cherished desire which should be fully gratified? Even if it be 
very difficult to be fulfilled, I shall get it realised (for you) 

7. On being asked thus, JayantI said : “O sage merged in 
Brahman, it behoves you to know it by means of the power of 
your penance. In fact, you already know precisely what I have 
desired to achieve”. 

8. On being told thus, the sage saw everything by means 
of his divine vision and said: <c O beautiful maiden, you are 
the daughter of Mahendra. You have come here to render 
service to me. 

9. O woman of beautiful lips, O lustrous woman, you 
desire to live in contact with me for ten years without being 
seen by any other living being. 

10. O beautiful lady with (brilliant) complexion of the 
Lord of Devas and of fire* ! O lady of beautiful eyes, you 
choose (the fulfilment of your) desire from me, O lady of 
sweet voice. 

11. Let it be, O fascinating woman, we shall go home”. 
Thereafter the holy lord returned to his abode, accompanied 
by Jayanti. 

12. He stayed along with her for ten years. Being envelop¬ 
ed with Maya (illusive power), he was invisible to all living 
beings. 

13. On seeing (learning) that Kavya had returned after 
realising his desires, all Daityas delightedly came to his 
house desirous of seeing him. 


♦For ‘ devcndranalavaroabhe 1 hereof, Bd. P. v. 10 reads ‘deuindranilavarpabhe' 
‘O goddess with the shining lustre of blue sapphires’ which is worth 
consideration. 



780 


Vayu Parana 


14 Having gone there, they could not see their preceptor 
who was concealed by Jayanti. Thinking that it was part of 
his> clever strategy*, they returned to their respective homes. 

15 16 On knowing that Kavya was held in restraint by 
Tayantl for ten years in her desire to do what was beneficial to 
her father, Brhaspati knew that to be an opportunity offered by 
Daitvas He assumed the form ofKavya, the preceptor of Danyas, 


and spoke to Asuras. 

17 Looking at the Asuras who had assembled, Bphaspati 
said /“Welcome to my disciples for whom I perform sacri¬ 
fices. For your welfare, I have come back to this place. 


18 I shall teach you all. That (great) Vidya has been 
acquired by me”. With a delighted mind, then they approached 
him for the sake of attaining the Vidya. 


19-20 After the period of ten years was over, Sukra s 
ambition was completely realised. (His delusion vanished) 
and his intellect was awakened at the same time. At the end 

of the period of agreement, DevayanI, his daughter was bom 

(of Jayanti). ThenSukra decided to look after his disciples. 


21. Sukra said: “O gentle lady, let us go to see your 
disciples, O lady of sweet smiles and of tremulous eyes, O 
chaste lady, O lady of large eyes of three colours”. 

22. The lady replied : “O sage of great holy rites, please 
resort to your disciples. It is the sacred Dharma, O Brahmana. 
I shall not make you swerve from it.” 


Suta said : 

23. Then he went to Asuras and saw that they had been 
deceived by the intelligent preceptor of Devas by assuming 
the form ofKavya. He spoke to Asuras : 

24. “O dear ones, know me to be the (real) Kavya. This 
is the son of Angiras. O Danavas, in spite of my power, you 
have been deceived”. 


*ddhii,iya. But lahanam (the sign of his non-return), in Bd. P. ibid. v. 14. 



36.25-37 


781 


25. On hearing him speak thus, Daityas were confused. 
They looked at both of them smiling pleasantly.* 

26. They stood there utterly confused. They were unable 
to understand anything. When they were (seen) confused like 
this, Kavya spoke to them again : 

27. “I am your preceptor Kavya. This is the praceptor of 

Devas, the son of Augiras. All of you follow me. Leave off this 
Brhaspati”. 

28. On being addressed thus, all the Asuras stood gazing 
at them. They could not see any difference between them. 

29-30. Unperturbed by anything, Brhaspati told them: “O 
Daityas, this is Anginas. I am Kavya, your preceptor. This is 
Brhaspati in my guise. O Asuras, he deludes you all by assum¬ 
ing my form”. On hearing his words, they consulted one another 
and spoke these words: 

Ji. “This holy lord and sage has been imparting instruc¬ 
tions to us continuously for the last ten years. This Brahmana is 
desirous of coming in between”. 

32. Then all those Danavas bowed to and paid respects 
to him (Brhaspati in the guise of Kavya). Deluded by a long 
practice they accepted only his words. 

33. All the infuriated Asuras spoke to him (the real 
Kavya) (staring at him) with reddened eyes: “This is our 
preceptor and benefactor. You may go. You are not our precep¬ 
tor. 

34. Whether heisBhargava (son ofBhrgu) or Angirasa (son 
of Ahgiras) let him be our preceptor. Wc shall abide by his 
guidance. Do not tarry (here any longer). That will be in your 
interest.” 

35-37. After saying this, all the Asuras resorted to Brhaspati 
(as their teacher). When the Asuras did not accept his sugges¬ 
tion for their great benefit, Bhargava became angry at their 
arrogance. He told them again : “O Danavas, although I had 
apprised (and instructed) you, you are not resorting to me. 
Hence, you will become deficient in sense and will attain defeat 
after defeat”. After saying this to them, Kavya went away the 
way he had come. 

♦The word sitdsita is obscure. Bd. P. v. 25 read sthirdsinau which 
means ‘sitting firmly*. 










782 


Vayu Purana 


38 On realising that the Asuras had been cursed by Kavya. 
Brhaspali got his object fulfilled. With great delrght, he re¬ 
sumed Sis own real form. To h» great contentment, he 
realised that the Asuras had fallen and doomed and he 
vanished from the scene. 

39 When he had disappeared, the dismayed Danavas 
spoke 'to one another: -Oh fie upon us! In this matter we have 

been deceived. , r . 

40 We have erred in our duties. So the fate is against 

and we have been struck by it. We have been used (by him 

i.e. Brhaspati) in his own interest and burnt by means of his 

41-42. Then the Asuras became extremely frightened of 
the Devas and fled from that place. Keeping Prahlada at the 
head, they approached Kavya again. On approaching him, 
they stood there with heads bent down. On seeing his disciples 
(lit. ones for whose benefit he performed Yajiias) Kavya said to 

them: , 

43. “In spite of being cautioned by me at the proper 

time, you did not honour and respect^ me. So, on account of 
that arrogance, you met with a defeat . 

44. Then Prahlada entreated him: “O Bhargava, (please) 
give up (forget) your wounded sense of honour. O Bhargava, 
do not forsake us, your own disciples, particularly attached to 
you with devotion and prayerfulness. 

45-46. When asked by you, we had been deluded by the 
preceptor of Devas. Knowing this by means of your long- 
ranged vision, it behoves you to save us. O son of Bhrgu, ifyou 
are not going to favour us, we are (no belter than) cursed by 
you. So we shall enter Rasalala (the nether worlds) to-day.” 


Sul a said : 

47. On being thus implored, eulogised and informed 
Kavya realised the truth. Out of mercy and sympathy, he 
controlled his anger. 

48. He spoke these words : <c Do not be afraid. Do not go 
to Rasatala. Even though I was alert this incident befell you 
because it was inevitable. 


36 . 49-60 


733 


49. Destiny which is very powerful cannot be altered. 
The sense that you have lost, you will regain now. 

50. Brahma too had mentioned that the period adverse 
lo you had arrived. It was due to my favour that you had 
enjoyed the great pleasures of the three worlds (so long). 

51. For full ten Yugas you have reigned over Dcvas. 
Brahma has ordained your rulcrship only for that length of 
period. 

52. In the Savarnika Alanvantara you will again have 
suzerainty. Your grandson Bali will become the lord of all the 
worlds. 

53. It has been mentioned by Brahma himself to me that 
when later on the worlds will be seized from him, his power of 
penance will not be of any avail. 

54. Since his activities will be devoid of undue attachment, 
Brahma will be pleased with him and (the kingdom) will be 
bestowed on him in the Savarnika Manvantara. 

55. The lord has told me, ‘The kingdom of Devas 
will come to Bali’. Hence he bides his time remaining invisible 
to all living beings. 

56. You have been granted immortality by the delighted 
self-born deity. Hence, without exhibiting undue curiosity and 
agitation you have to bear with the change. 

57. Before the (proper) time, it is not possible for me to 
save you. O lord, I have been forbidden by Brahma who knows 
the future. 

58. These two are my disciples. They are equal to me.* 
and Brhaspati. They will sustain you all when attacked by 
Devas.” 

59. When the Daityas, the chief of whom was Prahlada, 
were given this advice by Kavya of indefatigable energy and 
activity, they went away along with those two (disciples i.e. 
Sanda and Amarka). 

60. On hearing about the inevitability of future events 


♦Probably Sanda and Amarka are mentioned here as will be clear by 
later verses 63 etc. 









724 Vayu Parana 

from Sukra, Danavas took the words of Kavva to mean 
victory for them (at least) for once. 

61-62. They equipped themselves with various weapons 
and the coats of mail and challenged Devas for fighting. 
On seeing Asuras advanced for jattlc, Devas got ready 
with all equipments and fought them in return. The battle 
between Devas and Asuras continued for a hundred years. 
Asuras defeated Devas. The beaten and distressed Devas spoke 
thus among themselves. 

63-65. Devas said : “We do not know the (extent of the) 
power of San<ja and Amarka on Asuras. Hence, what is 
conducive to our welfare must be done by preparing for a 
Yajha. After knowing about and capturing those two, we 
will defeat Asuras”. 

Devas then invited both San<ja and Amarka and said, 
“We shall invite you for the Yajha. O Brahmanas, forsake 
Asuras. After defeating them we will make you receive a share”. 

66. In this manner, Sanda and Amarka thereafter forsook 
Asuras. Devas were victorious and Danavas suffered disastrous 
defeat. 

67-69. After defeating Asuras, Devas approached Sanda 
and Amarka. Asuras who had already been over¬ 
whelmed by the curse of Kavya had no support now. Hai assed 
by Devas, they entered Rasatala. Thus Danavas were crippled 
and rendered inactive by Sakra. 

Thereafter, whenever the cult of Yajhas and other holy 
rites was slack, Lord Visnu incarnated again and again as a 
result of Bhrgu’s curse*, in order to stabilise Dharma and 
destroy Adharma. 

70. Lord Brahma pronounced that all those Asuras who 
did not follow the directions of Prahlada would be killed by 
human beings. 

71. Hence Narayana was born of Dharma in the Caksusa 


* Visnu s incarnations were due to Bhrgu’s curse. Verses 71 fF. give the 
list of those incarnations but they are different from oui usual list (vide 
Intro., Vaisriavism). 



36.72-80 


785 


Manvantara. In the Vaivasvata Manvantara, he popularised 
Yajiia in Caitya 1 (sacrificial shed). 

72-73. At the time of the manifestation of the other (i.e. 
Prthu) Brahma himself was the priest. In the fourth Yuga.when 
Asuras 2 were in distress, he was born within the ocean for 
the purpose of killing Hiranyakasipu 3 . 

The second (incarnation was that of the terrible Narasimha, 
keeping Suras at the head. 

74. The third incarnation, that of Vamana, took place 
in the seventh Tretayuga when all the three worlds had been 
overrun by Daityas and were ruled over by Bali. 

75-76. Withdrawing all the limbs within himself (Assum¬ 
ing the form of a Dwarf) the son of Aditi approached the son 
of Virocana, Bali, the king of Daityas, who was performing a 
Yajna. Brhaspati too accompanied him. Assuming the form of 
a Brahmana on an auspicious occasion, he requested Bali: 
“O king, you are the lord of the three worlds. Everything is 
in you. It behoves you to grant me (the space covered by) 
three paces”. 

77. “I will give”, promised the king Bali, the son of Viro¬ 
cana. On knowing that he was a Vamana (dwarf), he was 
delighted much. 

78. But, O excellent Brahmanas, that lord Vamana 
measured the entire Universe, the Earth, the Heaven and 
the Sky by means of three paces. 

79. That Bhutatman (the immanent soul of all living beings) 
of great fame excelled even the sun by means of his brilliance. 
He illuminated all the quarters and the intermediate directions 
with his refulgence. 

oO. The mighty-armed Janardana brightened up all the 
worlds and shone. Seizing the royal glory of Asuras from 
all the three worlds, he forced them to retreat to the bottom 
of the nether-world along with their sons and grandsons. 


1. 'Vainya* i.e. King Prthu in Bel. P. v. 72. It-is a better reading as this 
and other sources give the credit of Yajna to Prthu in this Manvantara. 

2. Suras (in Bd. P. v. 74) is the correct reading. 

3. It implies Varaha incarnation, but Varaha killed Hiraijyaksa and 
Nrsiriiha incarnation was for killing Hiranyakasipu. 





786 


V «J"Purana 

81 Namuci, Sambara and Prahlada (were among them) 
The cruel Danavas were killed. Those who were rudely shaken 

were forced to flee in various directions. 

82. Madhava, the immanent soul of all living beings showed, 
the Brahmanas there a great miracle, viz. all the great elements' 
with their special features and the entire Time. 

83. They saw the entire Universe and themselves in his 
cosmic body. There was nothing in the worlds which was not 
pervaded by thenoble-souled lord. 

84. Seeing that form of Upendra (i.e. Vamana) Devas, 
Danavas and human beings were fascinated. All of them were 
enchanted by Visnu’s refulgence. 

85. Bali was bound with great nooses along with his 
kinsmen, friends and followers. The entire race of Virocana 
was consigned to Patala. 

86. After handing back the entire riches and glory of 
Devas to the noble-souled Indra, the mighty-armed Janardana 
manifested himself before the human world. 

87. These three incarnations of the lord were divine and 
auspicious. Listen and understand the seven incarnations as 
human beings as a result of the curse. 

88. In the tenth Tretayuga when Dharma had been ruined 
he had his fourth incarnation as Dattatreya with Markandeya 
as his preceptor. 

89. His fifth incarnation was in the fifteenth Tretayuga as 
Mandhatr, the Emperor. Tathya (Utathya?) was his preceptor. 

90. The sixth incarnation was that as the son of Jamadagni 
in the nineteenth Tretayuga. He annihilated all the Ksatriyas. 
He had Visvamitra as his preceptor (Purohita). 

91. In the twentyfourth Tretayuga, he took his seventh 
incarnation as Rama, the son of Dasaratha. In his sacrifice 
Vasistha was his priest. It was for the purpose of killing 
Ravana. 

92. In the twentyeighth Dvapara Yuga, Visnu took his 
eighth incarnation as Vedavyasa born of ParaSara. He had 
Jatukarna as the preceptor. 

93. Vi$nu who had been born earlier as the son of Aditi 
andKasyapa took his ninth incarnation as the son of DevakI 
an asudeva with the Brahmana Gargya as his preceptor. 


36.94-104 


787 


94-95. The lord is Aprameya (one whocannot be measured). 
He is Niyojya* (freely ordered about and employed bydevotees). 
He moves about as he pleases. He has full self-control. He 
sports about in the world like a boy playing with toys. This 
mighty-armed ^ladhusudana cannot be measured. There is 
nothing greater than the cosmic form of the Lord. 

96-97. In the twentycighth Dvapara Yuga, when a slight 
portion of the end of Dvapara remained and when Dharma 
had been destroyed, Lord Visnu was born in the family of 
Vi'?nis in order to establish Dharma and destroy Asuras. By 
means of his Yogic Maya, the Yogic soul fascinated all living 
beings. 

98. Entering human womb, he moved about on the 
Earth fully concealed (from the view of ordinary mortals) for 
the sake of the sport among the human beings. He was accom¬ 
panied by Sandipani as his preceptor. 

99-100. In that incarnation, the powerful lord slew the 
following Daityas who had taken human bodies : Kamsa, 
Salva, Dvivida the great Asura, Arista, Vrsabha, Kesin the 
horse, Kuvalayaplda the elephant, the chief of wrestlers, the 
officer in-charge of the abode (ofKarhsa) (Canura) and the 
demoness Putana. 

101. The thousand arms of Bana of wonderful exploits 
were cut ofTby him. The Asura Naraka and the powerful 
(Kala-) Yavana were killed by him in battle. 

102. All the precious gems and jewels of kings were con¬ 
fiscated by him through his splendid refulgence. All the kings 
of evil conduct in Rasiitala were killed by him. 

103-104. These incarnations of the noble-souled lord were 
for the sake of the benefit of the worlds. 

In this Kaliyuga, towards its close, when the period of 
junction will begin, the powerful Kalki will be born under the 
name Visnuyasas, as the son of Parasara. He will be accom¬ 
panied by Yajuavalkya as his preceptor. This is his tenth and 
future incarnation. 


♦Better a-niyojya ‘uncontrollable; one who cannot be ordered’ as inBd.P. 
It fits here with an Avagraha (S)— apramejo niyojyasca. 




788 


Vdyu Purdim 


105-109. He will be leading all the armies consisting of 
elephants, horses and chariots. He will be surrounded by 
hundreds and thousands of Brahmanas armed with weapons. 
He will be killing those who are not very religious and those 
who hate religion, viz. the northerners, those of the middle 
lands, those who live to the west of the Vindhya mountain, 
the southerners (such as) Dravitfas along with Simhalcse, 
Gandharas, Paradas, Pahlavas, Yavanas, Sakas, Tusaras, 
Barbaras, Pulindas, Daradas,Khasas, Lampakas, Andhakas, 
Rudras and Kiratas. The powerful lord will destroy Mlecchas 
making his discus whirl. He will be invisible to all living 
beings and move about on the Earth. 

110. Visnu will be born as a human being with a part of 
the intelligent god. In the previous birth he would have been 
born as the powerful Pramiti. 

111. In bodily splendour he was (will be) like the moon 
and will be born when the Kaliyuga is complete. Thus the ten 
incarnations of the lord have been recounted. 

112. The lord takes incarnations in the different periods 
with a part of his powerful splendour in the three worlds for 
different purposes and ends in view. He is born in different 
wombs in accordance with the function he has to perform. 

113. When the twentyfifth Kalpa has started and twenty- 
five years have elapsed, he will be killing all living being and 
men. 

114. By means of his ruthless activities he will make the 
Earth left with only the seeds. He would have (then) mas¬ 
sacred all Vrsalas and almost all impious persons. 

115-120. Then Kalki will have achieved his object along with 

his army. The subjects then would be destroyed by their own 

actions. But they will become Siddhas again by themselves. 

Urged by the inevitable destiny, they will become un- 
reasona . e, infuriated and deluded, causing mutual destruction. 

•^rn ^°^ owerSj * le W *U undertake eternal rest in the 

middle of Ganga and Yamuna. When Kalki passes away 
e mgs will die along with their ordinary soldiers. People will 


36.121-37.1 


789 


be without anyone to restrain them.* When the arrangement 
for security ceases to be, they will kill one another in battle 
The will lose confidence in one another. They will be fretting 
and fuming and will be extremely distressed. Having no 
belonging left, they will leave off their cities and villages to¬ 
gether. All the Vedic Dharmas will be defunct. All the rites of 
castes and stages of life will be extinct. People will be short in 
stature and short-lived- They will be residing in forests. 

121-125. They will be resorting to rivers and mountains. 
Leaves, roots and fruits will constitute their diet. They will be 
wearing leaves and barks of trees or hides. There will be a 
highly indiscriminate fusion of castes. In the last junction of the 
Kali age they will be short-lived and highly distressed. Their 
means of sustenance will be destroyed. They will be overwhel¬ 
med with many adversities. They will undergo sufferings. The 
people will be completely extinct along with the Kali age. 
When the Kali age lapses and the Krta Yuga starts again, all 
objects will regain their original forms .naturally and not other¬ 
wise. Thus I have recounted the activities of Devas and 
Asuras. In the context of the narration of Yadu race the 
great fame of Visnu has been recounted. I shall now recount 
the race of Turvasu, Puru and Druhvu. 


CHAPTER THiRTYSEVEN 1 2 
Royal Dynasties 

(Conclusion of the Anusaiiga Section) 

Sutasaid : 

1. Vahni was the son of Turvasu. Gobhanu was the son 
of Vahni 3 . The unconquered heroic Trisanu was Gobhanu’s 
son. 


1. These verses (to the end of the chapter) describe a gloomy picture 
of the society at the end of Kali Yuga. All Puranas are unanimous in 
depicting the terrible state of the public as Kali advances. 

2. This chapter correspond to Bd.P. 2.3.74. Reference are to verse 
numbers. 

3. Genealogy orTurvasu as recorded in AITH, p. 149 shows Garbha as 
the predecessor of Gobhanu. 




790 


Vayu Purdria 

2 Karandhama was the son of Trisanu and his son was 
Marutta. Another Marutta mentioned before was the son of 
Avik§it. He was also a king. 

3 Marutta was childless. I have licai d that he too was a 
king. All the (people) made Duskrta 1 a descendant of Pu ru , 

his son. 

4. Thus, due to the curse of Yayati in connection with the 

transference of his old age the line of Turvasu merged with 
that of Puru. 

5. The successor of Duskrta was the king named Sarutha. 
After Sarutha came Janapltfa and he had four sons. 

6. They were Pantfya, Kerala, Cola and Kulya with their 
kingdoms named after them, viz. Pandya, Kerala, Cola and 
Kulya. 

7. Druhyu had two heroic sons well known as Babhru and 
Setu. Aruddha was the son of Setu and Ripu was the son of 
Babhru. 

8. This strong (king) Ripu was killed in war with very 
great difficulty by Yauvanasva. Their great war lasted conti¬ 
nuously for fourteen months. 

9. Aruddha’s successor was the king named Gandhara 
after whom the great lan d of Gandhara took its name. 2 

10. The horses bred in Gandhara land are the most excel¬ 
lent horses. Gandhara’s son was Dharma and Ghrta (Dhrta) 
was his son. 

11. Durdama was born to Ghrta (Dhrta) and his son was 
Pracetas. A hundred sons were born to Pracetas. All of them were 
kings. 

12. All of them were the rulers of the Mleccha territory in 
the northern direction (region). Anu had three noble-souled 
sons. All of them were highly righteous. 

13. They were Sabhanara, Paksa and Parapaksa. The son 
of Sabhanara was the scholarly king Kalanala. 

14. Kalanala’s son was the pious-souled Spijaya who was 
righteous. The heroic king Puranjaya was the son of Srnjaya. 


1- Dusyanta in Bd. P.v. 3. 

A r shows that Druhyu’s descendants ruled over a part of 

Afghanistan. 



37.15-24 


791 


15. Janamejaya of great strength and vitality was the 
son of the saintly king Puranjaya. 

16. This king was equal to Indra. His fame was established 
(even) in heaven. Mahamanas was the son of MahaSala. He 
was very pious. 

17. He was the lord of the seven continents. He was an 
emperor of great fame. Mahamanas procreated two famous 
sons. 

18. They were Usinara the knower of Dharma and Titiksu 
the righteous. Uslnara had five wives. They were born of the 
races of saintly kings. 

19. They were Mrga (Nrga in Bd. P.), Krmi, Nava, 
Darva and Drsadvatl the fifth. Usinara had five sons from 
them. They made his race flourish. They were virtuous and 
grew old with the performance of great penance. 

20. Mrga (Nrga in Bd. P.) was the son of Mrga (Nrga), 
Nava was the son of Nava. Krmi was the son of KrmI and 
Suvrata, the virtuous, was the son of Darva. 

21-22. O Brahmanas, the son of Drsadvatl was (popular¬ 
ly called) Auslnara Sivi. The city ofSiviwas famous as Siva- 
pura * 1 (II) (III) (IV) and that of Mrga was the Yaudheya city. Navarastram 
belonged to Nava and the city Krmila to Krmi. That of 
Suvrata was Vrsta (Ambastha). Now listen and understand 
Sivi’s sons. 

23. The four sons of Sivi called Sivis were very popular 
among the people. They were Vrsadarbha, Suvlra, Kekaya 
and Madraka. 

24. Their territories were very flourishing. They were 
Vrsadarbhas, Sucldarbhas, Kekayas and Madrakas. Now listen 
to the progeny of Titiksu. 


1. These places are located as follows : 

(I) Sivapura—The country of Siaposh. It includes Kafiristan 
(DE. 211). 

(II) Yaudheya—The country between the Hydaspes and the Indus 
(DE 215) 

(III) Navarastra—Nausari in Baroach Dist. of Gujarat (DE 139). 

(IV) Krmila—untraced. 




792 


Vayu Purdna 


25. The mighty-armed son of Titiksu named Us'adratha 
was the well-known king in the eastern quarter. His son was 
Hema. 

26-32. Sutapa was born to Hema and Bali was the son of 
Sutapas* (Bd. P.). The noble-minded Bali who was a great 
Yogin was bound (by Vamana). He took birth in the human 
womb, being desirous of children, as the family was ncarin^ 
extinction due to absence of issues. He begot sons who 
established the discriplines of four castes on this earth. He 
procreated the sons Ahga, Vanga, Sulha, Pundra and ICalinga. 
These are called Baleya Ksatras (the Ksatriyas born of 
Bali). That lord had Brahmana sons also called Baleya Brah- 
manas. They established the line (of Bali). Many boons were 
granted to the intelligent Bali by the delighted Brahma. The 
boons granted were Mahayogitva (the state of being a great 
Yogin), longevity of life lasting for a Kalpa, invincibility in 
war, great inclination towards righteousness and piety, the 
vision of the three worlds, importance among his descendants 
unrivalled state in strength as the ability to see the true prin¬ 
ciples of Dharma. “You will establish the (discipline of) four 
castes”—on being thus told by the lord, king Bali attained 
great peace (of mind). 

33-34. After a long period the scholarly Bali went back 
to his own abode. The territories of the sons were Angas, 
Vangas, Sulhakas (Suhma), Pundras and Kalirigas. They were 
very flourishing territories. 


Listen to and understand their race. These sons were his 
Ksetrajas (born of his wife) through the contact of a sage. 
They were born of (sage) Dirghatamas of great virility in 
Sudesna (the wife of Bali). 


The Sages said : 

35. O holy lord, how were these five Ksetraja sons of 

to l P T Ca l ed by thC SagC Dir S luitar nas ? Please narrate this 
to us who ask. 


*Sulayaia in the text is obscure. Hence 


the form Sutapas is accepted. 



37.36-47 


793 


Sul a said : 

36. Formerly there was an intelligent and renowned 
sage named Asija. The wife of this noble-souled sa-e was 
named Mamata. 

, 37 ' Brhaspati who was the younger brother of Asija, 
whose splendour was great and who was the preceptor of the 
heaven-dwellers (gods) coveted Mamata. 

38-40. Not desirous of having sexual intercourse with 
him, Mamata spoke thus to Brhaspati : “I am pregnant due to 
my contact with your elder brother. This is the eighth (month). 
O Brhaspati, this great child in the womb cries much. The 
son of Asija that he is, he has learned the Vedas with their 
six ancillaries and he repeats the Vedic Mantras. 

Your semen virile too is never-failing. It does not behove 
you to have sexual intercourse with me. O holy lord, when 
the period (of gestation) lapses (you may do) as you deem 
fit”. 

41. Though emphatically told thus by her, the noble- 
soulcd Brhaspati of excessive refulgence did not restrain him- 
self, as he was overwhelmed by passion. 

42. The virtuous-souled Brhaspati did have his sexual 
intercourse with her. Even as he was discharging the semen 
virile; the child in the womb spoke thus : 

43. “No Snatakn (a Brahmana who just had his sacred 
ablution after completing his Vedic study) shall deposit his 
(semen virile) here. There is no space here for two. You too 
are one with never-failing semen virile. I have come here 
first.” 

44. Brhaspati, the sage of divine attributes, became in¬ 
furiated on being told thus. He cursed the son of Asija, his 
brother, who was yet in the womb: 

45. “You have spoken thus to me on an occasion coveted 
by all living beings. Since you have spoken thus out of 
delusion, you will enter a long period of darkness”. 

46-47. Due to that curse, the sage thereafter came to be 
called Dlrghatamas. 

Asija (son of Asija—Dlrghatamas) too was highly renowned 
by virtue of his power (of penance) like Brhaspati. He too 



794 


Vciyu Purana 


stayed in the hermitage of his brother observing celibacy. He 
heard of Godharma (the law of cattle—behaving like a bull 
or cow) from the bull, the son of Surabhi (Kamadhcnu). 

48. Asija’s brother, his uncle, had built a house for him. 
While he was staying there, a bull came there casually. 

49. Surrounded by cows he grazed the Darbha grass that 
had been brought for the DarSa 1 rituals. DIrghatamas caught 
hold of the quivering bull by its horns. 

50. Caught by him, the bull could not move even a step. 
Then the bull spoke to him : “O foremost one among the 
strong persons, leave me off. 

51. o dear one, a strong one like you has not been met 
with by me anywhere, even though I had been bearing the 
three-eyed lord (everywhere), as a result of which I have come 
down to the earth. 

52. O most excellent one among strong persons, leave me 
off. I am pleased with you. Choose a boon”. On being told 
thus, the sage told the bull: “Where will you go alive, away 
from me ? 

53. Hence I will not release you, the quadruped that eats 
others’ wealth”. Then that bull replied to DIrghatamas: 

54. “O dear one, to us nothing is sinful. There is no 
theft. We do not distinguish between what should be eaten or 
what should not be eaten or what should be drunk or should 
not be drunk. 

55. We do not know what should be done or what should 
not be done, what should be approached or what should not 
be approached. O Brahmana, we are not sinners. This is 
remembered as the Dharmaofcows and bulls”. 1 2 

56. On hearing the name of cows mentioned, he became 
confused and released him. Thanks to his devotion to the cows 
as ordained by the Vedas, he propitiated the bull. 


1. The sacrificial rite to be performed on the New Moon Day. . 

2. This practice of open and unconcealed sexual intercourse is men¬ 
tioned in the M.Bh. (MW 365A) and seems to have been followed by 
Dirghatamas. The Buddha mentions this Dharma in derision. 



37.57-66 


795 


57 When the bull went away, fully propitiated, He !, can 
to del,berate on the Dharma of cow, devoutlv. He rva S Sy 
engrossed in it and devoted to Ii • ' „ y 

again and again. " P °" d '™« “="“>'17 °™r it 

■ T"l A V" 'T k '?1 M h! ‘ VCit ' hc l)CCOmc foolish and silly- 
minded and molested the wife or his younger brother Auta- 
thya, even though she struggled and wept 

59. Considering it to be his arrogance, Saradvan did not 
brook it Using force and following Godharma (the practice 
of cattle), he had approached his daughter-in-law (the wife 
of younger brother). 


60. On seeing this trespass, Saradvan reflected. The noble- 
souled (Saradvan) knew what was destined to happen. So he 
did not confer death on him (Dlrghatamas). 

61. With eyes turned red due to anger, he shouted to 
Dlrghatamas: You do not distinguish between whom to 
approach and whom not to. Following Godharma you have 
solicited your daughter-in-law. 

62. You are a man of despicable conduct. I am casting 
you o(T. Go away along with your evil action. In spite of being 
blind, old and dependent on others for maintenance you have 
committed a deplorable, sinful action. Therefore, you are for¬ 
saken. I am convinced that you are a person of evil conduct”. 


Suta said : 

63. Thereafter he thought of a ruthless action. After 
rebuking Dlrghatamas many times, he caught hold of him by 
his arms, put him in a sealed casket and hurled it into the 
waters of Gariga. 

64. For seven days the sealed casket was wafted by the 
current. King Bali, the knower of the principles of Dharma, 
who was in the company of his wife, saw the sinking casket 
borne towards him by the current. 

65. Bali, the righteous-souled son of Virocana, saved him 
and took him to his harem where he propitiated him with 
different kinds of food and drinks, and looked after him. 

66. The delighted sage asked Bali to choose a boon accord¬ 
ing to his desire. The leading Danava chose the boon for 
(blessing him with) a son. 



796 


Vayu Puratia 

67 Bali said: “O blessed one, O bestower of honour, it 
behoves you to procreate in my wife sons endowed with 
virtue and wealth, so that my line will be perpetuated”.! 

68 On being requested thus by him, the sage said to the 
kino- “So be it”? The king thereupon sent his wife named 

Sudesna unto him (the sage). ... 

69 ' On seeing him blind and old, the queen did not go un¬ 
to the'sage. She bedecked her servant-maid in ornaments and 
left her with him. 

70-73. The righteous-souled sage ot good sell-control 
begot of that Sudra woman two sons of great prowess, 
Kakslva and Caksus. They studied the Vedas duly and be¬ 
came masters and expounders of Vedas, great enlightened 
Siddhasand excellent ones with direct vision of Dharma. On 
seeing them, Kakslva and Cak§us, the king, Bali, the son of 
Virocana, asked the sage, “Are these my sons?” The sage said, 
“O excellent Asura, no, that is not the case. They ai e mine. 
Due to your deception, these god-like children are born of 
Sudra womb. 

74. Considering me blind and old, Sudesna, your queen, 
sent the Sudra servant-maid unto me and disrespected me . 

75. Bali, thereupon propitiated the excellent sage again. 
The lord rebuked his wife Sudesna. 

76-78. He bedecked her in ornaments and gave her unto 
the sage. The sage DIrghatamas spoke thus to the queen : “O 
splendid lady, if, without showing aversion, you lick from head 
to foot my naked body smeared well with curds mixed with salt, 
you will obtain those sons mentally desired by you”. The queen, 
thereupon, carried out all his instructions. 

79. When she reached the anus, her aversion was so great 
that she avoided it. Thereupon that sage said to her : <c O 
auspicous lady, since you avoided the anus, the eldest son you 
will give birth to will be without anus”. 


1. This Purana has mixed up two different Balis—Bali or Mahabali, 
the rival of Indra, who donated three feet of land to Vamana, was not 
childless. Bana, Usa*s father, was his son. This Bali is another East Indian 
King who being childless requested thus to Dirghatamas. 



37.80-92 


797 


80. Then the queen replied to the sage Dirghatamas, 
“O blessed one, it does not behove you to give me a son like 
that”. 

81-82. The sage said: “O gentle lady, this is your own 
fault. It will not be otherwise. O queen of good rites, I shall 
bestow a son unto you. Even without anus, he will perform all 
bodily functions”. Touching her belly, the sage Dirghatamas 
continued— 

83-84. “O lady of sweet smiles, since' you have licked up 
the curds from my body, your womb is filled like the ocean 
on the Full Moon Day. Five splendid sons comparable to the 
sons of Devas will be born to you. They will be refulgent, 
valiant and righteous and performer of sacrifices.” 

85. Then Anga, the eldest son of Sudesna, was born. The 
other sons born to her thereafter were Vanga, Kalinga, Punclra 
and Brahma (Suhma in Bd. P. v. 87). 

86 . These five were the sons born of Bali’s wife. They 
perpetuated his line. Thus, they were given as sons to Bali 
formerly by Dirghatamas. 

87-88. For certain reasons, his (Bali’s) progeny had 
been prevented by Brahma, saying, “Let there not be any off¬ 
spring of this nobie-soulcd (king) by his own wives”* That was 
why he begot children of human wombs. Then the delighted 
bull, the son of Kamadhenu, spoke these words to Dirghatamas: 

89. “Since you have done this after pondering over 
Godharma , I am pleased with you. I shall release you (from the 
curse). 

90. Hence, look, I shall remove your long period of dark¬ 
ness and gloom, as well as the curse of Brhaspati along with 
the other sins that may be lingering, sticking to your body. 

91. After sniffing at you, I shall remove your fear of death 
and old age.” As soon as he was sniffed at, the darkness was 
destroyed and he began to see. 

92. He regained his eye-sight. He became a young man 


* apatydmatyadare§u is a misprint for apalyamatmadarcsu 

Gf. Bd. P. v. 89 : abalyamasya d&reju svefu ma'bhiit mahatmanah! 




798 


Vayu Pur an a 


blessed with long life. Thus that DIrghatamas was transformed 
by the bull and he became Gautama. 

93. Thereafter Kakslvan went to Giripraja (Girivraja_Bd. 

P.) along with his father. He performed extensive penance for 
the sake of his father as conceived (originally). 

94. After a long period, he became purified through his 
penance. After shaking off his defects, the lord (sage) attained 
Brahmanahood along with his younger brother. 

95. Then spoke his father: “O Lord, now I am (really) 
one blessed with a son. By having a famous and good son (like 
you), 1 have achieved my objective (and am happy and con¬ 
tented) in life.” 

96. With his soul united in Yogic practice, he attained 
Brahman-hood and extinction of (worldly bondage). After 
obtaining Brahmana-hood Kakslvan procreated a thousand 
sons. 

97-99. Those dark-skinned Gautamas (descendants of 
Gautama) are remembered as the sons of Kakslvan. Thus the 
association of DIrghatamas and Bali, the son of Virocana, has 
been narrated. So also the progeny of both. After the corona¬ 
tion of his five sinless sons, the contented Bali resorted to Yogic 
practice. The lord of Yogic soul bides his time roaming (on the 
earth) while remaining invisible to all living beings. 

100 . Dadhivahana, the son of the saintly king Anga, be¬ 
came king. Due to the blunder of Sudesna, this king was 
Anapana (devoid of anus). 

101 . King Diviratha is remembered as the son of Anapana. 
The scholarly son of Diviratha was king Dharmaratha. 

'02. It was this selfsame glorious Dharmaratha by whom 
Soma (Soma juice) was drunk in the course of a Yajna along 
with the noble-souled Sakra on the mountain Visnupada. 

10 .;.. Listen, (the son)of Dharmaratha was king Gitraratha. 
From Citraratha was born king Dasaratha. He was famous 
as Lomapada and his daughter was Santa. 1 



1. Some words missing herein the text are supplied here. 


are given in A (p. 374). They are 



37.104-111 


799 


104. The elephant of Sakra was bom as his elephant 

Cantfika. By means of Mantras (?) he brought the excellent 
vehicle to the earth, 

105. Haryanga’s successor was the king Bhadraratha. 
Bhadraratha’s son was Brhatkarma, the lord of subjects. 

106. Bjhadratha was his son and Brhanmana was born of 
him. Brhanmana procreated the son Rajendra. 

107. He was otherwise known as Jayadratha and from him 
was born king Drdharatha. The son of Drdharatha was 
Janamejaya, the conqueror of the universe. 

108. His successor, the king of Ahgas, was Kama. Kama’s 
son was Surasena and Dvija is remembered’as his son. 


The Sages said : 

109. How was Karna known as the son of a charioteer and 
how did he become a member of the family of kings of Ahgas? 
This we wish to hear. Indeed you are very efficient (in narra¬ 
tion) . 


Sfita replied : 

110, King Brhanmana was born as the son of Brhadbhanu 
(earlier he was mentioned as Brhadratha). He had two wives. 
Both of them were the daughters of Caidya. 

111. They were Yasodevi and Satya. The race is bifurca¬ 
ted on account of these two wives. Jayadratha otherwise known 
as Rajendra was born of Yasodevi. 


104. That noble-minded heroic son of Das'aratha, Caturanga, the pro¬ 
motor of his family, was born through the grace of Rsyasrriga. 

105. It is reported that Prthulasva was Caturanga’s son. The son of 
Prthulas'va was (?) of Campa. The (capital) city of Campa was beautiful. 
It became the beautiful Malini (real name of Campa). 

106-107. The city of Campavati (alias) Campa was inhabited by 
people of four Varnas (castes). They lived in Campavati for sixty thousand 
years. By Brahmanas, Ksattriyas, Vais'yas, by all, their own duty (Dharma) 
was followed. All were devoted to Visnu by performing penance and 
following the duties of their (respective) caste. 

Haryanga became his son by the grace of Purnabhadra. 

—Va.P. (Anandashram, Pune, p. 374) 




800 Vd y u Parana 

112. (Defective verse) Satya gave birth to the famous 
Vijaya who was of mixed Brahmana-Ksatriya caste (?) Vijaya’s 
son was Dlijli and his son was Dhrtavrata. 

113. Dhrtavrata’s son was Satyakarma of great fame. 
Satyakarma’s son was Adhiratha, the charioteer. 

114. He adopted and looked after Karna. Hence Karna 
was known as the son of a charioteer. Thus everything that 
had been asked about Karna has been mentioned to you. 

115. Thus all the kings in the family of Ariga have been 
recounted by me. Now listen to the progeny of Puru in detail 
and in the proper order. 

Siita said : 

116. The mighty-armed son of Puru, Janamejaya became 
a king. His son was Aviddha who conquered the eastern 
region. 

117. From Aviddha was born as son the great hero 
Manasyu. King Jayada was the son of Manasyu. 

118. His successor was the king named Dhundhu. Bahu- 
gavl was the son of Dhundhu. Sanjati was his son. 

119. Sanjati’s son was Raudrasva. Understand his sons. 
Raudrasva begot ten sons of the celestial damsel GhrtacT. 

120-123. They were Rajeyu, Krteyu, Vakseyu, Sthandileyu, 
Ghrtcyu, Jaleyu, Sthaleyu the seventh, Dharmeyu, Sannatcyu 
and the tenth son Vaneyu. He had ten daughters also, viz. 
Rudra, Sudra, Madra, Subha, Jamalaja, Tala, Khala (these 
seven and then), the daughter who is remembered as Gopajala, 
then, Tamrarasa and Ratnakutl. The husband of all of them 
was Prabhakara by name. He belonged to the Atreya line 
(Gotra). 

Anadrsta was a saintly king. Rivcyu was his son. 

124. Riveyu’s wife named Jvalana was the daughter of 
Taksaka. That saintly king begot of that gentle lady a son 
named Ranti. 

125-126. Ranti, the king, begot splendid sons of his wife 
Sarasvati. They were Trasu, Praliratha and Dhruva, who was 
exceedingly righteous. His daughter Gaurl is famous as the 
splendid mother of Mandhata. Dhurya was Pratiratha’s son 
and his son was Kantha. 


37 . 127-139 


801 


127. (Defective verse) His son was Mcdhatithi from 
whom the Brahinanas Kanthayanas originated. Itina (?) was 
the daughter of Anuyama (?). She gave birth to sons. 

128-129. Trasu obtained his favourite son Malina who was 
an expounder of Brahman. Thereafter he obtained Upadata 
and the (following) four sons of Itina (?) : Susmanta, 
Du?yanta, Pravlra and Anagha. The son born to Dusyanta 
was an excellent king and he became an emperor. 

130. That son Bharata was born of Sakuntala. It is from 
him that (the land) took its name Bharata. A disembodied 
(celestial) voice spoke to king Dusyanta. 

131-132. <c O Dusyanta, the mother is but a leathern pouch 
(or bellows). The son belongs to the father. He is identical 
with him by whom he is begotten. Sakuntala tells the truth. 
Maintain your son. O lord of men, he who discharges the semen 
virile redeems the son from the abode of Yama. You are the 
progenitor of this child in the womb. Do not dishonour 
Sakuntala’h 

133. Bharata begot of his three wives nine sons. “These 
arc not befitting me”. Saying this, the king did not approve of 
them. (Pie disowned them). 

134. Then those infuriated mothers slew their sons. Thus 
the births of those sons to the king were futile. 

135. Then the powerful son Bharadvaja, the son of Bfha- 
spati, was brought over there by the Maruts in the course of the 
sacrifices and handed over to him. 

136. In this connection, they cite this story of the intelli¬ 
gent Bharadvaja, his birth and the transfer unto Bharata by the 
Maruts. 

137. When his wife was in the advanced state ofpreg- 
nancy, it is said that Asija died. Looking at his brother’s wife, 
Bt-haspati said : “O auspicious lady, embellish your body with 
ornaments and give me (the pleasure of) sexual intercourse 

with you.” 

138 On being told thus, she said to him, “O holy lord, 
I am pregnant now. The foetus has reached the advanced state 
of maturity. The child repeats the Vedic Mantras. 

139. You too are one whose semen virile never goes in 



802 


Vayu Purana 


vain. This activity (of sexual intercourse with you) is despic¬ 
able”. On being told thus, Brhaspati said smilingly : 

140. ‘‘You need not at all instruct me in good behaviour”. 
With great delight, he forcibly indulged in sexual intercourse 
with her. 

141. "O father (uncle) Brhaspati”, said the foetus to 
Brhaspati who was in a state of exhilaration, “I am already 
embedded here, having come here before. 

142. You arc one whose semen virile never goes in vain. 
There is no space here for two (children).” On being told thus 
by the child in the womb, the infuriated Brhaspati said again: 

143. “Since you prevent me at such a time as this, desired 
by all living beings, you will enter a long period of darkness”. 

144. The (vaginal) passage of his mother was covered 
with his feet by the child. Tiie semen virile of Brhaspati, being 
obstructed in between them became an infant. 

145. On seeing the son instantaneously born Mamata said, 
“O Brhaspati, I am going to my house. Bhara (Nurture), 
Dvaja (that which is born of two).” 

146. When she went away after saying this, he (too) for¬ 
sook the son instantaneously.” “Bharasva (Nurture). Dadham 
(very well)”. Since this was said, he came to be known as 
‘Bharadvaja’. 

147. On seeing the infant abandoned by both the mother 
and the father, the Maruts took away the child Bharadvaja 
out of mercy. 


148-149. At that time Bharata had performed various 
Yajiias and other Iulmja and JVoimillilca (sacrifices) with the 
desire for obtaining a son. In spite of those Yajiias, the lord 
did not obtain any son. Thereafter he performed the A 'land- 
Soma Yajna for the sake of a son. 

150. Being propitiated by that Marut-Soma sacrifice, 
the Maruts (gave) him Bharadvaja, the intelligent son of 
Bjrhaspati. 

151. On obtaining that son Bharadvaja, Bharata said : <f O 
lord, with you as my son, I am satisfied, since all my previous 
children had been killed”. 

152. The births of his (i.e, Bharata’s) previous sons had 


37.153-164 


803 


been in vain ( vitatha ). So Bharadvaja was known by the name 
Vitatha. 

153. Hence the Divine child Bharadvaja turned into a 
Ksatiiya from mahinana-hood. He is remembered by the 
names Dvimuhhydyana (having two important abodes) and 
Dvipitrka (having two fathers). 

15 r. After the birth (succession) of Vitatha, Bharata went 
to heaven (passed away). Vitatha’s successor was Bhuvamanyu. 

155. Four sons comparable to the Mahabhutas (great 
elements) were born to Bhuvamanyu. They were Brhatksatra, 
Mahavlrya, Naraand the powerful Gagra. 

156. ThesonofNara was Samkrti. His sons were very 
powerful. Guruvlrya and Trideva are remembered as the sons 
of Samkrti. There were none greater than they. 

157. The successors of Gagra were born of Sinibaddha. 
Therefore the Gagryas (descendants of Gagra) are remembered 
as Brahmanas with the traits of Ksatriyas. 

158. Blilma was the son of Mahavlrya. From him was born 
Ubhaksaya. His wife Visala gave birth to three sons. 

159. She gave birth to Trayvaruni, Puskarin and the third 
son Kapi. Kapi’s descendants were excellent Ksatriyas and 
those of the other two arc said to be great sages. 

] 00. The descendants of Gagra, Samkrti and Mahavlrya 
were Brahmanas endowed with Ksatriya traits too. They 
merged with the line of Angiras. Now the line of Brhatksatra 
will be recounted. 

101. Brhatksatra’s successor was a pious one named 
Suhotra. Suhotra’s successor was one named Hastin. Formerly 
this city named Hastinapura was built by him. 

162. II as tin’s successor were three, viz. Ajamidha, 
Dvimldha and Purunildha. They were all extremely devout 
and pious. 1 

163-164. Ajamidha’s sons were splendid. They perpetua¬ 
ted the auspicious line. They were very pious. They were 

1. The following additional verse numbered 167 in A, is translated as 
follows : 

“The queens of Ajamldha were auspicious and perpetuators of the Kuru 
race. They were (by name) Nilini, Kesini and the beautiful Dhumini’. 





804 


VSyu Purdna 

born to the great king in his old age after a great penance, 
thanks to the grace of Bharadvaja. Listen to their extension. 
Kantha was born to Ajamidha and Kesinl. 

165. Medhatithi was his son and from him were born the 
Brahmanas called Kanthayanas. King Brhadvasu was born to 
Ajamidha and (his second wife) Dhumini. 

165. Brhadvasu’s son was Brhadvisnu who was very strong. 
His son was Brhatkarma whose son was Brhadratha. 

167. His son was Visvajit, whose son was Senajit. The 
four sons of Senajit were well known in the world. 

168. They were Rucirasva, Kavya, Rama of steady bow 
and Vatsa, the king of Avant! from whom the Parivatscira (era 
started). 

169. Paicirasva’s successor was Prtlmscna of great fame. 
Para was the son of Pythusena and Nipa was born of Para. 

170. We have heard that a hundred sons were horn to Nipa. 
They are called ‘Nlpas’. All of them were kings. 

171. The most glorious king among them who raised the 
fame of the race and stabilised the race was Samara with his 
capital in Kathpilya. He was fond of war. 

172. Samara had three sons endowed with all good 
qualities. They were Para, Para and Sattvadasva. Para’s son 
Vrsu shone well. 

173. A son named Sukrii endowed with all good qualities 
was born to Vrsu, thanks to his meritorious activities. Vibhraja 
was his son. 

174. Vibhraja’s successor was the king named Anuha who 
was very famous. He was the husband ofRcI and so the son-in- 
law of $uka. 

175. Anuha s successor was Brahmadatta of great penance. 
"Vogasunu was his son and his son Visvaksena became a king. 

176. Vibhraja’s sons became kings, thanks to their merito¬ 
rious activities. Visvaksena’s son was Udaksena. 

1/7. His successor was Bhallata by whom the king was 
killed formerly. Bhallata’s successor was king Janamejaya. On 
his behalf, all the Nlpas were destroyed by Ugrayudha. 


37 . 178-189 


805 


The Sages asked : 

178. Whose son was Ugrayudha ? In which family was he 
born and glorified ? What for were all the Nipas destroyed by 
him ? 

Sula said : 

179-180. The scholarly Yavinara was the son and succes¬ 
sor of DvimJdha. Dhrtiman was his son. His son was Satya- 
dhrti. Satyadhrti’s son was the valorous Drdhanemi. The king 
named Suvarma was Drclhanemi’s son. 

181. The valorous Sarvabhauma (lord of the entire earth) 
was Suvarma’s son. He shone as the sole lord of the earth and 
he became famous as Sarvabhauma. 

182. In his great family was born (a king named) Mahat- 
pauravanandana. King Rukmaratha is remembered as the son 
of Mahatpaurava. 

183. Rukmaratha’s son was the king named Suparsva. 
Suparsva’s son named Sumati was very virtuous. 

184. The son of Sumati was lord Sannatiman, the right- 
eous-souled king. His son was named Sanati and Krta was his 

son. 

185. He was a disciple of the noble-souled Hiranyanabhi 
of the Kauthuma branch (of Samavedic study). Twenty four 
Saman-Sariihitas were expounded by him. 

186. The sons of Krta, the singers of Saman hymns, are re¬ 
membered by the name ‘Pracyas’ (Easterners). The 
heroic Ugrayudha was one of the sons of Krta. He was the scion 
of the family of Puru.. 

187. The mighty-armed lord of Paiicalas named Nila, who 
was the grandfather of Prsata, was killed by him (Ugrayudha) 
(and thereby) he exhibited his valour. 

188. Ugrayudha’s son (successor) was a very famous king 
named Ksema. Suvira was born of Ksema. Suvira’s son was 
Nrpanjaya. Viraratha was born of Nrpanjaya. Thus these are 
remembered as Pauravas (descendants of Puru) . 

189 Kin" Nila was born of N'ilini (the third wife) of Aja- 
midha.’ Susan ti was born of Nila, thanks to his severe penance. 


806 


Vayu Purdna 


190. Purujanu was the son of Susanti. Riksa was born of 
Purujanu. The following were the sons and successors of Riksa. 

191. They were : Mudgala, Srrljaya, the king Brhadisu, 
Vikranta who was younger to him and Karnpilya, the fifth. 

192-193. For the sustenance and the upkeep of all the five 
the father spoke to them thus : “Know that there are five flouri¬ 
shing territories for all the five of you.” Since the five were 
sufficient, all the territories were together well known as Paiica- 
las.* Maudgalyas, the descendants of Mudgala,were Brahmanas 
endowed with Ksatriya traits. 

194. These were known ns Kanthamudgalas and they mer¬ 
ged into the Atigirasa Gotra. Mudgala’s eldest son was very 
famous. He was engrossed in the meditation of Brahman. 

195. From him Indrasena conceived Badhyasva. We have 
heard that Mcnaka bore to Badhyasva twins. 

196-197. They were Divodasa the saintly king and Ahalya 
of great fame. Ahalya bore Satananda the excellent sage to 
Saradvata. His son was Satyadhrti of great fame. He was a 
master of the science of archery. 

o 

198. On seeing an Apsaras (celestial damsel) in front, the 
semen virile of Satyadhrti was emitted in the bush of Sara-grass 
and twins were born. 

199-200. Santanu who had come that way ahunting took 
them out of mercy (Krpa). The boy is remembered as Krpa 
and the girl Krpi. She was also known as Gautaml. Thus the 
race of Gautama, known as Saradvatas and Rtathyas, has been 
recounted. 


Henceforth I shall recount the progeny of Divodasa. 

201 Divodasa’s successor was king Mitrayu who was en¬ 
grossed in meditation on Brahman. Maitreya was born of him. 
is rememberd that these too got merged (in other families). 
202 . These too got merged into the family (of Bhrgu). 
J r Y, Were ( Bra |™anas) endowed with Ksatriya traits. They 

familv^Th 3S u ^ avas> K ln g Cyavana was born (in that 
family). The scholarly Pratiratha was born of him. 


*Pailca (five) +alam (sufficient) 



807 


203. The intelligent Sudasa was born of Cyavann 
was born as the son of Sudasa. Somalia was his son ^ 

204-205. When the race was about to be extinct, Ajamidha 
was born again. That was Somalia. Somalia’s son was Tanm 
When he was killed hundred other sons were born to the noble- 
soulcd lord Ajamidha in his birth as Somaka. The youngest of 
them, Prsata was Drupada’s father. } ° 1 


206-209. His son was Dhystadyumna and Dhrstaketu was 
his son. Dhuminl, the queen of Ajamidha, was desirous of a son 
In her rebirth she performed a very difficult penance for a hun¬ 
dred years. She performed Homas in the fire. She kept awake 
She ate but little and that too only the holy food. She perform¬ 
ed great holy rites. Day and night she stayed on the Kusa 
mattress alone. By these rigorous activities, she became smoke- 
coloured. The powerful Ajamidha begot of her Rksa, asmoke- 
coloured son, who was elder brother of Sita (one of white 
colour). Sam vara na was born of Rksa. Kuru was bom of Sam- 
varana. 


210. After treading on (conquering) Prayaga, he built 
Kuruksctra. The cxcessive-splendoured king ploughed it for 
many years. 

211. While it was being ploughed, Sakra shone there and 
granted this boon : Your (Kuruksetra) shall be beautiful, holy 
and resorted to by meritorious persons. 

212-213. Persons born in his family were excellent kings 
famous as Kurus. Kuru’s beloved sons were Sudhanvan, Jahnu, 
Pariksita the great king, Putraka and Arimardana. It is remem¬ 
bered that the intelligent Suhotra was the successor of Sudhan¬ 
van. 


214-215. Cyavana was his son. The king was an expert in 
religious affairs. Krta was the son of Cyavana. He performed 
great penance and many Yajnas. The king procreated his 
famous son Vidyoparicara who claimed friendship of Indra. He 
was a great hero who could traverse the sky and was known as 
Vasu too. 

216-217. Girika bore seven sons to Vidyoparicara—Brhad- 
ratha, a great warrior, who became famous as the king of 
Magadha, Pratyagjrha, Kusa, one whom they call Manivahana 
Mathailya, Lalittha and Matsyakala the seventh. 


808 


Vayu Purdna 


218. Bfhadratha’s successor was famous by the name of 
Kusagra. Kusagra’s son was a powerful king named Rsabha. 

219. Rsabha’s successor was a virtuous king named Puspa- 
van. King Satyahita is remembered as his valoious successor. 

220-221. His son was Sudhanvan. From him the valorous 
Drja was born. Orja’s son was Nabhasa and from him was born 
that powerful king Jarasandha. He was born in two pieces and 
he was joined by Jara. Jarasandha was mighty-armed because 
he was joined by Jara. 

222. This Jarasandha of great strength was the conqueror 
of all Ksatriya kings. Jarasandha’s son was the valorous Saha- 
deva. 

223. Sahadeva’s son was the glorious Somadhi of very great 
penance. Srutasruva was the son of Somadhi and is glorified as 
Magadha. 

Suta sold : ^ 

224. Janamejaya was the successor of Parlksita. Sruta- 
sena’s successor was named Bhlmasena. (lines missing). 

225. Jahnu begot a son named Suratha who became a 
king. Suratha’s successor was the heroic king Viduratha. 

226. It is well known that Viduratha’s son too was Sarva- 
bhauma. Jayatsena was bom of Sarvabhauma and Aradhi was 
his son. 

227. Mahasattva was born of Aradhi and Ayutayu came 
thereafter. Akrodhana was the son of Ayutayu. It is remember¬ 
ed that Devatithi was born of him. 

228. It was Rksa who became the successor of Devatithi. 
Bhlmasena was born of Rksa and Dilipa was his son. 

229. Pratlpa was the son of Dilipa. It is remembered that . 
three sons were born to him. Those three were Devapi, Santanu 
and Bah lika. 

230. King Saptabahlisvara should be known as (the son) 
of Bahllka. Somadatla too, of great fame, was the son of 
Bahllka. 

231. Bhuri, Bhurisravas and Sala were born of Somadatta. 
With a desire to accumulate virtue Devapi (renounced every¬ 
thing and) went to the forest. 


37.232-245 


809 


232. Sage Devapi became the preceptor of Dcvas. To 
this noble-souled sage, two sons Cyavana and Istaka were born. 

233. Santanu became king. He was a scholar and a great 
physician ( MahabhUa ). About this Mahabhisa they cite this 
verse. 

234. “Whomsoever docs the king touch, be he very old due 
to the efflux of time, becomes a youth again. Therefore they 
know him as Samtanu (Sam —happiness, Tanu —body)/’ 

235. Therefore the quality of his being Sarhtanu was well 
known among the subjects. That righteous king Samtanu 
married Jahnavx (Ganga). 

236. The lord begot a son of her, named Devavrata (who 
later became) Bhlsma. That Bhlsma became famous as the 
grandfather of the Pantfavas. 

237-238. After some time Samtanu begot his most favourite 
son Vicitravlrya who as king did much for the welfare of the 
subjects. Krsnadvaipayana begot of Vicitravlrya’s wife (< ksetra ), 
Dhrtarastra, Pandu and Vidura. Gandharl bore to Dhrtarastra 
a hundred sons. 

239. Duryodhana was the eldest among them. He became 
the lord of all Ksatriyas. Madri and the queen Prtha became 
the wives of Pandu. 

240-241. Sons bestowed by gods were born of them on 
behalf of Pandu. Yudhisthira was born, thanks to the grace of 
Dharma; Vrkodara was born of Vayu; Dhananjaya whose 
valour was equal to that of Sakra was born of Indra. Sahadcva 
and Nakula were born to Madri, thanks to the grace of Asvins. 

242. Five sons were born to DraupadI from the (five) 
Pandavas. DraupadI bore Srutividdha, the eldest of them, to 
Yudhisthira. 

243. Hidarhba bore her son Ghatotkaca to Bhlmasena. 
Kasya too bore her son Sarvavrka to Bhlmasena. 

244 . Vijaya, the princess of Madra land, bore Suhotra to 
Sahadeva. Niramitra was bom to KaremaU of Vaidya (?) as 
the son of Nakula. 

245. The heroic Abhimanyu was born of Subhadra as the 
son of Partha. Parlksit was born of Uttara, the princess of 
Virata, as the son of Abhimanyu. 


810 


Vayu Parana 


246. King Janamejaya was the successor of Parlksit. H e 
established Vajcsaneyika Brahmanas. 

247-248. The infuriated Vaisariipayana (said to him), «q 
evil-minded one, your directions (rule) will not remain long 
here in this world without an enemy (without being protested 
against). As long as I am alive in this world, this (act of yours) 
cannot be praised.” Thereupon, Janamejaya was faced with 
difficulties all round. 

249. He worshipped lord Prajapati by offering Havis in 
the Paurnamasa Yajfia. He saw that the different materials 
were offered in the sacrifice of the lord. Still he was in 
difficulties? 

250. Janamejaya, the son of Parlksit, the descendant of 
Puru, then performed Asvamedha twice. Thereafter, he made 
those Vajasaneyaka Brahmanas function. Janamejaya was 
crippled (defeated) three times. 

251. Crippled at the hands of As'vakomukhyas, crippled 
at the hands of the residents of Angas, and crippled at the 
hands of the people of MadhyadeSa (Middle Lands)! Janame¬ 
jaya became Trikharvi (crippled three times). He was distres¬ 
sed. Being cursed along with those Brahmanas, he suffered 
ruin. 

252. Satanlka of truthful exploit and strength was his 
son. After him (Janamejaya), the Brahmanas crowned his son 
Satanlka. 


253-255. The powerful As'vamedhadatta was the son of 
Satanlka. Adhisamakrsna was born as the son of Asvamedha- 
datta. He conquered the cities of his enemies. He is the 
present ruler, of righteous soul and great fame. It is under his 
rule that you have been able to perform this Dirghasatra (sacri¬ 
fice of long duration) for three years. It is very difficult to be • 
performed. O excellent Brahmanas, (besides) there is another 
a ra lasting for two years, which is being performed in Kuru- 
ksetra on the banks of the river Drsadvati. 


The Sages said : 

, hi ;! 6 ; ^ highly intelligent Suta, we wish to hear the 

kin~ I, T f SUbjCCtS alon § with the kings. The past 
kings have been already mentioned by you. 


811 


37.257-267 

257-259. We wish to hear all these—the activities that 
will be undertaken by them, and their names, the kings who will 
be born, their time calculated in years, the extent of theYugas, 
their good points and their defects, their happiness and misery 
and those of the subjects, their religious activities and their 
passionate pursuits as well as their monetary dealings. Enu¬ 
merate all these to us who ask you. 

On being requested thus, Suta the most excellent among 
the intelligent ones, mentioned everything in the manner it 
would occur and as he had seen and heard. 

Suta said : 

260-261. Even as I recount listen and understand the 
future events, 1 the Kaliyuga and the Manvantaras in the 
manner they had been described to me by Vyasa of wonderful 
activities. Henceforth, I shall mention the kings who will be 
born in future. 

262-265. I shall mention the descendants of Aila, Iksvaku, 
Sudyumna and other kings in whom this splendid territory 
of the Iksvakus will be vested. I shall mention all other kings 
also besides these who will be born in future, viz. Ksatriyas, 
Parasavas, Sudras and Brahmanas, Andhas (Andhras), Sakas, 
Pulindas, Tulikas, Yavanas, Kaivartas, Abhiras, Sabaras, 
and all other Mleccha (outcaste) tribes. 

I shall m'ention those kings by names and the duration in 
years of their rule. 

266. This present king Adhisamakrsna is a king belonging 
to the Puru dynasty. I shall mention all the future kings in his 
family. 

267. Nirvaktra will be the son of Adhisamakrsna. When 
his city Hastinapura is swept away by Ganga he will 
abandon it and live happily at Kausambl. 


1* Verses 260-310 describe the ‘future* dynasties of kings. The dynasties 
mentioned here arc (1) Brhadratha, (2) Pradyota, (3) Sisunaka (Sisunaga), 
(4) Nanda, (5) Maurya, (6) Kanva and (7) Andhra. Guptas (if the read¬ 
ing be correct) arc merely mentioned and Mlcccha and other rulers arc also 
referred to. 




812 V& JU Purdrta 

268. His son will be Usna. Citraratha will be born of 
Usna. Sucidratha will be born of Citraratha, and Vj-timan will 
be born of Sucidratha. 

269. Suscna of great fame and prowess will be born there¬ 
after. To Suscna will be born the king named Sutlriha. 

270. Ruca will be born of Sutlrtha. Then Tricak?a will 
be born. Tricaksa’s successor will be Sukhibala. 

271. Sukhibala’s son will be the king Paripluta. King 
Sunaya will be born as the son of Paripluta. 

272. King Mcdhavi will be the son of Sunaya and Medha- 
vin’s son will be Dantfapani. 

273. Dandapani’s son will be Niramitra and Ksemaka will 
be the son of Niramitra. These twentyfive kings (?) will be born 
in the race of Puru. 

274-275. In this connection the following verse describing 
the subsequent race has been cited by Brahmanas who know 
ancient lore. “This race which has produced Brahmanas and 
Ksatriyas, and which is honoured by Devas and sages, will be 
extinct in the Kali age after coming to Ksemaka”. Thus the race 
of Puru has been enumerated precisely. 

276. (The race) of the intelligent son of Pandu, the noble- 
souled Arjuna (has been narrated). 

Henceforth I shall mention the race of the Iksvakus of 
great souls. 

277-278. Brhadratha’s successor was the heroic king 
Brhatksaya. His son was Ksaya. Vatsavyuha was the 
son of Ksaya. After Vatsavyuha, Prativyuha became king. 
His son is Divakara and this king is ruling over the city of 
Ayodhya now. 

279. Divakara s son will be the renowned Sahadeva. 
Brhadasva will become the successor of Sahadeva. 

280. Bhanuratha will be his son. His son will be Pratitasva. 
Suprallta will become the son of Pratitasva. 

281-282. Sahadeva will be his son and his son will be 
Sunaksatra. Kinnara, the oppressor of his enemies, will become 
the son of Sunaksatra. Antariksa, the son of Kinnara, will be a 
great (king). 

283-284. Suparna will be born of Antariksa and Amitrajit 


37.285-294 


813 


will be born of Suparna. His son will be Bharadvaja. Dharminwill 
be his son. A son named Krtanjaya will be born to Dharmin. 
VratawillbethesonofKrtanjaya and his son will be Ranan- 
jaya. To Rananjaya will be born the heroic king Sanjaya. 
Sakya will be born as the son of Sanjaya. From Sakya will be 
born Suddhodana. 

285. In the family of Sakya, Rahula will be born to 
Suddhodana (?) Then Prascnajit will be born. Ksudraka will be 
born then. 

286. Ksulika will be the son of Ksudraka. From Ksulika 
will be born Suratha. Sumitra, the son of Suratha, will be the 
last king. 

287. All these mentioned are the future Iksvaku kings- 
in the Kali age. They will be'born in the race of Brhadbala 
in the Kali age. All of them will be heroic, learned and truth¬ 
ful. They will be the conquerors of the sense-organs. 

288. In this connection the following verse describing the 
subsequent race is cited by those who know the future. “This 
race of the Iksvakus will end with Sumitra. After coming to 
the king Sumitra, it will become extinct in the Kali age.” Thus 
the Ksetra (domain ?) originating from Manu and descending 
from Aila has been described. 

289. Henceforth I shall mention the kings of Magadha, 
the descendants of Bfhadratha, i.e. the kings of the race of 
Jarasandha and the family of Sahadeva. 

290. I shall mention the past, present and future kings 
in accordance with their importance. Even as I recount, listen 
and understand, 

291. In the Mahabharata war Sahadeva fell. His son 
Somadhi, the saintly king, ruled over Girivraja. 

292. He ruled over the kingdom for fiftyeight years. His 
son Srutasravas ruled for sixtyfour years. Ayutayu ruled for 
twentysix years. Niramitra enjoyed the earth for a hundred 
years and passed over to heaven. 

293. Sukrtta ruled over the earth for fiftysix years. Brhat- 
karman ruled the kingdom for twentythree years. 

294. Senajit enjoys the kingdom (now). (His son) Srutan- 
jaya will be king for forty years. 




814 


Viiyu Pu,an a 

295. Mahabala, the mighty-armed and endowed with great 
intellect and exploit, will become king and rule over the earth 
for thirtyfivc years. 

296. Suci will remain in the kingdom for fiftyeight years 
Ksema will be the king for full twentyeight years. 

297. Bhuvata the powerful will maintain the kingdom f 0r 
sixtyfour years. Then Dharmanetra will be the king for f u n 
five years. 

298. Njpati (?) will then enjoy the kingdom for fifty, 
eight years. Suvrata’s rule will be for thirtyeight years. 

299. Drdhasena will be the king for forty, ten and eight 
(i.e. fiftyeight) years. Then Sumati will be in possession of 
the kingdom for thirtythree years. 

300. Sucala will enjoy the kingdom for twentytwo years 
Thereafter, Sunetra will enjoy the kingdom for forty years. 

301. Satyajit will enjoy the earth for eightythree years. 
After attaining the kingdom Virajit will enjoy it for thirtyfive 
years. 

302. Arinjaya will be in possesssion of the earth for fifty 
years. These thirtytwo kings will be the future rulers in the line 
of Brhadratha. 

30 3-304. Altogether they will rule for full thousand years, 
hen the descendants of Brhadratha cease to rule and when 
the Vitahotras occupy the throne, even as all the Ksatriyas 
stand gazing Pradyota* Munika will kill his master and' crown 
his own son as the king. 

305.. That king of the future will be devoid of statesman¬ 
ship or just policies. All the vassals will bow down before him. 
That excellent man will be king for twentythree years. 

6 Thereafter the king named Palaka will rule for 
wentyfour years. Then king Visakhayupa will rule for fifty 

307. The rule of Ajaka will be for thirtyone years. His 
son Vartivardhana will rule for twenty years. 

p . five future sons (and successors) of 

>o a wi rule for one hundred and thirtyeight years. 


’As per Bd. P. v. 123, Pradyota is the 
Jtus father. 


prince enthroned and Munika was 



37 . 309-322 


815 


Destroying their fame entirely, Sisunaka (Sisunaga) will become 
king (at Varanasi).* 

309-310. His son will attain Girivraja in Varanasi. The 
suzerainty of Sisunaka (Sisunaga) will be for forty years. His 
son Sakavarrn* will iulc foi tlnrtysix years. Then for twenty 
years Ksemavarma will be the king. 

311. Ajatasatru will be the king for twentyfive years. 
Thereafter Ksatraujas will rule the Kingdom for forty years. 

312. King Bimbisara will rule for twentyeight years. King 
Darsaka will rule for twentyfive years. 

313. The next king will be Udayl who will rule for thirty- 
three years. In the fourth year of his rule, he will build his 
capital city named Kusumapura (Mod. Patna)'on the southern 
bank of Ganga. 

314 The king Nandivardhana will live for fortytwo years. 
The king Mahanandin will be the king for fortythree years. 

315. Thus the kings of the Sisunaka (Sisunaga) dynasty 
will be ten in number. Theyaltogcther willrulefor three hundred 
andsixtytwo years. 

316. All the members of the Saisunaka (Saisunaga) family 
will be the contemporaries of the following kings who will be 
kinsmen to Ksatriyas. 

317-319. Those are twentyfour Iksvaku kings, twentyfive 
Paricalas, twentyfour Kalakas, twentyfour Haihayas, thirtytwo 
Kalihgas, twentyfive Sakas, twentysix Kurus, twentyeight 
Maithilas, twentythree Surasenas and twenty Vltihotras. All 
these kings will rule simultaneously. 

320. Mahapadma will be born ofaSudra wife of Maha¬ 
nandin. He will be a king over all Ksatriyas. 

321. Thereafter all the future kings will be born of Sudra 
wombs. Mahapadma will be the sole ruler with a single royal 
umbrella. 

322. He will rule over the earth for twentyeight years. 


*Varaiiasyam the 1st word from the next verse (no. 309) be better 
connected with Sisunaga’s becoming a king at Varanasi to avoid confusion 
in v. 309. 







816 


Voyu Puraria 


Due to the power of the inevitable future, he will uproot all the 
Ksatriyas. 

323. His sons will be thousands. For eight years twelve of 
them will rule as kings. In succession to Ivlahapadma they will 
become kings in order. 

324. Kautilya will exterminate all of them by means of 
the twice eight of them (sixteen). After enjoying the kingdom 
of the earth 1 for a hundred years, the moon in the form of 
Nanda will set and fall down. 

325. Kautilya will instal Candragupta as king. Kin» 
Candragupta will be ruling for twentyfour years. 

326. Bhadrasara {?), the next king, will be king for 
twentyfive years. King Asoka will rule over the men for twenty- 
six years. 


327. His son Kunala will rule for eight years. Kunala’s 
son Bandhupalita will enjoy the kingdom for eight years. 

328. Bandhupalita’s successor Indrapalita will rule for 
ten years (?) King Devavarma will be king for seven years. 

329. King Satadbara, his son, will rule for eight years. 
King Brhaaasva will be the ruler for seven years. 


330. These are the nine kings who will enjoy the earth. 
The earth will be in their possession for full one hundred and 
thirty seven years. 2 

331. The general Puspamitra will drive out Byhadratha 
and will rule over the kingdom continuously for sixty years. 

332. The sons of Puspamitra will be kings for eight 
years. The eldest of all of them will be the king for seven 
years. 

333. Thereafter Vasumitra, his son, will be king for ten 
years. Then Dhruka (?), his son, will rule for two years. 


1. Instead of bhuktva mahim hereof, Pargiter’s suggestion (Dynasties of the 
Koh Age, p 26) <bhuktamahV -the earth that was-enjoyed (for 100 

years)’is a better reading. 

Sungas , Reading tebhya b SuA S 6n gamiyati ‘from them the earth will go to 



37.333-346 


817 


334. After him the Pulindakas will rule for three years. 
King Ghosasuta too will rule for three years. 

335. Thereafter* Vikramamitra will be king for many 
years. King Bhagavata will rule for thirtytwo years. 

336. His son K$emabhumi will rule for ten years. Ten 
Tuhga (? Sunga) kings will enjoy the earth. 

337. (Defective verse) They will enjoy the earth for full 
hundred and twelve years and it perhaps will go to Sudcva who 
will not be a (born) king but an indulgent fellow ever since his 
childhood. He will then become a king. 

338. There will be another king Dcvabhumi among the 
Srngas (? Sungas). He will be aKanthayana (Kanvayana— 
‘Belonging to Kanva gotra’) and will rule for nine years. 

339. Bhutimitra, his son, will be king for twentyfour years. 
After him king Narayana will rule for twelve years. 

340. His son Susanna will rule for ten years. These four 
kings of lofty activities will be Kanthayana (Kanvayana) 
Brahmanas. 

341. They will make the vassals bow down to them. They 
will rule for fortyfive years. After the change of their rule, 
Andhras will come in. 

342. Driving out Kanthayanas (Kanvayanas), over¬ 
powering Susarman and making the remaining forces of the 
Srrigas (? Surigas) dwindle down, Sindhuka of the Andhra race 
will gain possession of the earth. 

343. King Sindhuka will rule for twentythree years. After 
him Bhata (Krsna) will rule for ten and eight years (?) 

344. His son, Srlsatakarni will be very great. Satakarni 
will rule for fifty and six years, 

345. Apadabaddha, his son, will rule (first) for ten years, 
(then) for twentyfour years and (then) for six years. 

346. Nemikrsna will rule for twentyfive years. Then for 
full one year Hala will be the king. 


*Bd, P. v. 154 reads sapta for tato hereof. But Bd. P. reading fixed the 
period of the king’s reign. 



818 Purana 

347. Five (or) seven kings (of this race) will b c very 
powerful. Putrikascna will rule for twentyfivc years. 

348. Satakarni will be king for one year. SivasvamI will 
rule for twenty eight years. 

349. King Gautamiputra will rule for twcntyouc years 
among men. Thereafter Yajhasri of the Satakarni family will be 
the king for nineteen years. 

350. After him, king Vijaya will rule for only six years. 
DandasrI Satakarni, his son, will for three years. 

351. Pulova (Pulumayi) will rule for seven years. There 
will be other kings as well. Altogether there will be thirty 
Andhra kings who will enjoy the earth. 

352. The rule of ‘the Andhras will cover a period of 
four hundred, five and six (four hundred and eleven) years. 
There will be five families of the Andhras and all of them will 
be (are) equal (inpower). 

353-355. There will be ten and seven Abhlra kings, seven 
Gardabhins (Gardabhillas), ten Sakas, eight Yavanas, fourteen 
Maunas, as kings. Andhras will enjoy the earth for two 
hundred and one hundred years. Sakas will enjoy the earth 
for three hundred and eighty years. 

356. Yavanas will enjoy the earth for eighty years. 
It is remembered (prophesied) that Tusaras will be in 
possession of the earth for five hundred years. 

357. Thirteen Marunda families will rule for four 
hundred and fifty years along with (other) Sudras. There will 
be other Mleccha tribes as well. 

358. * Eleven of those Mlecchas will enjoy (the earth) for 
three hundred years. Then the Sudra tribes (Kilakila) Koli- 
kilas (?) will rule for an equal period (?) 

359. Vindhyasakti will take over the administration from 
Kolikilas. Having supervised over the administration for 
ninetysix years, he will pass away. 

369. Listen to and understand the future Sudra clans 
called Disakas (?) Svarapuranjaya will be the son of Sesa, 
the king of serpents (Vaidisaka—residents of Vidisa?). 

361-362. That king, born of the race of serpents, will be 
a king who will enjoy. The following kings: Sadacandra 
who will be a part of the moon, Nakhavan the second, Dhana- 


37.363-375 


819 


dharma the next one, Vimsaja the fourth and Bhutinanda 
thereafter, will be kings in the foreign land (or at Vidisa?) 

363. At the close of the rule of Nandana of the Ahgas, 
Madhunandi will become the king. His younger brother will be 
Nandiyasas by name. 

364-355. There will be three kings in his family: Dohitra, 
Sisuka and Pravlra. SiSuka will rule over Purika. The powerful 
Pravira will be the son of VindhyaSakti, He will rule over the 
city Kahcanaka (along with the others) for sixty years. 

3()6. They will perform Vajapcya Yajhas with the offerings 
of excellent Daksinas. His four sons will become great rulers of 
men. 


367. When the family of Vindhyakas becomes extinct, 
three kings of Bahlikas. will enjoy the kingdom for thirty 
years. Supratlka and Nabhira (will be the prominent kings). 

368. The king named Sakyama will be the ruler of Mahisls. 
Puspamitras and Pattamitras will rule for thirteen years. 

369. Seven excellent kings will rule over Mckala (Amar- 
kantaka). The kings in Komala (Comilla, Bengal) will be very 
strong and powerful. 

370. Nine kings of great intellect and well known as Meghas 
will become the kings of the Nisadha (Marwar, Dc 140) land. 
They will rule till the end of the Manvantara. 

371. Those strong and powerful kings wili be born in the 
race of Nala. Visvasphani, the powerful, will become the ruler of 
Magadhas. 

372. After exterminating all the other kings he will make 
Kaivartas, Pahcakas, Pulindas and Brahmanas as well as the 
other castes (rule over the kingdom). 

3 /3 He will establish kings in different lands, thanks to 
his excessive splendour. Visvasphani will be very powerful and 
strong in war like Visnu. 

374 It is said that in external appearance, Visvasphani 
will be like a eunuch. He will destroy the existing Ksatr.yas 


and make other KLsatriya clans. 

375. After propitiating Devas, 
times that strong king will reach the 
and cast off his body. 


Pitrs and Brahrnanas many 
banks of Jahnavl (Ganga) 


820 Vd J u Purarta 

376. After forsaking his body, he will go to Sakra’s region. 
Thereafter, the nine Naka (Naga) kings will enjoy the city of 
Campavatl. 

377. The seven Nagas will enjoy the beautiful city 0 f 
Mathura. 

Kings born of the family of Guptas 1 will enjoy all the terri¬ 
tories near Gi.'iga such as Pravaga, Saketa and Magadha. 

378. The descendants of Manidhanya will enjoy the terri¬ 
tories of Nisadha, Yaduka, Saislta and Kalatopaka. 

379. Devaraksitas (?) will enjoy the territories of 
Kosalas, Andhras, Paundras and Tamraliptas along with the 
oceans as well as the beautiful city of Campa. 

380. Guha will protect Kalihgas, Mahisas, Mahendra- 
nilaya and other territories. 

381. (The king) named Kanaka will enjoy Strirastra (the 
women’s territory, Kamarupa) and Bhaksyakas. All these 
kings will be contemporaries. 

382. Thereafter, 2 the untruthful and unrighteous Yavanas 
of great fury and of little grace will rule here spreading their 
religion, spending vast riches and giving vent to their lust. 

383. Those kings will not be duly crowned. They will have 
all the defects of the (Kali) Age. They will commit evil actions. 

384. During the remaining period of the Kali Age, the 
kings will enjoy the Earth, not even hesitating to kill women and 
children and to destroy one another. 

385. The races of those kings will gain continuous ascen¬ 
dancy (at some time or in some places) or flourish and perish 
in succession in due course. 

386. They will be devoid of piety, true love and real wealth. 
All the common people coming into close contact with them, 

too will follow the customs and habits of Mleccha (aliens and 
outcastes). 

387. They will be acting contrary to accepted traditions. 


1. Bd. P. v. 195 reads Sapta for Gupta hereof. 

Th- 38 , 2 ' 4 ? 5 J deplct a gruesome picture of the advanced Kali Yuga. 

well Tr T ( t S idcntiCa ‘ VerSeS ) are fo und in other Puranas as 
the Deonle f states that such was the actual condition of 

from200B.0..0 200A.D._,h. p.riod to which ihcc 
came to be composed. 



37.388-399 


821 

They will destroy their subjects. The kings will be greedy and 
devoted to mendacious behaviour. 

388-389. When their turn is over, women will outnumber 
men in that Age. People will become more and more deficient 
in learning and stiength. Their span of life will grow less and 
less. When their decline reaches the limit the ruling kings 
overwhelmed by Kalawill be ruined. 

390. Struck down by Kalki, all the MIecchas will be 
destroyed. All the heretics and the unrighteous will be doomed. 

391-393. The very name king will disappear when the 
Kali Age comes to the period of junction. Only very few people 
will survive and they will be helpless and destitute without any 
belonging, as Dharma would have been destroyed by that time. 
There will be none to console them. They will have no where¬ 
withals. They will be afflicted by diseases and sorrows. They will 
be overwhelmed and ruined by drought and mutual slaughter. 
They will have none to support them. Being distressed (and 
due to fear) they will forsake their avocations and professions. 
Deserting their own villages and towns they will resort to 
forest. 

394-395. When the kings are destroyed, the subjects will 
leave off their homesteads. All the feelings of friendliness and 
affection will be lost. In acute distress, even the closest of 
friends will become bereft of affection. The discipline of castes 
and stages of life will become distrubed. Terrible mixture and 
mingling of the castes will result. People will take shelter on 
mountains and riverbanks. 

396-397. They will resort to rivers, marshy foreshores of 
the seas and mountains. They will gather together in the terri¬ 
tories of Angas, Vangas, Kalingas, Kasmiras, KasI, Kosalas, 
the mountain ravines of Rsika and other places. Men will seek 
shelter on the ridges of Himavan and the coasts of the briny 
sea. 

398. The Aryas will flock to the forests with the Mleccha 
tribes. Men will sustain themselves with the meat of deer, fishes, 
birds and beasts of prey as well as with sugar-cane plants, 

honey, greens, fruit and roots. 

399. Like the sages (of yore) they will wear different kinds 


322 Vdyu Pur ana 

ofleaves and barks of trees as well as hides of deer which they 

themselves will make. 

400. Desirous of growing foodstuffs (grains) through 
seeds, they will dig the earth deep with wooden pikes. They 
will strenuously rear goats and sheep, donkeys and camels. 

401. The men then will resort to the banks of rivers for 
the sake of water. By means of their activities they will harass 
one another as well as the rulers of the land. 

402. They will consider it honourable to be issueless. They 

will not observe rules of cleanliness and good behaviour. 
Then the men will be engrossed in evil actions and behave 
in this manner. k 

403. The subjects will follow the worst of religious^ obser¬ 
vances. No one will live beyond their twentythird year. 

404-405. They will be weak. They will be debilitated and 
fatigued due to sensuality. They will be overcome by (prema lure) 
old age. Their diet will consist of leaves, roots and fruits. Bark 
garments and deer skins will constitute their clothings. In search 
of livelihood they will be roaming over the earth. Towards the 
end of Kaliyuga, the people will come to such a plight. 

406. When the Kali Age, the duration of which is a 
thousand divine years, comes to a close, the subjects will be 
annihilated along with the Kaliyuga. When it expires along with 
the period of junction, the Krta Age will come in. 

407. When the moon, the sun, Tisya and Jupiter come 
together in a single sign of zodiac, the Krta Age will set 
in. 

408. Thus the past, present and the future races have been 
enumerated in due order. 

409-412. From the time of the coronation of Mahadeva* 
(Mahapadma?) to the birth of Parlksit the duration was a 
thousand and fifty years. The period between Mahapadma and 
the future kings ending with Andhras whom I have 
narrated, has been calculated as eight hundred and thirtysix 
years by the learned sages, the knowers of Puranas. 


*Mahananda in Bd, P. v. 227. 



37.413-419 


823 


(Defective verse) The Seven Sages then said that a hundred 
years elapsed when Pratipa was king (?) You should calculate 
twentyseven hundreds again (?) 

413. The stellar mansions are altogerher twentyseven. 
The Seven Sages stay in each of these, for hundred years in 
succession. This is remembered as the Yugaof the Seven Sages. 
The years are calculated according to those of the Devas. 

414. (Defective verse) The hundred years of the Seven 
Sages are equal to sixty divine years and seven (divine) days. 

415. (?) The Seven Sages are seen in the east at first and 
then in the north of the zone of the constellations. Thereafter 
they arc seen parallel to those constellations seen in the middle 
of the firmament. 

416. It should be known that the Seven Sages are united 
with it (the zone of the constellations) in the sky for a hundred 
years. This is the evidence of the union of the Sages and the 
constellations. 

417. In my opinion the Seven Sages were stationed in the 
Magha (tenth) constellation at the time of Parlksit. At the time 
of Andhras they will be in the twentyfourth constellation 
(i.e. Satabhisak) .* 

418. At that time the subjects will be afflicted very much. 
They will be doomed through their mendacious nature in the 
affairs of virtue, wealth and love. 

419. When the Vedic and Smarta (pertaining to the 
Smrtis) rituals (Dharma) become lax and the rigorous discip¬ 
line of the castes and the stages of life becomes very loose, the 
deluded subjects will be weak in their soul-power and undergo 
a mixing and mingling of the castes. 


♦The corresponding Bd. P. v. 230a reads : 

saptarsayas tadd prdptah pitrye pdrikfite iatam / 

If the reading is accepted, the verse means . During the period of 
Parlksit the Saptarsis were in the Pitrya (Magha constellation for a 
hundred years. Hence the period of the dynasty of Andhras will be two 
thousand and seven hundred years ? The words in our text need correction. 



824 


Vdyu Purdna 

420 . Sudras will become merged with the twice-born 
castes. Brahmanas will begin to officiate as priests in the 
Yajnas of the Sudras. Sudras will begin to compose 
Mantras. 

421-423. Desirous of securing means of livelihood, Brah¬ 
manas will approach them reverentially. Declining gradually 
and bit by bit, all the subjects will be destroyed and when the 
Yuga expires, they will be completely destroyed. 

& Kali Yuga had started on the very day when Krsna 
passed away. Understand the duration of Kali Age. Kali- 
yuga is said to be of the three hundred and sixty thousand years 
according to human calculation. 

424. According to divine calculation it is one thousand 
years. The Sandhyamsa (the period of junction) is also men¬ 
tioned. (That period is extra.) When it has expired completely 
Krta Age comes in. 

425. The races of Aila and Iksvaku are said to become 
extinct with Sumitra. 

426-427. Those who know about the Lunar race know that 
the Ksatriya race of Aila will become extinct with Ksemaka. 
The sons and descendants of the Sun of the past, present and 
future have been glorified. They were and will be the heighte- 
ners of their fame. In that race there were Brahmanas, 
Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. 

428-429. Many noblc-souled kings are born and have pass¬ 
ed away in every Yuga. Their names are legion. When the 
members of every family are calculated, many names are re¬ 
peated. Hence they have not been mentioned by me. The race 
of Nimi comes to an end in the Vaivasvata Manvantara itself. 

430. I will recount how the Ksatriya race originates in 
this Yuga. Even as I recount listen and understand. 

431-432. Devapi will be born in the Kalapa village. He 
will be a king of Puru’s family and considered (greater) than 
Iksvaku. He will be endowed with great Yogic power.* 


♦The corresponding verse of Bd. P. ( v . 250) states : Devapi belonging 
to the family of Puru and Mam who belongs to Iksvaku family—these 
two are endowed with great Yogic Power. They stayed in the village called 
Kalapa.” 7 



825 


Suvarcas, the son of Soma, will be bom in the family 0 f Iksvaku 
In the twentyfourth cycle of four Yugas, they will be the 
founders of the Ksatriya race and traditions. 

433. In the twentieth Yuga (? cycle of four Yugas ?) there 
will not be any founder of the Lunar race. Devapi being un¬ 
rivalled, will be the first king in the family of Aila. 

434. In the four Yugas these two will be the founders of 
Ksatriya race. Everywhere this should be known as the 
characteristic feature, for the sake of progeny (the perpetuation 
of the line). 

435-436. When Kali Yuga declines and Krta Yuga 
sets in and again in the first Tretayuga they will be the acti- 
visors of the Ksatriya lines along with the Seven Sages. In the 
Dvapara period, Ksatriyas do not stay along with the sages. 

437-438. When Krtayuga and Tretayuga decline, the 
Seven Sages and the kings will take birth for the sake of seed 
of the Brahmana and Ksatriya races. For the sake of progeny, 
they (the Seven Sages) abide by the kings in all the Manvantaras 
in every Yuga. 

439. The annihilation of Ksatriyas leads to their contact 
with Brahmanas again (?) In all the seven Manvantaras all 
the progeny have been heard of (?) 

440-442. In view of their long life the Seven Sages know 
the series of Yugas, the origin, activities and the decline of 
those active persons belonging to Brahmana and Ksatriya races. 
The birth of the Brahmanas in the families of Aila and Ik$vaku 
is in this manner (?) Born in the Treta Age and extinct in the 
Kali Age, they will follow the Age till the end of the Manvan- 
tara. 

443. When all the Ksatriyas were eliminated by Rama, the 
son of Jamadagni, the Ksatriyas of the two families were born 
again. I shall recount them. Listen and understand. 

444. The families of Aila and Iksvaku spread once again. 
A series of other kings of the Ksatriya race became rulers. 

445. A hundred families undergoing coronation became 
famous among each of the races of Aila and Iksvaku. 

445. The extent of Bhojas is up to twice of that (i.e. 
two hundred). Thus there were three hundred Ksatriya 


826 Vd J u Parana 

families. They were divided into four according to the four 
quarters. 

447-449. Listen and understand even as I recount the past 
and the present kings among them. Prativindhyas were a 
hundred; Nagas were a hundred; Hayas were a hundred; 
Dhrtarastras were a hundred and one; Janamejayas were 
eighty; Brahmadattas were a hundred; Sirins and Virins were 
a hundred (each); then Pulomans were a hundred; Svetas, 
Kagas, Kusas etc. were a hundred; the other Sasabindus who 
passed away were a thousand. 

450. All of them performed horse-sacrifices with lakhs and 
lakhs in Daksina. Thus hundreds and thousands of saintly 
kings have passed away. 

451-452. Know that the descendants in this world of the 
present Vaivasvata Manu cannot be mentioned in detail and in 
full even in hundreds of years. 

453. In the Vaivasvata Manvantara already twentyeight 
cycles of four Yugas have passed along with their saintly kings. 
Listen and understand those who yet remain. 

454-458. Forty excellent kings will be born in the future. 
Then the Vaivasvata Manvantara will come to a close. Inciden¬ 
tally I have mentioned everything in detail and in brief. Many 
are repeated. As they are too many they could not be mention¬ 
ed in full. The twentyfive families of Yayati’s sons were highly 
beneficent to the people. They have been glorified. They even 
now sustain the worlds. 

He who listens to and remembers these attains rare things 
of the world. They attain longevity, fame, wealth, sons, heaven 
and infiniteness. O Brahmanas, thus the third section has been 
recounted by me. What more shall I say ? 


SECTION 4 : UPASAIvIHARA PADA 


CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 

The Manvantaras & Dissolution of the Universe 

1. After hearing the third section completed (narrated in 
full) by the intelligent Suta, the excellent sages asked him 
about the fourth Section. 

The Sages said : 

2. The third section called Anusahga Pada has been com¬ 
pletely narrated out of affection by you. Now narrate to us in 
details the fourth Pada called Samhdra (annihilation or con¬ 
clusion) . 

3-4. Please recount all the Manvantaras, the ones that had 
elapsed along with the others (the future ones), theSeven Sages 
who exist now in the current Manvantara and the details of 
the creation and expansion of the noble-souled Manu.. Narrate 
everything in detail and in the proper order. 

Suta said : 

5. O excellent sages I shall narrate everything to you 
precisely; the fourth and the concluding section, along with the 
(description of) annihilation. 

6. O Brahmanas, listen to the creative activity of the 
current noble-souled Vaivasvata Manu in detail as well as in 
proper order. 

7. Even as I recount, listen and understand the gist of the 
(past) Manvantaras along with the seven future ones as well as 
the dissolution of the worlds. 

8 All these (past) seven Manvantaras have already been 
recounted by me. Now listen to the brief description of the 
future Manvantaras from me. 


g 28 Vayu. Pur ana 

9 . I shall speak about the current Vaivasvata Manu and 
the future Savarna Manu briefly. Listen and understand. 

2 . The future Seven Great Sages are remembered as 
follows: Kusika’s descendant Galava, Jamadagni’s son 
Bhargava (Parasurama), Dvaipayana of Vajistha lineage, Krp a 
the descendant of Saradvan, DIptiman of Atri’s lineage, 
Rsyasrnga of Kasyapa’s lineage, Drona’s son Asvatthama of 
great fame and belonging to Bharadvaja Gotra—these noble- 
wuled ones are the future Seven Great Sages. 

13. There will be three groups of Devas, viz. Sutapas, 
Amitabhas and Sukhas (? Mukhyas). Each of these groups 
consists of twenty Devas. 

14-15. I shall enumerate them. Listen and understand 
attentively. Rita, Tapas, Sukra, Dyuti, Jyotis, Prabhakara, 
Prabhasa, Bhasakrt, Dharma, Tejas, Rasmi, Rtu, Virat, 
Arcisman, Dyotana, Bhanu, Yas'as, Kirti, Budha and Dhjrti— 
these twenty Devas constituting the group Sutapas, are glorified 
by their names. 

16-17. Prabhu, Vibhu, Vibhasa, Jeta, Hanta, Ariha, Ritu, 
Sumati, Pramati, DIpti, Samakhyata, Mahas, Mahan, Deha, 
Muni, Naya, Jyestha, Sama, Satya and Visruta these are the 
twenty Devas mentioned as Amitabhas. 

18-19. Dama, Data, Vida, Soma, Vitta, Vaidya, Yama, 
Nidhi, Homa, Havya, Huta, Dana, Deya, Data, Tapas, Sama, 
Dhruva, Sthana, Vidhana and Niyama—these twenty are 
mentioned as constituting the Mukhya (Sukha) group of 
Devas in the first Savarna Manvantara. 

20. All these are the sons of the noble-souled Kasyapa, the 
son of Marici who exists now. They will be born in the Savarna 
Manvantara. 

21-22. He who was formerly Bali, the son of Virocana, 
will become their Indra. Nine sons will be born to Savarna 
Manu, viz. Viravan, Avarlyan, Nirmoha, Satyavak, Krti, 
Carisnurajya, Visnu, Vaca and Sumati. 

23-24. I shall mention nine more in the other Savarna 
Manvantaras. Other Savarna Manus will be born as Brahma’s 
(future) sons. They are seen as Merusavarnis by those end¬ 
owed with divine vision. They are the grandsons of Daksa, 
the sons of his beloved daughter. 


38.25-35 


829 


25. They are endowed with great penance and great 
splendour. They live on the ridges of Meru. They are pro¬ 
created by Brahma and other (Devas) as well as by the intelli¬ 
gent Daksa. 

26. They were bom in the previous Caksusa Manvantara. 
These noble persons had been in the Maharloka. After return¬ 
ing from there they will resort to Meru. 

The Sages said : 

27. How were the sons procreated by Daksa in his own 
daughter ? How were they created by Bhava, Dharma and 
Brahma the noble souls ? 

Suta said : 

28. After bowing to Pracetas, henceforth, I shall mention 
the future Manus who are the Savarna Manus, their origin as 
well as their prowess. 

29. When a short period of Caksusa Manvantara remained 
and the Vaivasvata Manvantara had begun, those who will be 
the Manus in the future Manvantara were born. 

30. Of those Manus who are the daughter’s sons of 
Pracetasa Daksa, the five named Savarnas and four are born 
from great sages. 

31. One Savarna is the son of Samjna born of Vivasvan 
(the Sun-god). The eldest son of Samjna is Lord Manu, son 
of the Sun-god (Vivasvan) 

32. Their auspicious manifestation was (took place) at the 
advent of the Vaivasvata Manvantara. The fourteen Manus 
are glorified as the enhancer of fame. 

33. These Manus are described in the Vedas, Srutis* and 
Puranas as very powerful Prajapatis. All of them were the 
lords of all living beings. 

34. The entire Earth consisting of the seven continents and 
mountains is to be protected by these kings for a full thousand 
Yugas. 

35. Their details will be mentioned along with their progeny 


♦Smrtis in Bd. P. v. 30. 



830 Vd J u Pnrana 

and penance. These creations of Svayambhuva and others 
should be known as fourteen. 

36. They hold office as the presiding Authorities in the 
Manvantaras only once each. After the tenure of their office 
they resort to Maharloka. 

37. (Defective verse) Among them eight have already 
ceased to operate; (excepting) six more Manus are the others 
who will come in the future. At present it is Lord Vaivasvata 
Manu who rules. 

38. I shall mention those who remain, those who are the 
future Brahmanas (Manus), along with Devas, Danavas and 
sages as well as their (other) creation of the subjects. 

39. The details of the creation of these Manus are to be 
known through the creative activity of Vaivasvata Manu, since 
they are neither inferior nor superior to those of Vaivasvata 
Manu. 

40. I am not recounting their details for fear of repetition 

and due to their multiplicity in both the past and the future 
Manvantaras. v 

41. I shall mention them, the creative activities in the 
different families only partially. The remaining things should 
be known through their details and in order. 

42. Daksa had a pious daughter who was well known as 
Suvrata. Although she was the youngest of the daughters, she 
was the most excellent and the most pious. Once the father 
took her with him and approached Brahma. 

43. He was in the Vairaja region seated along with Dharma 
and Bhava. Brahma spoke to Daksa in the presence of Dharma 
and Bhava. 

44. “O Daksa, this, your daughter Suvrata will give birth 
to four sons who will become the auspicious Manus and stabilise 
the discipline of four castes.” 

45. On hearing the words of Brahma, the three—Daksa, 
Dharma and Bhava approached that girl mentally along with 
Brahma. 

46. The girl immediately gave birth to four sons who were 
similar to and befitting those four divine personages as they 
were of truthful meditation. 


38.47-59 


831 


47. Those sons were born fully endowed with physical 
bodies, born in a trice but capable of all enjoyment, and com¬ 
petent to perform all activities. They were endowed with 
glory. 

48. On seeing them, those deities who had realised 
Brahman began to claim “This is my son, This is my son 5 ’. 
They began to tug at them furiously. 

49. Since they mentally created sons through meditation, 
they said to one another : “Let us select that boy as our respec¬ 
tive son who is similar to us physically. 

50. If a boy is similar to one in features, prowess and name 
as well as complexion, one shall take him as one’s gentle 
son. 

51. A son emulates the features of his father invariably. 
Hence the son is born taking after the father and the mother.” 

52-53. After coming to terms like this, they took those boys 
who were similar in complexion ( Savarna ) to them. Since the 
boys were similar in complexion to god Brahma and others, 
they are called Savarna. Since they were meditated upon and 
were accepted respectfully, they are remembered as Manus. 

54. When the Caksu?a Manvantara expired and the 
Vaivasvata Manvantara set in, a son named Raucya was born 
to Ruci, the Prajapati. 

55. He who was born of Bhuti became known by the name 
Bhautya. In the Vaivasvata Manvantara two sons were born to 
Vivasvan. 

56. One is well known as Vaivasvata Manu and the other 
as Savarna. The learned Lord Vaivasvata Manu was the eldest 
son of Sarhjna. 

57-58. The other Vaivasvata Manu was the son of Savarna 
(i.e. Chaya, the shadow of Sarhjna). The four Savarna Manus 
born of the great sages will be equipping themselves with (the 
power of) penance. They will achieve all their tasks in their 
respective future Manvantaras. 

59. (Defective verse) The sons of the first Merusavarni 
Manu who was the son of Daksa were the three groups, Marlci- 
garbhas, Susarmans and Paras. All these noble-souled ones 
were born in the Vaivasvata Manvantara. 


232 Vayu Purana 

60. They are the sons of Rohita, the Prajapati, the son of 
Daksa. In future each of these groups will consist of twelve 
Devas. 

61. (Defective) Aisvarya-Sangraha, Raha, Bahuvasa (and 
the remaining) should be known as twelve Para gods. Under¬ 
stand the later ones. 

62-63. Vajiya, Vajijit, Prabhuti, KakudI (?), Dadhikrava, 
Ayapakva, Pranita, Vijaya, Madhu, Tejasman and two 
Nathavas—these twelve constitute the Maricis. I shall re¬ 
count the Susarmans mentioning the names. Listen to (them) 
and understand. 

64-65. Varna, Anga, Visva, Muranya, Vrajana, Amita, 
Dravaketu, Jambhostha, Ajasra, Sakraka, Sunemi and Dyuta- 
pas—these twelve constitute SuSarmans. Their future Indra 
will be known by the name Adbhuta. 

66-69. The seven sages in the Rohita Manvantara were— 
Skanda of fiery nature and resembling Soma and otherwise 
known as Kartikeya, Medhatithi of Pulastya lineage, Vasu of 
Kasyapa Gotra, Jyotisman of Bhrgu family, Dyutiman of 
Angiras lineage, Vasita of Vasistha Gotra, Havyavahana of 
Atri’s Gotra and Sutapas of Paulava family. 

The following nine are glorified as the sons of the first 
Savarni—Dhrtiketu, DIptiketu, Sapa, Hasta, Niramaya, 
Prthusravas, Anlka, Bhuridyumna, and Brhadratha. 

70-71. In the tenth revolution (i.e. cycle of four Yugas?) 
the second Savarni, the son of Dharma, will be the Manu. In 
his Manvantara, there will be two groups of Devas, viz. 
Sukhamanas and Viruddhas. All of them will be Tvisivants 
(‘highly effulgent’) a hundred in number and mutually 
equal (?)—alike. 

72. They are said to be controlling the breath in (other ?) 
persons by the sages. They will be the Devas at the time of the 
Manu, son of Dharma. 

73-74. Their Indra will be the great scholar Santi. The 
Seven Great Sages will be the glorious Havisman of the Pulaha 
family, Suklrti of Bhrgu race, Apomurti of Atri lineage, Apava 
(?) of Vasi$jha family, Pratipa of Pulastya family, Nabhaga of 
Kasyapa family and Abhimanyu of Angiras family. 


38.75-91 


833 


75-77. The ten sons ofManuwill be—Suksetra, Uttama- 
ujas, Bhurisena, Vlryavan, Satanlka, Niramitra, Vrsasena, 
Jayadratha, Bhuridyumna and Suvarcas. In the eleventh revo¬ 
lution (cycle of four Yugas) when the third Savarni will be the 
Manu, the following three groups of noble-souled Devas will be 
famous : Nirmanaratis, Kamajas (Kamagas in Bd.P.) and 
Manojavas. 

78-80. Each of these groups consists of thirty units. The 
thirty days in a month mentioned by the poets constitute the 
Devas Nirmanaratis. The nights (known as ?) Vihangamas 
(constitute the Kamaja Devas). The Muhurtas constitute the 
Devas Manojavas. These are the three groups of Devas men¬ 
tioned, These future Manus are remembered as the sons of 
Brahma. 

81. Their Indra, the king of Suras, will be called Vfsa. 
Listen and understand their Seven Sages who are being glori¬ 
fied. 

82-86. They are—Havisman of Kasyapa family, Vapusman 
of Bhrgu’s race, Varuni of Atri lineage, Bhaga of Vasistha’s 
family, Pusti who should be known as hailing from Angiras 
family, Niscara of Pulastya race and Agnitejas of Pulaha family. 
They are also the Devas in the eleventh Manvantara. The 
following are the sons of Prajapatya (son of Prajapati) Savarna 
Manu—Sarvavega, Sudharma, Devanlka, Purovaha, Ksema- 
dharma, Grhesu, Adarsa and Paunqhaka. 

In the twelfth revolution (Manvantara) Rtusavarni, the son 
of Rudra, will be the Manu. He will be the fourth Savarni. 
Listen to the Devas in that Manvantara. The future Devas are 
said to consist of five groups. 

87. The Devas will be—Haritas, Rohitas, Sumanas, Sukar- 
mans and Suparas. These are remembered as the five groups 
of Devas. 

88-89. They are the mental sons of Brahma. Each of these 
groups consists of ten Devas. The following ten constitute the 
Harita group of Devas : Aruntija, Hari (? Havi), Vidvan 
(whose followers are) in thousands, Parvatanucara, Apas, Amsu 
(prob. Apamsu as in Bd.P.), Manojava, Urja, Svaha, Svadha 
^lixcL Tara 

90-91. The following ten constitute the Rohita group: 


834 %«Purana 

Tapas, Jani, Bhjti, Vaca, Bandliu, Rajas, Raja, Svarnapada, 
Vyusti and Vidhi. Know these to be the Sumanas: the thirty- 
three Devas who have been glorified (before), viz. Usita and 
others. 

92-93. Understand the Sukarmans. They are—Suparva, 
Vrsabha, Prsta, Krpi, Dyurana, Vipascita, Vikrama, Karma, 
Nibhrta and Kanta. These Devas are Sukarmans. Now under¬ 
stand their sons (i.e. Suparas ?) 

94-95. They are : Varyodita, Jista, Varcasvl, Dyutiman, 
Havi, Subha, Havikrta, Prapti, Vyaprtha and Dasama (?) 
These are the mentally created ones the Suparas, the Devas 
mentioned (before). Rtadhama of great fame should be known 
as their Indra. 

96-99. The Seven Sages are—Krti the son of Vasistha, 
Sutapas of Atri’s family, Tapomurti of the Angiras race, Tapas- 
vin of Kasyapa Gotra, Taposyana of Pulastya family, Taporati 
of Pulaha Gotra and the seventh of them should be known as 
Tapomati of Bhrgu family. These are the Siddhas, the Seven 
Sages in the Savarnika Manvantara. The following are the sons 
of the twelfth (?) Manu : Devavan, Upadeva, Devzisrestha, 
Viduratha, Mitravan, Mitrabindu, Mitrasena, Amitraha, 
Mitrabahu, and Suvargas. 

100. In the thirteenth revolution (Manvantara), the Raucya 
Manvantara, three groups of Devas are mentioned by the self- 
born deity (Brahma). 

101 . All those noble souls are Brahma’s mental sons. They 
are Sutramans, Sudharmans and Sukarmans. 

102-103. They are said to be the future Somapayins (Imbi¬ 
bers of Soma juice), the groups of Devas. Along with the per¬ 
formers of Yajnas, the deities are thirtythree in number. 
They include the Ajya, Pfsadajya and Grahajyestha groups of 
Devas. Listen to and understand that the thirtythree Devas are 
separate ones. 

104-105. The Sutramans are the present Prayajyas and 
Ajyapas. The Anuyajyas and those who partake Pfsadajya are 
Sukarmans. The Upayajyas are Sudharmans. Thus the Devas 
have been recounted. Divaspati of great prowess will be their 
Indra. 


38.105-119 


835 


106-109. The sons of Ruci should be known as the grand¬ 
sons of Pulaha. The Seven Sages in the thirteenth Manvantara 
will be—Dhrtiman of Angiras family, Pathyavan of Pulastya 
race, Tattvadarsin of Pulaha family, Nirutsaka of Bhrgu Gotra, 
Nisprakampa of Atri’s family, Nirmoha ofKasyapa Gotra and 
Svarupa of Vasistha lineage. The following are the sons of 
Raucya Manu in the thirteenth Manvantara : Citrasena, Vicitra, 
Tapas, Dharmadhrta, Bhava, Anekabaddha, Ksatrabaddha, 
Surasa, Nirbhaya and Prtha. 

110. In the fourteenth Bhautya Manvantara, the future 
groups of Devas are five. 

111. The five groups of Devas arc—Caksusas, Kanisthas, 
Pavitras, Bhajaras and Yacavrddhas. 

112-113. Know that the seven different parts are those 
named Caksusas. They understand Brhada and other Samans 
as the Kanisthas. The seven worlds are Paritras (Pavitras ?) 
The Bhajiras (Bhajaras) are the seven Sindhus (oceans, rivers). 
Know the sages to be Vacavrddhas belonging to Svayambhuva 
Manu (?) AU the Indras of the Manvantaras should be known 
as having equal characteristics (and powers). .... 

114. Those Indras excel all the mobile and the immobile 
living beings in the three worlds by means of their splendour, 
penance, intellect, strength, learning and exploits. 

115. The Indras (or Devas) are Bhutapavadins, Hfstas, 
Medhyasthas, Bhutavadins, Bhutanuvadins. The three Vedas 
are competent in respect to Pravadins (arguers .) 

116. Agnidhra, Kasyapa, Paulastya, Magadha, Bharga , 
Agnibahu, lud. Aigirasa, Ojaavm, and Snbala are the som of 

Bhautya four S j var „ a Manus arc the sons of Brahma. 

One Savarna Manu is called the son of Vivasvan. 

,18 Raucya and Bhautya, these two Manus belong to 
Pulaha and Bhrgu families. While Bhautya rules over, the 
Kalpa becomes complete. 

^VlT^When all things are dissolved completely, when all 
the ^Manvantaras com. to a close and many Yogas pass on,.. . 
called Samhdra (Annihilation). 


836 


Vdyu Purdna 

120-122. Then, at the end of the Manvantara, the seven 
Devas of the Bhrgu family, the powerful sovereign rulers, who 
had enjoyed the three worlds for seventyone cycles of four Yugas 
by remaining within them, and who used to perform Yajfias 
along with the Pitrs, Manus and the Seven Sages will then aban¬ 
don the three worlds and go to Maharloka along with their 
devotees and those who perform Yajfias. When they proceed 
upwards, and when the Manvantara expires, all the three worlds 
will be rendered without any support. 

123. O Brahmanas ! Thereafter, the abodes presided over 
by deities become vacant and fall down along with constella¬ 
tions, stars and planets getting hurled and destroyed. 

124-125. Thereafter, when the lords of the three worlds 
including the eight Indras pass away, the fourteen groups of 
Devas beginning with (A)jita and others and ending with 
Caksusas—the Devas who were very mighty and full of splen¬ 
dour in all the Manvantaras—will go to Maharloka where 
they will become identical with those Devas who stay there till 
the end of the Kalpa. 

126-127. It is reported that when the time of Samhara (lit. 
heaping and collision— Sankalana) comes those fourteen groups 
of Devas will forsake Maharloka and go to Janaloka with (i.e. 
preserving) their physical bodies and accompanied by their 
followers. 

128-129. Thus when the Devas have gone from Maharloka 
to Janaloka, when BhQtadi (Cosmic Ego— Ahamkara ) and other 
(prime causes of the universe) remain and (even) immobiles 
have come to an end, when the abodes of the worlds beginning 
with Bhuh and ending with Mahah have become void, when the 
Devas have gone upward and become united with the Kalp- 
avasins (those who stay till the end of the Kalpa), 

130. after withdrawing (annihilating) those Devas, Sages, 
Pitps and Danavas, god Brahma with his powerful vision sees 
that it is the end of the Yuga and puts an end to his creation. 

131. The knowers of day and night of god Brahma under¬ 
stand that the day of Brahma consists of a thousand cycles of 
four Yugas and similarly the night too consists of a thousand 
cycles of four Yugas. 

132. This Pratisaficara (Dissolution & Reabsorption) of all 


38.133-143 


837 


living beings is of three types, viz. Naimittika (periodical), Prakf 
tika (pertaining to Prakjrti) and Alyantika (the ultimate one). 

133. The Naimittika dissolution is the burning (of the Uni¬ 
verse) at the end of the Kalpa and complete withdrawal (of all 
beings) by god Brahma. The destruction of Karanas (instru¬ 
ments or means and causes) of living beings during Pratisarga 
(absorption) into Prakrti is called Prakrta type of dissolution. 

134. The dissolution due to dawning of spiritual knowledge 
is said to be the ultimate one ( Alyantika,) as it renders the seeds 
(causes) of Samsara, impossible. 

135. After dissolving all the Devas residing in the three 
worlds at the end of his day and when he feels the urge to 
sleep (?), Lord Brahma destroys all the subjects and dissolves all 
the creation. 

136. Then at the end of a thousand cycles of Caturjiugas, 
when the period of annihilation of Yuga arrives, Prajapati 
(Lord of subjects, viz. Brahma) begins to make the subjects 
abide in him (i.e. absorb in himself). 

137-138. Then a drought sets in lasting for a hundred 
years. Those living beings on the surface of the Earth, (still 
left) being deficient in strength become dissolved and are merg¬ 
ed into the Earth. The Sun then rises up with seven rays consti¬ 
tuting his chariot. 

139. Lord Sun of unbearable rays begins to suck up water 
through his rays. Those seven rays will be green in colour and 


of dazzling lustre. 

140. Spreading over the forest (‘the sky’-Bd.P.) gradually 
they get transformed again. The wood over the earth, wealth 
and refulgence begin to blaze with water (?) 

141. Hence it is water that is said to be the cause of 
the blazing of the Sun. With drought the Sun does not blaze. 
With drought the Sun has no halo(?) 

142 With drought the rays of the Sun do not pic up 

things (from the ground). The Sun blazes with water. Hence, 

sucking up water, the Sun blazes in the sky. 

143 His seven rays suck up water from the great ocean. 


Suns. 


838 V *yu Puraria 

144. Then those seven rays assuming the forms of seven 
Suns, burn the four quarters and the four worlds like fires. 

145. The fiery rays reach the top and bottom (of the 
worlds). Seven Suns and the blazing fires of dissolution shine 
fiercely. 

146. Ignited and illuminated by means of the water, thous¬ 
ands of rays envelop the sky and scorch the Earth. 

147. Being burnt by their blazing heat, the Earth inclusive 
of the oceans and the mountains becomes bereft of moisture and 
viscidity. 

148. The nether regions, the upper regions and the sides 
are restrained by the illuminated rays of the Sun of various 
colours and spreading everywhere. 

149. The scorching rays of the Sun and the leaping flames 
of the fires mingling with one another appear to be a single unit 
with a single flame. 

150. That fire becomes a mass of fiery zone creating the 
destruction of all the worlds. With its brilliance it scorches all 
the four worlds. 

151. All the mobile and the immobile beings get dissolved. 
The Earth, devoid of trees and even grass, appears like the back 
of a tortoise shell. 

152. The entire universe destroyed and affected by misfor¬ 
tune appears like a frying pan. The whole of the sky, filled with 
the burning rays, blazes fiercely. 

153. All the living beings in the nether worlds and in 
the great ocean become dissolved and one with the Earth. 

154. The continents, mountains, sub-continents, the great 
oceans all these will be reduced to ashes by that cosmic fire, 
the soul of everything. 

1 o5. The excessively kindled fire sucks up water from every- • 
where, the oceans, the rivers and the nether worlds. Spreading 
over the Earth it blazes up. 

156. Then the big Samvartaka fire (the fire of dissolution) 
transcends the mountains and destroys all the worlds. It becomes 
a terribly kindled fire. 

157. It then pierces through the Earth and dries up Rasa- 

tala. After burning up Patalas it burns down the world of 
serpents. 


38.158-170 


839 


158. After burning the Earth from below, it burns the 
firmament above spreading through thousands, lakhs and tril- 
lions of Yojanas. 

159. Many flames leap out from that Samvartaka fire. 
Glowing fiercely the Samvartaka fire consumes Gandharvas, 
Pisacas, the great serpents and Raksasas. Everything is reduced 
to a huge globular mass (of ashes). 

160. The deadly fire thus burns all the four worlds, viz. 
Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka and Maharloka in a terrible 
manner. 

161. When all the worlds arc enveloped with fire on all 
sides and above, the entire universe is slowly permeated with 
brilliance and shines like a (redhot) ball of iron. 

162. Thereafter the terrible Sariivartaka clouds begin to 
rise in the sky. They assume the shapes of the herds of huge ele¬ 
phants and are embellished with lightning streaks, 

163. Some are dark-coloured like the blue lotus. Some are 
like the white lilies, some resemble lapis lazuli and others are 
like emerald and sapphire. 

164. Others are (white) like the conch shell and the kunda 
flowers. Some are (black) like the natural collyrium. Some clouds 
are smoke-coloured and some clouds are yellow. 

165. Some clouds have the (grey) colour of a donkey, some 
resemble the red lac, others have the lustre of the red arsenic 
and there are dove-coloured clouds. 

166. Some glow-worm-coloured clouds rise up in the sky; 
some arc as vast as the expansive cities and the Earth and some 
are as huge as herds of elephants. 

167. Some clouds are like mountains and some are like 
rocky regions. Some resemble large basins and some huge shoals 
of fish. 

168. Terrific in appearance and multi-formed, all those 
clouds thundering terribly, fill the entire firmament at that time 
(of dissolution). 

169. Then the terrific fresh clouds identifying themselves 
with the Suns, organise themselves in seven groups and extin¬ 
guish the fire. 

170. The clouds then shower energetically and quell the 
entire inauspicous and terrible fire. 


840 


Vayu Purana 


171. The universe is filled with waters of the heavy down¬ 
pour. The brilliance of the burning fire is overcome by the 
wateis and the fire enters (i.e. merges) into water. 

172 . When in the course of a hundred years the whole fire 
is quelled, the clouds that arise from the fire inundate the entire 
universe with huge quantities of showers. 

173. Urged by the self-bom deity (Brahma), they fill the 
universe with their showers. Others assail the sea-shore with 
large quantities of water. The entire Earth with its continents 
and mountains is covered with water. 

174. O Brahmanas, the entire quantity of water showered 
by the clouds enters the ocean. There it is sucked up by the rays 
of the Sun. 

175. The water sucked up by the rays of the Sun clings to 
the clouds. It falls again on to the Earth whereby the oceans 
are filled up. 

176. Then the oceans overflow their shores all round. 
Mountains crumble down and the Earth sinks into the water. 

177. Whirling up suddenly, a violent wind of terrible nature 
envelops all those clouds in the sky. 

178. In that Ekdrnava (a single vast sheet of water) all the 
mobile and the immobile beings get dissolved. When a thousand 
cycles of four Yugas pass away, it is called a complete Kalpa. 

179. Learned men call this vast sheet of water whereby the 
entire world is enveloped, Ekdrnava . All separate entities are 
lost sight of. Neither the surface of the Earth, nor the atmosphere, 
neither the wind nor the firmament is visible distinctly. 

180. Objects of Parthiva (Earthly) nature, waters of the 
ocean and all Haima (i.e. of the elements of fire, Gold standing 
for Tejas) objects form one unit termed Salila (water). 

181. When only water is seen flowing hither and thither it 
is called Salila . When it stands covering the whole Earth, that 
(mass of) water is called Arnava (an ocean). 

182-183, The word Bha indicates Vyapti (pervasion) and 
Dipti (splendour). Since water shines and pervades all the ashes 
(of the universe) it is called Ambah. The root ^Ar means multi¬ 
plicity and quickness. In that Ekdrnava waters are not quick. 
Hence they are called “Naras”. 


38.184-194 


841 


184. At the end of that period of a thousand sets of four 
Yugas, one day of Brahma passes off. During the whole of that 
period the entire universe becomes sub-merged in the Ekamava. 
All the activities of Prajapati (Brahma) cease (to exist). 

185-186. When in that Ekamava the mobile and the im¬ 
mobile beings become annihilated, Brahma assumes this form— 
with thousand eyes, thousand feet, thousand heads, beautiful 
mind, thousand legs, thousand eyes and faces, thousand speeches 
(tongues), thousand arms and the lustre of the Sun. He is 
called the first Prajapati and the Purusa in the path of Trayl 
(three Vedas). 

187. He has brilliant complexion like the Sun. He is the 
protector of the worlds. He is single and the first Turdsdf (fore- 
staller of the enemies). He becomes Hiranyagarbha, the great 
Purusa. He goes beyond the darkness (of ignorance). 

188. At the end of the period of a thousand cycles of four 
Yugas when everything around is flooded with water, the lord 
becomes desirous of sleep and creates a dark night without light. 

189. When Brahma lies down with the four types of creation 
withdrawn in the Ania (Cosmic Egg), the Seven Great Sages 
see that noble-souled Kala (god of Time or Death). 

190. At that time they move about in Janaloka. By 
means of penance they have gained (divine) vision. They are 
the noble souls—Bhrgu and others. Their characteristics have 
already been recounted by me. 

191. With their divine vision only they see the seven 
worlds—Satya and others. They visualize Brahma during the 
great nights of Brahma. 

192. The Seven Sages see him at the time of his sleep. He 
is cited to be the first Paramesthin, because he stays beyond 
ail Kalpas. 

193. In the beginning of every Kalpa, he becomes the 
creator of all living beings again and again. After withdrawing 
all creations within himself Prajapati (creates them again). 

194. The excessively brilliant one, the creator of every¬ 
thing takes (withdraws) everything into himself and thereafter 
stays within the single vast sheet of water for the whole of that 
night. 


842 


Vayu Purana 

195. Then, when the night passes off, Prajapati wakes U p. 
He is induced (in his mind) with the desire for creation once 
again. 

196-198. At the time of the Naimiltika (periodic) dissolution 
(by Brahma), when Prajapati grows calm, inthecoursc of with¬ 
drawal effected all the living beings get separated from their 
bodies. All the Bhutas become burnt by the rays of the Sun; even 
gods, sages and the excellent Manus (are affected by it in 
that water of flood.). In that collision all the living beings 
beginning with Gandharvas and ending with Pisacas who have 
not been scorched in the beginning of the Kalpa resort to Jana- 
loka. 

199. The living beings of the lower strata of animals and 
those that have fallen into hell—all those become burnt up 
and get absolved from sins. As long as the universe is submerged 
in water, they abide in Janaloka. 

200. When the night of Brahma whose source of origin is 
the Unmanifest, dawns again all those - living beings are born 
again. 

201. The sages, Manus, Devas and all the four kinds 
of living beings (are alike in this respect). Those Siddhas too die 
and are born. 

202. Just as die Sun is rising and setting in this world (it 
happens regularly), so also the living beings are seen to have 
birth and destruction. 

20o-205. The rebirth after the dissolution of all living 
beings is called Saiiisara (worldly existence). Just as all living 
beings (e.g. trees) germinate after the rains fall, so also the 
subjects and the immobile and other beings are born in every 
Kalpa. Just as in successive seasons the different forms of the 
characteristics of the seasons appear in the same succession as 
before, so also at the time of (every) creation the mobile and 
the immobile beings (appear in the same manner as they were) 
before Brahma’s nights and the dissolutions. 

206. All the living beings come out and re-enter the creator 
of subjects, Brahma, the great lord, Prajapati of great Yogic 
power. 

207. The great Deva who is both manifest and unmanifest 


38.208-216 

843 

becomes the creator of all living heings again and again in the 
beginnings of the Kalpas. The entire universe is his. 

208. It is he by whom the waters are created at first the 
waters that reach the surface of the earth along the path taken 
before. 

209. Just as mortal beings revolve through those ( Tonis 
or births) due to their auspicious and inauspicious activities, so 
they move upwards and downwards due to the (pull of) the 
Sun, as transfer from one body to another is inevitable. 

210. J So also Devas, Manus, Prajesas and other Siddhas 
who have attained heaven naturally assume the forms of 
righteous living beings on being subjected to the inevitable 
future. 

211. Henceforth, I shall recount the period of dissolution 
of all living beings (Abhutasamplava). O Brahamanas, the 
Manvantaras have already been explained by me along with 
Prajnanisarga 1 2 (creation through intellect.) and the fourteen 
Marius. 

212. All the Manvantaras consist of a thousand cycles of 
four Yugas. When two thousand cycles of four Yugas are com¬ 
pleted it is said that a Kalpa is finished entirely. 

213. This should be known as one day of Brahma. Under¬ 
stand its calculation. The time taken to utter a short syllable or 
to wink once is called Nimesa. It is equal to a Matra. 

2*14. Fifteen such Nimesas of human beings constitute one 
Kastha. One Lava is equal to five Ksanas and twenty Kasthas 
constitute three Lavas 

215. According to another calculation seven and a half 
measures (Praslhas) of water constitute a Lava. 3 Thirty Lavas 
should be known as a Kala and thirty Kalas, one Muhurta. 

216. Thirty such Muhurtas make one day and one night 
or nine hundred Kalas make one day and one night . 4 

1. Obscure. So is the corresponding text in Bd. P.3.41.207. 

2. Prajdniiarga ‘creation of subjects’ in Bd.P.v.209. 

3. Perhaps it indicates that the time taken by so much of water to drip 
through the hole in the mechanical device used to calculate time, is one 
Lava . 

4. The reading here of vyadhikdni Satdni sat should be emended as 
iryadhikdni etc. meaning ‘six (hundred) increased by three hundred . 



844 


Vayu Purana 

217. The movement of the Moon and the Sun should be 
known by counting these: Fifteen Nimesas make one Kastha. 
Thirty Kasthas make one Kala. 

218. Thirty Kalas make one Muhurta. Some say that Kala 
is a tenth part of a Muhurta. Forty Kalas arc termed (by 
others) one Muhurta. 

219-220. Muhurtas and Lavas arc determined (thus) by 
those who know the measure. (Instead of the above) through 
water also time is measured. Thirteen Palas of water make a 
Prastha according to the calculation current in Magadha. Four 
Prasthas of water make one Nalika Ghata (a jar with a tube 
fitted in). 

221. The bottom plate of the device is four Angulas square. 
There are four holes in it, each of the size of a golden masa 
(the pulse, black gram). Two Nalika Ghatas of water flow 
through those holes in the period of a Muhurta. It is the same 
both in the day and in the night. 

222-223. Thanks to the special movement of the Sun, the 
maximum number of Kalas is six hundred and five in all the 
Rtus always. This is to be known as one human day. The 
Stellar day contains ten more. A human year is calculated 
through Savana months. 

224. It is decided in the scripture that a human year 
is one day and one night for the Devas. Through this day, 
the months, Ayanas and years should be calculated. 

225. Knowledge of this is arrived at by this method. The 
terms given are only indicative. Since Kala constitutes the basic 
unit dme is mentioned as Kala. 

226. One day of Brahma is constituted by ten million two 
hundred and ninety thousand divine years. 

227. On hearing this, the sages were very much surprised. 
They asked Suta thereafter to make their knowledge clearer 
numerically. 

The Sages.said: 

228. We wish to hear the magnitude of the period of 
dissolution on the basis of human calculation, briefly, consisting 
of small words and syllables. 


38.229-241 


845 


229. On hearing their words, lord Vayu endowed with 
d.vme attributes and celestial vision and engaged in the 
welfare ol the worlds spoke in brief. 

230. “The day and the night of Brahma have already been 

mentioned. I shall now mention their duration based on worldly 
calculation. 7 

231-233a. According to human calculation, four hundred 
and thirty two crorcs eight millions nine hundred and eighty 
thousand (4328980000) human years constitute the period of 
dissolution. 

233b-236. Then seven Suns rise up. All the four types of 
creations become merged in the great elements of the worlds. 
The universe is flooded with water. All the mobile and the 
immobile beings are destroyed. After completing the annihi¬ 
lation Prajapati becomes quiescent. When everything is burnt, 
light vanishes and everything is surrounded by nocturnal dark¬ 
ness. The entire vast sheet of water is then presided over by 
Isvara. The duration of the period of Ekarnava is the same as 
that of the day of the lord. The period of night is as long as 
everything is submerged in water. When that recedes, it is 
remembered as day. 

237. The night and day of Brahma succeed each other. 
This successive period of night and day of the lord is what is 
called Abhulasainplava . 

238. It is called Abhutosamplava because whatever living 
beings there be whether mobile or immobile in the entire range 
of three worlds upto the elements ( bhiitas ) become merged. 

239. (Another explanation) Prajapati is called Bhuta 
because he exists at the very outset before all the subjects and 
creations. Everything floats and merges in Bliuta. Therefore the 
the final dissolution is called Abhutasamplava. 

240. The word Abhutasariiplava is also used in the sense 
of permanency and deathlessness (?) The past, present and 
future subjects are calculated up to Aparardha* (infinite number) 
by means of divine number. 

241. The maximum longevity (of Brahma) is mentioned as 
twice Parardha. This much is the period of stay of Aja (the 


♦Probably the reading is ‘a-parardha’ upto Parardha—vide v. 241. 



846 Vdju Purana 

unborn) Prajapati. At the end of the stay of Brahma, Parame- 
sthin, there is the Pratisarga (secondary creation). 

242. Just as the flame of a lump is blown out by the 
gust of wind, so also Brahma becomes quiescent as a result of 
the Pratisarga. 

243. (Defective) The principles beginning with Mahat 
become withdrawn in the great Isvara; Mahat merges into the 
Unmanifest and all the three Gunas attain equilibrium. 

244-245. Thus Abhulasariiplava lias been recounted by 
me briefly. This withdrawal by complete merging in water is a 
periodic ( jVaimittika ) reabsorption in relation to Brahma. What 
more shall I tell you? 

He who always retains this in memory, he who listens to 
this frequently, shall attain great Siddhi as a result of glorific¬ 
ation and listening attentively.” 


CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 
Worlds from Maharloka to Siva's City 1 

Vayu said : 

1-6. Those Brahmanas of acute discernment, who are of 
extra-ordinary good behaviour, who subsist on the residue of 
what is consigned to sacred fire in Homa , and who maintain 
special piety, become die residents of Maharloka along with 
Devas. 

The fourteen Manus, the increasers of fame who had been 
glorified before, and who belong to the past, present and the 
future, are born here again and again along with sages, Devas, 
Gandharvas and Raksasas and take up their duties in the 
Manvantaras. 


1. This chapter corresponds to Bd. P. 3.4.2. Only verse numbers from 
it are mentioned for reference. The chapter is an epitome of Dhuvana 
Kola. 



39.7-12 


847 


, DeVaS ; ?T, Sa f; * 2 * 4 S ’ ^ anUS PUrS P ass awa y gradually 
and resort to Maharloka along with the righteous Brahmanas, 

Ksatriyas and Vaisyas. They are accompanied by those 
who perform truthful actions, who .are faithful and devoid 
of arrogance and who regularly maintain Vedic and Smarta 
rites and who maintain the rigorous discipline of Varnas 
and Asramas. Afterwards when the period of a Manvantara 
expires, they cease to operate in their offices (and <» 0 to 
Maharloka). 


The Sages said : 

7-8. O Powerful Maiarisvan (Wind-god), of what nature 
is that world which has been called Maharloka by you? In 
every world many (meritorious souls) will be presiding. Hence, 
O Lord, recount to us with pleasure, how many are those 
worlds and how they are burnt (if at all). You alone know this 
precisely. 

9. On being requested thus by those disciplined-souled 
sages, Vayu, the knower of reality, spoke these sweet and truth¬ 
ful words. 


Vayu said: 

10. There are only fourteen abodes called Lokas 1 (worlds) 
described by great sages and (meritorious men) stay therein. 

11-12. They call seven of them Krtas and the other seven 
Akrlas. The seven worlds, enumerated as Bhuh etc. are the 
Krtas . The seven Akrtas are the Prakfta ones (created by 


1. Verses 10-48 describe the seven Lokas (worlds), viz. (1) Bhur, 

(2) Bhuvar, (3) Svar, (4) Mahar, (5) Jana, (6) Tapas and (7) Satya. 
The location of 1-4 is (1) the Earth, (2) the space between the Earth and 

the Sun, (3) the space between the Sun and Dhruva (the Polar Star), 

(4) the space between Dhruva and Jana-Loka. 

Verses 24-27 explain the significance of Lokas [ 5-7 ] 

(5) Jana—Birth-place of subjects of Svayambhuva Manu and such other 
people. (6) Tapas—Region of the performers of penance like Rbhu, 
Sanatkumara. (7) Satya is Satta-malra (pure existence), the region of god 

Brahma. Tr . . . 

God Brahma created these worlds by uttering seven Vydh T lis, viz. Bhur, 

Bhuvah, Svah etc. 



848 V& y u Purana 

Prakrti). The Krtas are the abodes created along with their 
.Stem (persons identifying themselves with them). 

13. The Earth, the firmament, the heaven and what is 
remembered as Mahah —these four abodes are remembered as 
Arnavakas . 

14. These abodes are having decline and increase. Those 
not endowed so will be mentioned (later). Those that are 
Jfaimiltikas (periodical ones) last till the final dissolution. 

15. Jana, Tapa and Saiya— these three abodes are exclusive 
ones. They last till the (final) Prasarhyama (dissolution). 

16. I shall mention the Vyakta (manifest) ones. They are 
the seven abodes. Bhurloka is the first among them. The second 
one is remembered as Bhuvah. 

17. The third one should be known as Svah\ the fourth is 
remembeted as Mahah. Jana is the fifth world and Tapah is. 
considered as the sixth. 

18. Saiya is the seventh world. Beyond that there is dark¬ 
ness. When (Brahma) said “ Bhuh” Bhurloka originated. 

19. Second time when he said “ Bhuvah ”, firmament ori¬ 
ginated. For the third time when he said “ Svah ”, heaven 
appeared. 

20-21. By means of these three Vyaharas (utterances) 
Brahma created the worlds. Hence Bhuh is remembered as 
Parthiva Loka (Earth) and firmament is remembered as 
Bhuvah . Svarloka is heaven. This is the conclusion in the 
Puranas. Agni (Fire-god) is the lord of Bhutas . Hence he is 
remembered as Bhutapati . 

22. Vayu is the lord of Bhuvah. Hence he is Bhuvaspati . The 
Sun is the lord of Bhavya i.e. Svah , hence is Divaspati. 

23. When he uttered “Mahah”, Maharloka originated. The 
residence of the Devas who retire from their offices is there. 

24. Jana is the fifth Loka. Janas (people) are born there. 
It is called Janaloka because the subjects of Svayambhuva Manu 
and others were born there. 

25. Those subjects of Svayambhuva Manu and others, 
who have already been glorified, set out for Tapoloka when 
all the worlds are consumed by the fire at the end of the 
Kalpa. 


39.26-38 


849 


26. That world is called Tapoloka because Rbhu, Sanat- 
kumara and other holy personages of souls purified by Tapas 
(penance) and of sublimated sexuality stay in that world. 

27. The word Satya refers to Brahmi. It refers to pure 
existence as well. Hence Brahma’s world is Satya. It is the 
shining seventh world. 

28. All the Devas are the residents of Svarloka along with 
Gandharvas, Apsaras-s, Yaksas, Guhyakas and Raksasas. AH 
Bhutas, Pisacas and Nagas are residents of the Earth along 
with men. 

29-30. AlthoughMaruts, MatariSvans (Wind-gods), Rudras, 
(some) Devas and the Asvins have no fixed abode and they 
roam about in the atmosphere, they have their main residence 
in Bhuvarloka. The heaven-dwelling Adityas, Rbhus, Visve- 
devas, Sadhyas, Pitrs, and the sages of Angiras Gotra resort to 
Bhuvarloka also. 

31. All these Devas move about in aerial chariots and 
reside in the constellations and planets also. Thus all the 
(worlds) born of the utterances (Bhuh, Bhuvak, Svah) of Brahma 
have been recounted in order. 

32. Bhurloka is the first of these worlds and the last one is 
Maharloka . They are created by the Tanmatras. They are 
mutually pure i.e. they are separated from one another. 

33. Those who have gone away after resorting to the Earth, 
viz. Sukra and others ending with Caksusa (Manu?) reside in 
Maharloka till the end of the Kalpa. 

34-37. The seven Suns burn with their rays those worlds 
beginning with Bhurloka and ending with Maharloka. All the 
following : Marlci, Kasyapa, Daksa, Svayariibhuva, Angiras, 
Bhrgu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and others, are the Prajapatis 
and they live there with them. They are devoid of possessions 
and free from the feelings of my-ness. They are of sublimated 
sexuality. Rbhu, Sanatkumara and others are ascetics of great 
detachment. These worlds are the causes of the rebirth of all 
the fourteen Manvantaras including those of the Savarnas. 

38. Practising Yoga, penance and truthfulness and medita¬ 
ting on the soul, they return to the sixth Loka (i.e. Tapoloka) 
then at the end of the day (of Brahma i.e. during dissolution). 


850 


Vayu Purana 


39. Salya is the seventh Loka. It is the region from which 
there is no return. It is unobstructed (i.e. eternal). It is god 
Brahma’s Loka. 

40. In (velocity?) of rotation and in magnitude Bhurloka 
is the meeting place (i.e. in the middle?). The firmament, 
the space between the Earth and the Sun is remembered 
as Bhuvah (-Loka). 

41. This space between the Sun and Dhruva (the Pole 
Star) is Svarloka (Heaven). It is called Diva also. The space 
between Dhruva and Janaloka is called Maharloka . 

42. The seven worlds have been recounted well. Now I 
shall recount the Siddhis of those worlds. All the living beings 
in Bhurloka are the imbibers of juice and eaters of cooked 
food-grains. 

43-44. All the residents of Bhuvarloka and Svarga are the 
imbibers of Soma and Ajya (ghee-oblations). Those who stay 
in the fourth Loka, Maharloka , should be known to possess 
the mental Siddhis of five characteristics. Everything that they 
desire mentally is immediately realised. 

45. These Devas are of the past, present and future. 
They mutually worship by means of Yajhas. 

46. The middle ones worship the earlier ones (by sacrifice) 
and the present ones worship the middle ones. When the 
groups of Devas pass off, the contact and relations cease (to 
exist). 

47. It should be known that they still retain their series of 
mental Siddhis even though they cease to hold positions of 
authority. Their series of Siddhis is pure and should be known 
as mental. 

48. O Brahmanas, the four worlds situated lower than 
Janaloka have been briefly recounted by me to you. I shall 
recount them again. 

Vayu said : 

49-50. Marlci, Kasyapa, Daksa, Vasistha, Angiras, Bhrgu, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and others are born at the outset as the 


39.51-63 


851 


mental sons of Brahma. After establishing their subjects, they 
resort to Janaloka. l 

51-52. When the worlds beginning with Bhiih and ending 
with Mahar are pervaded by the flames of Samvartaka fire at 
the end of the Kalpa, when the black fires blaze and burn, 
Yama and other groups of Devas residing in Maharloka resort to 
Janaloka . All those stationed there are of very subtle bodies. 

53-54. The (newcomers) assume the same features and 
excellence as they (the residents of Janaloka ) and move about 
in Janaloka as long as the universe is submerged in water. 

55. When the night of Brahma whose source of origin is the 
Unmanifest, dawns into day, they are reborn in the same order 
as before. 

56. On the death of their predecessors all those aspirants 
beginning with Svayambhuva (Manu) and ending with Marlci 
are reborn. 

57-58. Thereafter the Yama groups of Devas are reborn in 
the (chronological) order, the eldest first and the younger 
afterwards. In the family of Devas are remembered seven 
Sambhutis (Manifestations). These Sambhutis are born with the 
Kalpa— Kalpajah . Four of these manifestations have passed 
away, while the three others (still) survive. 

59-61. Undergoing transmigration again and again upto 
ten times in order those Devas observe the evanescence of all 
created beings. Thanks to the force of the inevitable future and 
as a result of that power of their own meritorious deeds, they 
attain mental equilibrium. They desist from all activities and 
leave off Janaloka with a calm mind. They then attain the 
Vairaja Loka. 

62-63. Practising Yoga perpetually, performing penance 
and preaching dharma for a long time, they are bom in the 
families of meritorious persons. Whether they attain Devahood, 
sage-hood or human form, they do fulfil the duties of those 
respective positions. 


1 In vv 49-69, wc are told that at the end of the world, when Mahar- 

S&SSiSSSK?-MM" {J* 


Moksa). 



852 Vd y u Ptirdna 

64. Thus these groups of Devas resort to the Vairdja Loka 
after ten repetitions of births. There they stay for ten Kalpas. 

65-66. As each of the Kalpas is completed in the Vairdjaka 
(Kalpa) (Loka?), they move on to Brahmaloka in their due 
order of priority. In the world of Brahma, when a Kalpa of 
Vairdjalza (pertaining to Brahma) passes away, they. again get 
assigned a position lasting for a Kalpa in Vairdja (loka) . 

67. Thus in the order mentioned before they frequently go 
to Vairaja as a result of their penance up to ten times and return 
to Brahmaloka. 

68. Thus thousands of Devayugas have passed. They 
attained death along with the sages in Brahmaloka. 

Suta said: 

69. It is impossible to recount them in detail and in the 
proper sequence because time is beginningiess and it is impos¬ 
sible to count everything completely. Still you need not have 
any doubt. Everything has been mentioned by me precisely. 

70. On hearing that statement the sages were over-whelm¬ 
ed with doubts. They then spoke to Suta who was conversant 
with the Puranas, whose intellect was great and who was 
Vyasa’s disciple. 

The Sages said: 

71. Please mention precisely what constitutes the diet of 
these people in Vairdja Loka y what the extent of their exploit is, 
what their support is and how long they stay there. 

72. On hearing the statement uttered by the Sages, Suta 
who was well-versed in the Puranas and who knew the reality 
of the world, spoke thus with humility. 

Suta said: 

73. Those people who become the purest of the pure (by 
means of meritorious actions) attain that world (Vairdja) and 
stay there for ten Abhutasamplavas (periods of final dissolution). 

74. All of them have only subtle bodies. They are learned. 
Their forms and features are like those of clouds. Since they 
abide in a permanent world there is no Bhuta (the elements) 
in them. 


39 . 75-85 


853 


75-77. When a change is imminent (i.e. when they are 
about to leave), Sanatkumara and other Siddhas ofYogic rites 
and practice mention (reveal) their time of (periodic) change. 
The inclination to abandon the abode occurs simultaneously. 
Then all of them, of pure intellect, say to the Vairajas and to 
one another: “O blessed ones, now we shall enter into Pranava 
and stay in Brahmaloka. It is conducive to our welfare to 
proceed to Brahmaloka”. 

78-79. After saying thus, all of them striving to attain 
Brahman practise Yogic rites and stay there uniting the Atman 
with Paramdtman. Like the flames of a lamp that has ceased 
to burn (for want of oil), they become extinct and become 
merged in Brahman wherefrom a return is rarely achieved. 
(There is no return.) 

80. After attaining that world full of meditation, they attain 
the bliss of Brahman and the state of immortality. 

81. Brahmaloka is mentioned to be six times higher up be¬ 
yond the Vairaja worlds. And god Brahma is the Purohita (one 
who has been put in charge beforehand). 

82. All of them are Pnz?awz-souled (i.e. have concentrated 
their souls in the mystic syllable Om). They are endowed with 
enlightenment, purity and penance. After deriving the bliss of 
Brahman, they enjoy the state of deathless-ness. 

83. They are not affected by mutually clashing opposites 
(like happiness and sorrow etc.). They are devoid of the three 
Bhav.as (states of existence, i.e. birth, growth and decay). They 
possess majestic lustre. They are in every respect equal to 
Brahma except in the matter of over-lordship. 

84. They are endowed with majestic lustre, victory, AiSvarya 
(divine faculties of omnipotence etc.), Slhiti (continuous exis¬ 
tence), Vairdgya (non-attachment), Dartana (vision) on par 
with Brahma. 

85 Those learned men of holy rites and activities and in 
an enlightened state at the end of penance, attain the goal that 
transmutes them. When the Pratisancara (re-absorption) in 


1. Cf. Brahma Sutra 1V.4.17-21 which state that the Liberated Soul has 
all the powers of Brahma except that of creation of the world. 



854 


Vayu Purdria 

Prakfti is imminent they see it in a moment and get dissolved in 
the Unmanifcst along with Brahma and Devas. 

86. Thus Devas and Sages partake of, i.e. worship the 
Sattra (the sacrificial session in the form of) Brahman. The 
Satlra (i.e. Brahman) is eternal ( sandtana ), immortal, resplen¬ 
dent, ever-existent, imperishable and immutable. 

87. They are of sublimated sexuality. They traverse a path 
of no return. The purity they have attained by means of the 
practice of holy rites is supplemented by the knowledge of 
Vedantas. 

88. There they engage themselves in the practice of Yogic 
union (with the Supreme Brahman). They worship the highest 
goal. They abandon their physical body which is the cause of all 
sins and proceed ahead to (the state of)immortality. 

89-90. They are devoid of passion. They have conquered 
anger. They are rid of delusion. They speak the truth invariably. 
They are quiescent. They are of dedicated souls endowed with 
mercy and sympathy. They have conquered the sense organs. 
They are devoid of attachment. They are pure. They are 
remembered as ones who have attained Sayujya (identity) with 
Brahman. They are the heroic souls who have burnt all their 
sins by means of acts of penance uncontaminated by desires. 
Theirs are those worlds from which there is no falling off. 
It is remembered that the pleasure therein is immeasurable. 

91. This is the immortal region of Brahman. It is superbly 
resplendent in the most exalted firmament. After attaining it 
along with Brahma, Devas cease to be worried and sorrowful 
(i.e. attain Liberation—Moksa). 

The Sages said : 

92. O excellent one, whence is this Parardha (Infinite, 
Infinity) ? What is this called Para (the greatest) ? We wish to 
know this. Please speak. 

Suta said : 

93-95. Listen from me the definition of Parardha 1 and 

I. Verses 93-104 give the technical terms for numbers and the digits 
up to Parardha. 



39.96-108 


855 


Para. One, ten, hundred and thousand are the (main) numbers 
known (well) to you. Ten times thousand make Ayala. One 
hundred thousand is called Myuta by learned men. Similarly 
Arbuda and Kofi can be calculated. Hundred J\ r iyutas make a 
Kofi (crore). Thonsand Kiyutas make one Arbuda (one hundred 
million). Arbuda is ten Kofis. They consider hundred Kofis as 
Abja. 

96. Learned men call a thousand crores a Kharua and ten 
times a Kharua make a jVikharva. 

97-98. A huudred thousand Kofis make (what is called) Sanku. 
People who know numbers (and calculation) say that a thous¬ 
and times thousand Kofis multiplied by ten make a Samudra (i.e. 
Jaladhi). Ten thousand times a thousand Kotis is called Madhya. 
A hundred thousand times a thousand Kofis is termed Anta 
(Antya). 

99. A thousand crores multiplied by a crore iscalled Parardha. 
Learned men call twice a Parardha , a Para (great). 

100-102. The number hundred they say is Paridrdha ( Pari -. 
vrdha in Bd.P.). A thousand is Paripadmaka. Thereafter the other 
numbers (each number is multiplied by ten to get the next 
number) are Ayuta , jViyuta , Prayula, Arbuda, Nirbuda, Kharbuda , 
Kharua, Nikharva, Saiiku, Padma, Samudra, (Antya), Madhyama, 
Parardha and Para. In calculation these are the eighteen digits. 

103-104. These are the terms given by sages. A Parardha (? 
yeais) from the beginning of creation constitutes a Kalpa (?) 
of Brahma (only a day). A period extending as much also remains, 
at the end of which there is Pratisarga. Thus Para and Parardha 
have been (calculated) explained by me. 

105-107. As Brahma’s prowess is the greatest, his longevity 
the highest, (his power of) penance,strength, piety (or Dliarma), 
learning, fortitude, knowledge, realization of Brahman and 
faculties such as omnipotence ( aiivarya ) etc. are of the highest 
magnitude, there is no living being who is greater than Brahma. 
He is established in the highest position, so he is the greatest of 
all objects. 

The greatest Brahma has been reckoned (calculated and 
explained) by me (as Para). Plalf of Para is Paiaidha . 

108. The countable yet ever uncountable is the trinity- 


856 Vd y u Purdna 

The countable is observed through numbers. All numbers up to 
Parardha can be expressed. 

109. When the mass is seen there is no specific number. It 
is the characteristic of countless ness. If we say as many 
as sand particles it means infinite. These are the five characteri¬ 
stics (?). 

110. That can be calculated by Isvaras of divine vision be¬ 
cause of their purity. Since he is established in perfect know¬ 
ledge, Brahma sees every tiling. 

111. On hearing this, all the sages residing in Naimisa 
forest had their eyes bedimmed with tears (of joy). Their (voice) 
was choked up due to delight. 

112-113. Those expounders of Brahman asked Matarisvan 
(the Wind-god) : “O holy lord, we wish to hear precisely how 
far is Brahmaloka in so many Yojanas. What is the magnitude 
of Yojana and Krosa?” 

114. On hearing their words, Matarisvan (Vayu) of hum¬ 
ble speech spoke as follows in sweet words, in the proper order 
and in the same manner as was seen (by him). 

Vdyu said : 

115. I shall recount this to you. Listen to what I intend to 
say. The Vyakla Bhaga (that which is manifest) is grosser than 
Avyakta. 

116. There are ten parts of Mahat . The gross part is 
called Bhutaai (Ahamkarci or the Cosmic Ego). The magnitude 
of Paramdnu (an atom) is little more than the tenth part of 
Bhutadi (?) 

117. A Paramdnu is very subtle. It cannot he seen by the 
(naked) eye. It can be imagined; what cannot be (ultimately) 
split in the world should be known as Paramdnu . 

118. When the Sun’s rays enter through the window, the 
subtlest dust particle that is seen is called Paramdnu It is the 
first among the units of magnitude. It is called Paramdnu . 

119. When there is an aggregate of eight Paramdnus it is 
called Trasarenu or Padmarajas (pollen-dust of a lotus). 


39 . 120-130 


857 


12°. When egh, Trasareifus join together that is rcmem- 

bered as one (ctariot dust). When eight Ralharmu are 

combined they form what is remembered by learned men as 
one Balagra (tip of the hair). 

* 21 ; Ei ght Balagras form a LiksS (the egg of a louse). Eight 
Likfas form Yuka (a louse). Eight Yukds form what is called Yava 
(a grain of barley) and eight Yavas form one Angula (the dis¬ 
tance between the joints in a finger). 

122. Twelve /%a/a-joints make a Vitasti and twentyone 
^ii/a-joints make a Ratni (a cubit—the distance between the 
elbow and the closed fist). 


123. Twentyfour Angulas form one Hasla (the distance bet¬ 
ween the elbow and the tip of the middle finger). Two Ratnis 
or fortytwo Angulas should be known as a Kisku. 

124. Learned men say that ninetysix Angulas form one 
Dhanus (a bow). This Dhanus is a unit used in measuring Gavyuti 
(Explanation in verse 126). 


125. Dhanus , Dan<ja> Yuga and Nali —all these contain equal 
number of Angulas. Persons who know calculation say that three 
hundred Dhanus units make a Nalva. 

126. It is taught that two thousand Dhanus units make one 
Gavyuti . Eight thousand Dhanus units make one Yojana. 

127. The measurement of the distance of a Yojana is based 
on this unit of Dhanus . It should be known that a thousand of 
these Dhanus make the distance of a Sakra-Krosa (or a Krosa ). 

128. Calculation in Yojanas is made by those who are experts 
in the knowledge of numbers. Listen to the distance of Brahma- 
loka, in so many Yojanas. 1 

129. Divakara (Sun) is a hundred thousand Yojanas 
above the surface of the Earth. jVifokara (Moon) is a thousand 
Yojanas above the disc of the Sun. 

130. The entire stellar zone shines a full hundred thousand 
Yojanas above the Moon. 


1. Verses I28fif. give the distances from the earth to other planets and 

their locations. Though other Puravas endorse this information, it is 
imaginary. It shows the limits of the knowledge of Astronomy in those times. 

The same remark applies to the distances to Mahar Loka and other 
mythical worlds. 



858 


Vayu Purana 


131. The Mcru mountain is a hundred thousand Yojanas 
high. The distance between planets above the stellar zone is 
twice this (height) and they are one above the other 

132. Budha (Mercury) moves about beneath all stars and 
planets. Sukra (Venus) moves about above it. Above it is the 

planet Lohita (Mars). _ . N . . 

133-135. Above it is Brhaspati (Jupiter) and above that 
is Sanaikara (Saturn). A hundred thousand Yojanas above 
Saturn shines the entire zone of the Seven Sages (Great 
Bear). A hundred thousand Yojanas above the Seven Sages 
shines Dhruva (Pole star), son of Utianapada. He is the main 
pivot of all stars in the heaven. He has the compact divine 
stellar aerial chariot. 

136-137. The height of the three worlds has been recounted 
by mein Yojanas. In the course of the Manvantaras, worldly 
Yajnas are performed for Devas by the people of different 
castes and stages of life. These Yajfias alone are conducive to 
the sustenance and stability of Devas. 

138. The set of the three worlds has been explained. 
Understand what is beyond this. Above Dhruvaloka is Maharloka 
wherein those people staying till the end of the Kalpa reside. It 
is ten million Yojanas from Dhruva— that is the conclusion (of 
wise men). 

139. Janaloka is twenty million Yojanas from Maharloka . 
In it stay those Sadhakas (aspirants)—Daksa and others, the sons 
of Brahma. They live till the end of the Kalpa. 

140. It is remembered that Tapoloka is forty million 
Yojanas above Janaloka . It is here that the Vairaja groups 
of Devas stay. They are exempt from the effects of burning of 
all living beings in the destruction of the universe. 

141. Sixty million Yojanas from Tapoloka is Satyaloka . It 
is called Brahmaloka of those who are devoid of death and 
desire and so who never return to the Sarhsdra therefrom. 

142. It is remembered (proclaimed) that the space above 
Brahmaloka upto the (upper crust of the) Cosmic Egg is a crore 
and fifty niyuta (a fifteen million) Yojanas. 

143-144. The lower part extends to fortysix million five 
hundred thousand Yojanas. This lower half consists of movement 
(of stars, planets, etc.). In the upper half the movement 


39.145-157 


859 


ceases. Dhruvaloka and its top has been explained as has 
been heard by me mentioning the distance in Yojanas. 

145. Now I shall mention the allotment of abodes to those 
living beings who deserve falling into hells due to their cruel 
actions. 

146-149. The following are the hells* : Raurava, Rodha 
Sukara, Tala, Taptakumbha, Mahajvdla, Sabala, Vimocana, ICrmi, 
Krmibhaksa, Lalabhaksa, Visamsana, AdhahSiras, Pdyavaha, 
Rudhirandha, Vailarana, ICrsna, Asipalravana, Agnijvdla , Mahaghora, 
SathdamSc, Svabliojana, Tamas, Krsnasutra, Loha, Asija, Apratistha, 
Vicyaiva and others. 

150. All these dark and gloomy hells are under the juris¬ 
diction of Varna. -Vfcn of evil deeds fall into these severally 

151. All these hells Raurava etc. are reported to be beneath 
the Earth. A perjuror, a person taking up a side by making 
false statements and untruths falls into the hell Raurava of 
ruthless grasp. 

152. A slayer of a cow, a destroyer of a foetus and one 
who commits arson in the city fall into the hell Rodha. A slayer 
of a Brahmana, a drink-addict and a stealer of gold fall into 
the hell Sukara. 

153. A slayer of a Ksatriya, of a Vaisya in miserable 
circumstances or of a Brahmana as well as a defiler of the 
preceptor’s bed falls into the hell Tala. 

154. He who indulges in sexual intercourse with his sister 
and the soldier of a king (i.e. murderer of a king) fall into the 
hell Taptakumbha. A trader in (stolen) horses and protector 
of one who is kept in legal bondage fall into the hell Taplaloha. 

155. He who sells his chaste wife, he who forsakes a 
devotee and he who indulges in sexual intercourse with his 
daughter or daughter-in-law falls into the hell Mahajvala. 

156-157. He who sells the Vedas, he who blasphemes the 
Vedas, those who abuse or disrespect elders or hit them with 
wounding words and one who carnally approaches forbidden 


1. Veases 146-184 deal with the hells, the tortures therein and the 
sins that lead to these hells. The total number of hells is twentyeight. 



860 


Vayu Purana. 

women _ a ll these fall into the hell named Sabala. A thief or a 

trespasser falls into the hell Vimoha • 

158. He who dismantles or spoils public roads falls into 
the hell Kifoloha. Those who hate Devas and Brahmanas, those 
who do not worship preceptors and those who contaminate 
precious gems fall into the hell Kwiibhaksya . 

159. He who eats food keeping his wife, friends and 
daughter (starving) falls into the foul-smelling hell Lalabhakfa . 

160. A manufacturer of arrows, a potter, a person who takes 

away gold coins, a professional physician, one who sets fire to 

a garden—all these fall in (the hell called) Viiamana . 

161. He who accepts monetary gifts from evil men, he who 
officiates as a priest in theYajna on behalf of an ineligible man 
and the man who maintains himself by stellar calculation fall 
into the hell Adhomukho . 

162. He who sells milk, wine, flesh, lac, scents, juices, 
gingelly seeds and similar things falls into the terrible hell 
Puyavalia. 

163. He who captures, fetters or ensnares fowls, cats, 

boars, birds, deer, rams and sheep will also fall into the same 

hell. 

164-166. Learned men say that these (following) sinners 
fall into the hell Rudhirandhai a Brahmana who rears goats, 
sheep and buffaloes, handles wheels and banners or makes a 
livelihood with the sale of dyes and colours (or by staging plays 
etc.); a dealer in birds; lie who performs Yajnas on behalf of 
all and sundry in the village; he who burns other men’s houses; 
he who poisons others; he who makes a living by pimping and 
pandering; he who sells Soma juice; a drunkard; a flesh-eater; 
wilful slayer of animals; a slayer of buffaloes and deer; he who 
creates (imaginary) festivals; a tailor by profession; and one 
who is treacherous to one’s friends. 

167. There is no doubt in this that those who feed the 
people sitting in the same row with different sorts of food-stufls 
(and thus are partial), fall into the terrible hell Vidbhuja. 

168. He who invariably utters falsehood, lie who is voluble 
in scolding others, he who is inauspicious—these sinners fall into 
the terrible hell named Mutrakirna . 


39.169-180 


861 


169-170. Men who kill those who offer nu af - r L 
fall into Vailamiji. Insane persons, persons of dejected m^nd 
those who arc devoid of purity of couduct, persons of fu"oui 
temperament, persons who make others miserable, person 
given to deemfu ways fall into the hell p trson 

k,II,n s c'rMra, «) or hunting deer, are out, mutilated 
dragged and pulled in a terrible manner in that he I ’ 

171. Those who cat and drink (forbiddenl uffs) in a 
term, age fall into the hell Agnij.ah. They are eaten by steeb 
beaked crow s of dark and diverse colours. 

172. Persons svith the vow of holy rites and celibacy, break- 

21 e,T^I^ d,,d “ rgingSem — ^ • *» into 

about by - 

174. Those who perform actions contrary to the rules of 

castes and stages of life on being urged by anger or elation, go 
to hell (jVmiya ). ’ 6 

175. The hot-centred great hell Raurava is white (?) from 
outside and terrible. The extremely terrible Tapah is beneath it 
It is cool-centred, 

, I76 l Listen and understand these being described in serial 
order. Beneath the Earth only seven hells are mentioned. 

177. They are the outcome of Adharna (sin). They are 
Andhalamisraka and others. Raurava is the first among them. Then 
there is Maharaurava . 


178. Beneath this is the other hell which is both cold and 

scoiching. This third hell is A alasUlra which is remembered as 
Mahahavividhi* also. 

179. The fourth hell is Apratistha, and Avici is remembered 

as the fifth. The next one is Lohaprstha and Avidhcya is the 
seventh. 

180. The first hell is called Raurava because itis very terrible. 
Although it contains water, it is remembered as one that scorches. 
Beneath it is the hell Tapah that is terrible, cold and very 


* mahahir-vividhaf} (Bd. P.v. 181) having great serpents of various kinds. 




862 


Vayu Pur an a 


181. Biting serpents arc said to be in the terrible Kalasutra. 
Nothing can stay in the hell Apratisfiia. There is a terrible 

whirling in it. 1 

182. Avici is said to be very terrible because the sinners are 

crushed by means of mechanical contrivances. The hell Loha 

(Prsfha) is still more terrible, because all Karmans are exhaus¬ 
ted in it (by experiencing the fruit thereof,). 

183. (Defective verse) Though the beings in the hell are 
without bodies, the harassment, afflictions and sufferings that 
they undergo in the Avidlujo hell are irremediable. 

184. All these hells are as terrible as mountains and devoid 
of light above. In all these the misery due to sin is very intense. 

185-186. These two worlds on the top are devoid of any 
light whatsoever. Although they are like the other worlds, the 
sufferings in these two worlds by means of fiery piles (?) are the 
worst. They take up bodies capable of experiencing these suffer¬ 
ings as a result of their previous actions. Intensity of suffering 
is common to all these worlds. 

187-188. The sufferings of the beings doomed to hell are 
innumerable. They undergo misery. When the sins have been 
exhausted, they are born again in the womb of lower animals 
or as Devas. Devas are stationed above and Narakas (beings 
doomed to hell) arc stationed below. 

189. Caused by Dharmas or Adharmas they develop befitting 
bodies for the purpose of experiencing the fruits thereof. 

190. Devas see the hellish beings standing topsy turvy 
below them. The hellish beings too sec all the Devas standing 
topsy turvy. 

191. There is no distinction in Lokaloka as to the top 
or bottom because these worlds have no tip or root. They are 
held in position naturally. 

192. This situation, this Samjna (? name) is natural to 
Lokaloka (?). 

The Brahmanas who were performing the Satra then spoke 
to Vayu. 

The Sages said : 

193-194. Mention completely the number of living beings 



39.195-205 


863 

residing in Lokaloka and moving about in the world of 
existence. 

On hearing the words of the sages, Manila spoke these words. 
Vaju said : 

195-196. O excellent ones among men, all the creatures 
can by no means be entirely enumerated. 1 They are beginning¬ 
less and endless. They are jumbled and mixed with one another. 
Only a general inference can be made to fix their number. The 

number cannot be positively asserted. They are mentioned to 

be numerous. Even with a divine vision they cannot be known. 
How can I with limited knowledge and ordinary vision fix their 
limit ? 

197. Actually no question is asked on what cannot be con¬ 
ceived or known. Understand what has been named and 
numbered by Brahma. 

198. The earthly worms born of Samscka (sprinkling or 
watering) etc. form about a thousandth part of the number of 
immobile beings. 

199. This has been decisively arrived at that all the 
aquatic creatures together come to about a thousandth part of 
the creatures born of Samseka . 

200. All the worldly birds should be known as forming a 
thousandth part of the number of aquatic living beings. 

201. All.the animals, the quadrupeds, should be known as 
constituting a thousandth part of the number of birds. 

202. The bipeds (men) in this world should be known as 
constituting a thousandth part of all the quadrupeds. 

203. Righteous men should be known to constitute a thou¬ 
sandth part of the entire number of bipeds. 

204. Of the righteous men only a thousandth part goes to 
heaven. Of those righteous men who go to heaven only a thou¬ 
sandth part qualify themselves for absolution ( Moksa ). 

205. Persons staying in the abodes of torture are equal to 
those who go to heaven. Those wicked souls who fall into the 
dark Raurava after death are harassed by both chill and heat. 

1. Verses 195-208 give the Puranic notions about the number ofjivas 
m each species. 



864 


Vayu Pur ana 


206. They suffer bitter pain. The bodies of those who 
reach the abodes of torture become benumbed. Raurava should 
be known as hot. Blazing splendour and hot liquids flow there. 

207. The Tapa hell is in solid form and always chill. Good 
and righteous people going to heaven are very rare. 

208. This fixation of number is made by the self-born lord 
Isvara himself. Human calculation recedes. Only the calculation 
of Brahma decides (properly). 

The Sages said: 

209-210. Mahah, Jana, Tapah, Satya, Bhuta, Bhavya 
andBhava—all these worlds have been recounted by you. Please 
mention precisely what their difference is and what the distance 
between them is. 

On hearing these words of the sages of sublimated sexuality, 
Vayu, who has seen the real truth mentioned these facts to 
them. 


Vayu said: 


211. Learned men see that manifest through inference; the 
Yogins see it directly by means of Yogic power and those who 
habitually perform holy rites observe it through Pratyahara 
(withdrawal of physical senses), meditation and penance. 

212-214. The enlightened Rbhu, Sanatkumara and others 
who possess pure intellect, the Virajas (those who are free from 
Rajoguna) free from sorrow, those excellent saintly men like 
Brahma himself who are never fading (always) full of delight, 
logins adhering to Brahman, and the sages Valakhilya and 
others—all these have observed the residence of the eternal lord 
from close quarters. That residence cannot be conceived or 
argued about. It makes good men contented. I too have observ¬ 
ed it by remaining close at hand. 


215-216. Since Isvara is so subtle as the atom, he can 
only be conceived by learned men. The following ten everlast¬ 
ing attributes are always present in Sankara —Jfidna (perfect 
knowledge), Vairagya (detachment), AiSvarya (overlordship or 

fZHT r m y St i C r P0WCrS )> rapas (penance), Satyam (truth¬ 
fulness), Rsama (forgiveness), Dhrti (fortitude), Draffttva 


39.217-228 


865 


soul) and 


(supervision), Atmasambandha (contact with the 
Adhiffhanatva (the state of being the support of ain 

217. He is ViMu (all-powerful and omnipresent). The flee 
of Yog,c power ol the Yog,ns is kindled by his blessing,. A,sum- 
mg physical bodies, lie helps the world of human beinos. 

218. The abode of that eternal lord is imperishable, fixed 
and untarnished by worldly chaos. I, is the eighth (one beyond 
the seven Lokas). It is conceived by Maya and the greatest of 
all. 


219. The eightfold Prakrti and its creations are created 
by him through Maya. Lord Mahesvara is Mdyin (Master or 
possessor of Maya). The withdrawal (annihilation) of 
Devas is done there (in his abode). 

220. Listen to and understand even as I recount in detail 
and m the proper order. The distance between Bhurloka and 
Brahmaloka is one hundred and thirtyone million five hundred 
thousand Yojanas. 

221. The space of Brahmanda above Brahmaloka is 
fifteen million Yojanas. 


222-223. This is the highest point that can be reached. 
Beyond that no one can go. The eternal, uncountable, subtle 
raki tis supported by mutual Gunas exist there. Their attribute 
is to create the Ksetrajnci termed Brahma who makes them 
function and is present there. 

224-226. It is in them that all these exist: the possessor of 
lakrti, the subtle, supporting, the eternal one, the unproduc¬ 
ed, great abode, the great atom, the great one lying down, the 
undying, the unimaginable, unembodied, the mental form, the 
manifestation, the disappearance, the maintenance and the 
blessing. Vidhi (Brahma) cannot be compared to anyone else. 
The great IiSvara is like Paramanu. With his brilliance he makes 
this illuminated. He is beyond the darkness. 

227. The golden egg that was evolved at the outset as 
Aupasargika (a relevant adjunct) was very huge and wholly 
circular. It was evolved out of Isvara. 

228. The germination of seed is from Isvara. Ksetrajria 
(individual soul) is considered as the seed. They speak of 
Prakrti as the Toni (the source of the origin) and that is of the 
nature of Narayana. 


866 


Vayu Purana 


229. The creator of all the worlds, the noble-souled omni¬ 
present lord in contact with Prakrti creates Brahmaloka and 
Brahmanda through his body, for the purpose of the creation 
and maintenance of the worlds. 

230. Beyond Brahmaloka and beneath the upper crust of 
the Cosmic Egg—in between these two is the Pur a (city), his 
divine abode Manomaya (consisting of the mind) . l 

231. That is the abode of the embodied Isvara of un¬ 
measured splendour. The city named Siva is there and it is the 
refuge of those who are afraid of rebirth. 

232. O excellent Brahmanas, it is full one hundred thou¬ 
sand Yojanas in extent. Within, it is as extensive as the sphere 
of the Earth. 

233-34. It is surrounded by a massive gold rampart of solar 
splendour. It has brilliance of the mid-day Sun outshining the 
lustre of all others. It has four golden portals embellished with 
strings of pearls. The enclosures are well-constructed with 
bright golden adjuncts. 

233. That divine city (shines well) with the sounds of bells 
reverberating in the sky. Neither the fear of death, nor distress 
nor the exhaustion of old age finds a place there. 

236. No other city deserves to be compared to this city. It 
extends to a hundred thousaud Yojanas to the ten quarters. 

237. That city is pervaded by the brilliance of the bull- 
bannered lord and so it stands (firm). The creation of that 
golden city is by means of mental conception. 


238-240. The city shines much with scattered diamond 
ust. In the gardens and parks therein, there are divine lotuses 
which have the lustre of the autumnal Moon, which resemble 
the rising Sun, which are half white and half red and which are 
ma e of gold. With their stalks having the lustre of Marakata 
(emerald) gem they are of the size of the wheels of chariots, 
n fragrance, beauty and tenderness they are unequalled. 

Some lotuses resemble the wings of a bee; some 
are golden. Some are half black and half red. Their inner 


1. Verses 230-300 give a poetic 
description of the residents- therein. 


description of the city of Siva and the 



39.243-254 


867 


surfaces are very tender. The lotuses covering up the whole 
place seem to be so many umbrellas. 

There are seven great rivers there. Understand their names. 

243. The following are the beautiful rivers in that excellent 
city : Vara, Varenya, Varada, Vararha, VaravarninI, 
Varama and Varabhadra. 

244. The excellent rivers contain water shining like split 
jewels. It is mixed with the petals of red and blue lotuses. 
Foams and whirlpools add to their beauty. 

245. Neither Brahmarsis nor Devas, nor Asuras nor Pitrs 
nor others knew that city of the inconceivable lord. 

246. Only those noble-souled ones who perform meditation 
without agitation and who have conquered their sense-organs 
by means of good yogic power, see that city of the bull-banner¬ 
ed one. 

247-248. There is a splendid golden palace in the middle 
of that excellent city of unequalled splendour. It is divine and 
it resembles the great Meru mountain. It is enveloped in graci¬ 
ous glory. It has a thousand ‘feet’ (columns). It is embellished 
all round with incomparable gems and jewels. 

249-254. Its splendour all round is increased by means of 
invaluable and incomparable gems. It is embellished in some 
sections with crystals, in some sections with lunar stones, in 
other sections with lapis lazuli, in some sections with shining 
gems resembling the Moon, in some with brilliant gems as 
beautiful as the rising Sun, in others with golden jewels 
refulgent like fire, in some sections with jewels shining 
with silver lustre, in other sections with blue sapphire gems and 
in some sections with firmly fixed diamonds. It was heightened 
in splendour by means of brilliant windows and ventilators of 
various sizes. It is decorated with festoons and flags shining 
like the rays of the Moon. Sounds of golden bells reverberate 
in it. Joy and revelry are ever present there. Its refulgence is 
heightened by the residences of Kinnaras, which have the shape 
and lustre of the evening clouds. Just as the mountain-lord 
Meru shines with its golden peaks, so also the palace shines with 
shining water currents all round abounding in golden flowers. 







868 


Vayu Purana 

The whole city shines with golden flags and banners. Similarly 
the lordly palace shines with its terraces and landing spots. 

255-257. In this abode of the three-eyed lord there is a 
statue of Vasanta (Spring). The goddesses LaksmI, Sri, Kirti 
Sobha and Sarasvatl are present there in physical bodies (crea¬ 
ted through Maya). These eternal goddesses endowed with 
beauty and fragrance are innumerable and of mutually depen¬ 
dent (complementary) qualities. They are the ornaments of all 
precious stones and source of the origin of loveliness and 
dalliance. The highly blessed goddesses divided them-elves into 
a hundred crores and diligently wait upon the Lord with Uma. 

258. They have thousands of other maid-servants behind 
them, beautiful and endowed with splendour and glory. They 
all have eyes like the petals of lotuses. 

259. They rejoice along with the Ganas as huge as moun¬ 
tains and as brilliant as fire; they exhibit their extremely attrac¬ 
tive amorous gestures and sportive activities. 

260-264. Some are hunch-backed; some are dwarfish; some 

have beautiful bodies; some are horse-faced; a few are slender 
tke the red variety of sugarcane; some are hideous and terrible 
wnh flat faces; some have loosely hanging bellies; a few have 
short arms. Some have no eyes, some are small-footed; a few 

ike Ve thos e e or S ,° f I 1 "' l0rd 1 beaStSJ ° therS haVC faCCS and belIies 
ike those of elephants; others are elephant-faced; a few are 

lion-faced and tiger-faced; some have red eyes; some beauties 
with /T i T tS r and charmin S eyes; there are beautiful ladies 

fo m rS S £ hair 3nd C ° mCly CyeS ’* ° thCrS - —»e any 

fZms u WOmcnwith different dresses and 

abouT vc^e I'S?, 0 / ******* *•*! <Hr move 
arms sports^ Pa ‘ a “' ^ MaheSvaraoften 

of« fort^t Rud? 

liberal-mmdedness. They resemhl 8 ™ 3 ' of "J ual e *Plons and 

Wdeom faces with curved falSTt 1 °[ ^ . The >’ W 


39.269-279 


869 


like the blue lotus. His eyes are large, wide and copper-coloured. 
His hanging lips are a bit hideous. I-Iis sharp curved fangs appear 
to add to his beauty. His eyes are turned upwards. It is impossi¬ 
ble to see him stiaight in the face. He is beautifully clad in bark 
garments. 

269-270. He stands with his right arm (hand) clasping the 
left arm (hand) and keeping both of them clinging to his side— 
the hand that has destroyed the enemies of Devas and has 
never exhausted by fatigue in battles. In his left hand shines the 
weapon Pattis'a (a spear with a sharp edge). There also shines 
much his wonderful bow of ten colours, the twanging sound of 
which is very terrible. There is no other bow to equal its strength. 

271. Again there is his Trident which has the refulgence of 
lightening. It never fails in destroying enemies. It has the 
most excessive splendour and it blazes brilliantly. 

272. The sword of the noble-souled lord of Devas is the most 
excellent of all shining objects. Similarly does the cool-rayed 
Moon shine with its brilliant splendour and gorgeous body like 
the flame of fire in the sacrificial altar. 

273. In front of the lord is the great golden Kamandalu 
(water pot). It is full of water and it shines splendidly. 

274-275. The first (or the head) female doorkeeper (port¬ 
ress) of the goddess, named Vijaya stands there shining splen¬ 
didly after making obeisance to the lord. She is a blessed lady 
with four arms. She is very popular. She wears whitish garments. 
A sword hangs from her (waist). There is a great pearl 
necklace covering her chest. She shines like another goddess Sri. 
She is unequalled and great. 

276. There are other ladies behind her. They are accom¬ 
panied by groups of celestial ladies. With their newly wed and 
beloved husbands they worship Sankara. 

277. Groups of Gandharvas endowed with all characteristic 
features and accompanied by all musical instruments, sing songs 
of prayer before the lord of Devas. 

278. The Lord of bulls, of broad chest and great height, 
shines there. He has the lustre of the autumnal cloud. He re¬ 
joices much in his (lord’s) house. 

279. Then there is Skanda, his son, of unmeasured prowess. 


870 


Vayu Puraiia 


He wears red garments. He is glorious and his eyes resemble the 
petals of an excellent lotus. He stays there with his followers. 

280-281. He has four followers (attendants), viz. Sakha 
Visakha, Naigameya and Astavan (?) They are devoid of 
vicious indulgence. They are not cruel. They are engaged in 
protecting the subjects. The deity having peacock for his vehicle 
(i.e. Skanda) shines in their company. He has great prowess. 
There, the lord having faces all round (i.e. six-faced) sports with 
big serpents as his toys. 

282-283. Those kings who make gifts of gold to leading 
scholars, those householder Brahmanas who live at home ex¬ 
pounding Brahman, those who perform their Vedic study and 
penance in secret and those who maintain themselves by glean¬ 
ing (grains)—all these become the honoured councillors of the 
lord of Devas. 

284. Many Manvantaras expire and new Manvantaras 
come (yet the assembly of the lord stays as it was before). May 
the excellent and wonderful feats of Bhava. the lord of Devas, 
be heard. 


285. Tigers are his followers. They have great speed and the 
lustre of gold. They are created by the lord himself and they 
move about as they please. 

286. They are like Death unto god of Death. They subdue 

the arrogance of Yama. Who will (adequately) mention the 

innumerable superhuman faculties and excellences (of the 
Lord)? v 


2 j 7 'r , HenCef ° rth ’ 1 sha11 recount again the excellent and 
wonderful activities of Bhava, pursued sympathetically for the 
sake of blessing the living beings. Listen and understand. 

,J 88 f 2 - (defective verse) There are a thousand living 
^ughMaya and fettered to eight pillars in 
lord - They have 

features o^the lords of the quarters by having these attributes: 

Hke e it arC 3S ^ ^ ^ m ° Untain and shine 

2. In strength and prowess they are unequalled. 

' aSheM^ e . COlOUr0f ^ n «* la <*.Kunda flower 


871 


39.293-300 

4. They roar like the rumbling cloud (illuminated by) 
lightning. 

5. They wear crystalline jewels on their heads. 

6. They have cloud-like dark garments (covering their 
bodies). 

7. They are marked with Srivatsa mark in Vajra (adamant). 

8. Their fingers(toes) with their claws resemble the Trident 
and hence they are termed Sulapanin (armed with 
trident). 

To the excellent shining columns of that important palace 
they are severally tied by means of fiery fetters. Thus they live 
there very happily. 

Appreciating these words of Vayu, the surprised sages, the 
saints residing in the Naimisa forest said: 

293. “O omnipresent lord, O holy lord, the vital air of all 
living beings, who are those great beings in the forms of lions? 
Where are they born? Of what forms are they? 

294. What is their guilt for which those lions have been 
severally bound by means of Vaisvanara (fiery) fetters by the 
lord of all living beings?” 

295. On hearing their words Vayu spoke thus : f< Those 
thousand lions are the embodied forms of the Furies of the lord 
and created by the noble-souled Isvara after removing them 
from his own body. They are given the physical forms of lions. 

296-297. After granting the boon of freedom from fear to all 
living beings, they had been fettered formerly by means of the 
fiery bonds. When (dispute arose with Daksa) regarding his 
share in the Yajna, that Yajna of Daksa was completely destro¬ 
yed sportfully by a single lion that had been released from 
bondage at the behest of Isvara after knowing that the wrath 
of the goddess has been incurred (by him). 

298. At that time the great goddess Mahakall came out of 
MahaJevI (goddess Urna), the eternal witness of all rites, along 
with the Bhutas (goblins) as her followers. 

299. That fury is the holy lord Virabhadra who perma¬ 
nently resides in Rudra’s abode. He is of incomprehensible 
form. He is the wiper (remover) of the anger of the goddess. 

300. Thus the palace, the incomparable residence of the 


lord of Suras, the highest secret of all, has been recounted b 
me to you. 

301-303. Henceforth I shall describe the other residents and 
objects of that city which is the most excellent of all beautiful 
cities. It is situated in the atmospheric regions. There are man 
other palaces decorated wonderfully with various kinds of gems 
There are many flags there heightening their beauty. The 
palaces are richly endowed with things fulfilling all desires 
They are beautified splendidly by parks and gardens. Some are 
made of silver and some of gold. Some are like the evening 
clouds (red) and some resemble the Kailasa mountain fwhino 
All are lofty. 1 eJ - 

304. In those excellent palaces, the followers of Bhava who 
perform good rites, rejoice enjoying various means of pleasures 
liked by them such as sweet melody etc. 

305. Different kinds of auspicious mythological stories are 

recounted along with the chanting sounds of Vedas. The sounds 
of songs and musical instruments are heard all round; chantings 
of prayers (echo everywhere). S 

Th ^sounds are incomparable. All of them mingled 

2TS Tl,a ' an ' J staa ~ on 

them°L ^ areaus P icious and built of gold. Each of 

- 

brilliant “e *. Moon, w it h 

rising Sun and having the lustre^of fire.” rescmblmg the 

r iding in the ^imi?a 


The Sages said : 

there ? Indeed they amThe molt' 30111 ? f ° llowers of Bhava 
do they rejoice in that excellent cit™^' ° f bdng b,essed - Well 


873 


39.311-321 

Having heard the words of the sages, Vayu spoke : 

311-314. O sages ! May this be heard. 1 Only the follow¬ 
ing have attained Sdlokyo (residence in the same region—that 
of Siva) with Rudra, the eternal and never changing region. 
They alone attain identity of forms and excellent features with 
Bhava. They are the people who are devoted to the lord of 

Devas. They arc of bashful temperament (ashamed to do sinful 

things). They are powerful but not covetous. They are vigorous 
but have perfect self-control. They observe the middle course 
in taking food and other activities. They have conquered their 
sense organs and they revel in their own souls (meditating on 
souls). They arc far above the influence of Dvandvas (mutually 
opposed pairs like pleasure-pain) .They are gentle and extremely 
enthusiastic. They are devoid of jealousy and enmity. They 
love all living beings. They are quiescent, unagitated and they 
do not exert themselves (in worldly pursuits.) Their conscience 
is pure. They are pure in mind, speech and activity. With 
single-minded attention they seek refuge in Mahesvara. 

315-318. Those who live in Siva’s palace are all universal- 
formed with firc-like faces. They have kaparda (matted hair). 
Their throats are blue in colour, the neck white and the fangs 
very sharp. They are three-eyed with the crescent Moon form¬ 
ing their coronet. Matted hair is worn by them. All of them are 
heroic. They have ten arms and have the fragrance of lotus. All 
of them resemble the midday Sun in brilliance and wear yellow 
garments; all of them arc armed with Pinaka bows. They ride 
white bulls. They are endowed with glory; they wear ear-rings; 
they are embellished with pearl necklaces; in brilliance they 
are superior to Devas; they are omniscient and observers of 
everything. 

319. They divide themselves into various forms and enjoy 
various sports and pleasures, rare for others. They are devoid 
of death and old age. 

320. They can go anywhere they please. They are great 
Siddhas themselves and they are further enlightened by other 
Siddhas. Thus the attendants of the eleven Rudras of great souls 
are crores and crores. 

1. A Puranic way of describing the Sdlokald, SoTtiipota find Sovaptitd 
types of liberation. 



874 


Vayu Pur ana 


321. With them, Mahesvara, the noblc-souled lord of 
Dcvas, the beloved lover of Parvall, rejoices there fully sympa¬ 
thetic with his devotees. 

322. I do not find any difference between those Rudras and 
the noble-souled Bhava. I am speaking the truth unto you. 


323-324. The lordly MatariSva (Wind-god) thus concluded 
the holy story. All the sages resplendent like the Sun, considered 
that they attained great blessing on hearing the extremely 
meritorious story of the three-eyed Lord. They were delighted 
much. Honouring him suitably they spoke thus to Vayu of 
great strength. 


The Sages said 

325-326. O highly exalted and fortunate Wind-God ! The 
excellent holy Aupasargika eighth abode of Isvara and its magni¬ 
tude has been recounted precisely to us by you. It is redolent 
with the excellent fragrance of the great Atman. 

327. The grandeur ofMahadeva is difficult to be under¬ 
stood even by Suras. Due to the greatness belonging to him¬ 
self, the lord of unmeasured splendour has thousand Ganas. 

328-329. Non-delusion is effected by him in his devotees 
in order to bless them. In the abode of the lord of Dcvas, the 
Vibhiili (excellence, grandeur) that assumes a cosmic form 
shines very well. It is unequalled and is served (attended) 
by Brahmalaksmi (the glory ofBrahma or Brahman) itself. It 
appears like the Moon that pervades the sky with the moonlight. 

330. You have also mentioned everything regarding the 
noble-souled Rudras who are equal to Mahadeva. All these 
stories came out of your mouth like nectar. 

331. Without drinking it devoutly, of what use are our 
excellent holy rites ? There is nothing (?) which is not known 
by us. O Prana (life-breath), O excellent one among Dcvas, 
it uchoves you to answer our question precisely. 

Suta said : 


332. That lord (Wind-god) spoke: What else shall I 
explain again ? O sages of excellent rites, what should be re¬ 
counted by me ? I shall tell it. 


875 


39.333-343 
The Sages said : 

333-335. Please precisely recount to us what, at the time 
of Abhutasamplava, will be the state of the Adityas who stand 
by as attendants (near the lord), the lions who had been the 
outcome of the lord s furious outburst, the Vaisvanara groups of 
Bbutas (goblins), the tigers and other followers about whom you 
have mentioned along with the groups of lions and tigers. What 
will be their state as well as the state of those who have attained 
Siddhi at the time of the terrible dissolution, when all living 
beings are destroyed ? 

(On hearing it) Matartiva {the Wind-god) said : 

336-338. This is the greatest and (secret) reality. 1 I shall 
recount it. Please listen. Those who have gone .there before, the 
sons of Brahma, viz. Sanaka, Sananda and Sanatana, Vodhu, 
Kapila, Asuri of great fame, Sage Pancasikha and others have 
known the existence of Is vara, the unmanifcst source of origin 
(and attained salvation). 

339-341. Thereafter, when much time elapses, at the close 
of theKalpas, when even the great Bfnltas (Elements) are destro¬ 
yed and utter annihilation takes place, many crores of 
Rudraganas delightedly (meditate on) Mahesvara, closely 
adhere to eight types of truth (?), desist from enjoying melody 
and other objects of pleasure, enter all the living beings through 
their brilliance accompanied by perfect knowledge and attain 
the unagitated Vaihayasapada (the abode of firmament) in order 
to bless the living beings sympathetically. 

342. The noble-souled ones attain to Mahesvara of the 
subtle nature of Paramanu (Atom) there. They cross the river 
of births and deaths of great eddies and whirlpools of terrific 
nature. 

343. Then they see Sarva and the great Brahman. They 
are accompanied by those seven goddesses who have been 
glorified (before). 

1, Here is a description of what happens to the residents of Sivas city 
after Abhutasamplava. They enter Lord Siva who is a subtle Paramanu. The 
concept of Siva as an atom shows Vaiscsika influence. Historical Sanknya 
teachers like Kapila, Asuri, Pancasikha are elevated to the exalted position 
of sages like Sanatkumara, Sanaka. 



Vayu Purana 


876 

344-345. Lord Sankara draws within him the thousand 
lions, the Adityas, the Vaisvanara groups of Bhutas, the tigers 
and his own followers (the Rudraganas). Thereafter he draws 
these seven Lokas that rush (towards him) and the five Maha- 
bhutas (the great elements). 

346-347. Accompanied by Visnu, he makes (the worlds) 
united (sustained) and annihilates. He is Rudra who is of the 
nature of Saman andYajur (Vedas). He is warped and woofed 
both within and without, decisively. O Brahmanas, he is the only 
lord and leader. He is beginninglcss. He is the annihilator. 

348-349. Then all those sages (of Naimisa forest) refulgent 
like the Sun consecrated the sacred fire in their own hermitage. 
They thereafter devoted themselves to the worship of Mahesvara 
by means of the purity of their inner soul mentally, verbally and 
physically. 

350. They were merciful towards all living beings and 
engaged themselves in observing fasts and holy rites. All their 
doubts were cleared and the unequalled divine Yoga was attain¬ 
ed by them. 

351. After attaining these by means of the mind endowed 
with perfect knowledge and their greatest devotion, the Sdlokja 
form of salvation was attained by them. It is the eternal and 
unchanging region. 

352-355. He who regularly reads this hymn of prayer 
narrated by Vayu, whether a Brahmana, a Ksatriya or a 
Vaisya but observing his duties, attains Salokya with Rudra. He 
will be endowed with devotion and be free from ailments. A 
Sudra who is not addicted to wine, who is a devotee of Bhava 
and who has conquered his sense organs, remains till the time of 
dissolution without obstacles and attains the leadership of 
Ganas or the abode coveted by all. If he is a wine addict, he 
rejoices with those groups of Bhutas who are drunkards. Being 
worshipped on the earth he will be the granter of boons to men. 
Thus the Wind-god the excellent lord spoke these words. 


40.1-7 


CHAPTER FORTY 1 2 
Dissolution of the Universe 


877 


Siita said: 

I* ^ shall now recount the process of dissolution ( Pratyahara ) 
at the end of Para (one full day and night) of the self-born god 
Brahma, when the period of existence of the Lord comes to a 
close. 

2. During the process of Pratyahara, Isvara swallows the un- 
manifest ones** entirely and clearly ( vyaktam ) in exactly the 
same manner as he does the subtle ones. 

3-4. 3 This activity of re-absorption of creations begins even 
as the Kalpas have not fully expired. This terriblycritical period 
sets in at the closing period of the tenure of the office of the 
Manu named Druma (?) towards the end of Kaliyuga then. 
The entire creation merges in the apratyaksa (the invisible 
i.e. the unmanifest). It is called annihilation. 

5-7. When that period of ‘great washing off 9 begins to 
function, 4 * * * * when the withdrawal of the creation is imminent, 
elements gross and subtle ( Bhutas and Tanmatras) are destroyed. 
All evolutes beginning with Mahal and ending with Vi$e$a be- 


1. This chapter corresponds to Bd.P.III.4.3 Only verse numbers are 
referred. 

2. The word avyaktan in the line: avyaktan grasate vyaktam creates confusion. 
If emended as ‘ avyaktam * as in Bd.P.v.2 the verse means ‘during the process 
of Pratyahara, the Avyakta (the Unmanifest one) swallows the Vyakta (the 
Manifest one, the whole universe) entirely in the same way as Is'vara created 
the manifest universe which is very subtle/ 

3. For Par am tad anukalpanam apuTQt Bd.P.3 reads Paranta-dyyapu - 
kddyandm sampurne: It means ‘(when the extremely dreadful destruction) of 
everything beginning with molecules of two atoms and ending with para 
(greatest thing) is imminent it is called Samhara . 

4. Verses 5-33 state the process of involution of Tattvas. Thus at the end 

of a Kalpa, the element Pfthvi is swallowed by water; Prithoi loses its special 

quality, viz. smell and merges in water. The process of ‘Swallowing* 
a lower element by the higher element may be summarised as follows: 

The element Prthvi merges in->Water->Fire->Wind- > 

Ether->Bhutadi(Buddhi)-> Mahat-> Guna-Samya 

(equilibrium of Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) or Prakrti. 














878 


Vayu Parana 


come annihilated. All this happens naturally. At the outset the 
vast sheet of waters absorbs the quality of smell of the (element) 
earth. The earth devoid of smell becomes dissolved. When thus 
the quality of smell of the earth is dissolved, the earth assumes 
the form of water. 

8-9. The waters of great velocity and loud report spread 
throughout the entire universe and stay by awaiting destruction 
(?) • The special attribute of the waters ( Rasa —taste) becomes 
merged in Jyolis (fiery element). At the destruction of the 
subtle element Rasa , the waters too get dissolved. 

10. When Rasa is absorbed by Tcjas (fiery element), 
the waters become merged in it. When the waters are thus 
absorbed, only Tejas is seen all round. 

11. The fire element, pervading everywhere, absorbs the 
waters. The entire universe is gradually filled up with flames of 

. fire. 

12. When this (entire universe) is filled with flames, the 
flames spread on all sides, above and below. Vayu (the wind 
element) swallows up Rilpa (colour or form), the luminous 
quality of Jyotis (the fire element). The entire fire element 
merges in the cosmic air, like the flame of lamp in the great 
wind. 


13. When the Rupa Tanmatra (the essential quality) is 
dissolved, Vibhdvasu (the element of Fire) becomes bereft of 
Rupa (colour). Tejas then subsides. The great Tejas is then 
blown off by Vayu. 

14. When the entire universe thus becomes bereft of 
light, the element of Tejas having merged in Vayu, the element 
of Vayu resorts to the source of its origin. 

15. It shakes everything above, below and the sides in all 
the ten quarters. Then Aka§a (Ether) absorbs the quality of 
Vayu, viz. SparSa (Touch). 

16. The element of Vayu subsides and the open firmament 
alone remains, sans colour, sans taste, sans touch and sans smell. 
It has no physical body as well. 

. ^ l 9 m S rea t circular hole, the Akasa, characterised by 

its quality of sound, shines filling everything with its sounds. 

18. The AWfl-characteriscd Akasa envelops everything and 


40.19-30 


879 


remains (steady). Then Bhuladi (the Cosmic Ego) absorbs the 
the quality of sound belonging to it. 

19. Then the Bhutas and the sense-organs get merged simul¬ 
taneously in Bhuladi. Bhuladi is of the form of Cosmic Ego. 
It is said to be of the quality of Tamas. 

20. The principle Mahat characterised by Budd'ni (the cos¬ 
mic intellect) absorbs Bhuladi. The Mahat principle is to be 
known to be of the form of Samkalpa (conception) and Adhyava - 
saya (determination, will). 

21. Philosophers who ponder over reality call it by 
the synonyms Buddhi (Intellect), Manas (Mind), Linga (the Sym¬ 
bol) , Mahat (Great) and Aksara (the Imperishable). 

22. When all the Bhutas become dissolved, the Gunas 
remain in equilibrium, the entire universe becomes dark and 
gloomy; the groups of causes of the worlds remain merged in 
Atman. 

23-24. The creation becomes re-absorbed in Prakrti; neither 
the beginning nor the end of anything is perceived; nothing is 
seen; no name or form remains; even those endowed with perfect 
knowledge do not become aware of anything; no going in or 
coming out is observed. 

25-27. Such a situation is inferred and conceived mentally 
and the following account is given. All objects become established 
in that existent-cum-non-existent ( sad-asad-atmika ) eternal great 
cause. This automotive activity cannot be pointed out through 
any specific cause. The dissolution of the Seven Prakrtis occurs 
in this manner. At the time of the reabsorption of creation, 
they enter into one another. That by which the globular Egg 
is enveloped becomes dissolved. 

28. The seven continents, the seven oceans, the seven 
worlds and the seven mountains are enveloped by the covering 
of water. This Udakavarana (water-covering) becomes merged 
in Jyotis (Fire). 

29. (Defective verse) The Taijasa (fiery) Avarana (covering) 
is absorbed by the Wind element. The cover of the wind element 
is absorbed by the element Ether. 

30. Bhuladi (the Cosmic Ego) absorbs the Ethereal Tarawa. 
Mahat characterised by cosmic intelligence ( Buddhi ) absorbs 
Bhuladi. 


880 


Vayu Puraria 


31. The Unmanifest absorbs the principle of Mahal. 
Thereafter the Gunas attain equilibrium. This annihilation and 
extension of creation is pursued through the unmanifest Prakrti 
stationed in Brahman. 

32. It creates and absorbs the VikSras (created objects) for 
the sake of creation and annihilation. The Siddhas who are en¬ 
dowed with perfect knowlcdgehave all instruments in the activity 
of annihilation (?) 

33. Attaining a quick motion in these abodes due to their 
self-control, these Ksetrajnas become bereft of Karanas (sense 
organs and organs of activity). 

34. They call the Avyakta (the Unmanifest) by the term 
kfdra and Brahma (or Brahman) is called Ksetrajha. Their 
union is bcginningless but is caused by Sadharmya (similarity 
of characteristics) and Vaidharmya (dissimilarity of charac¬ 
teristics) . 


35. OBrahmanas, it is thus that one should know with 
regard to all Sargas (creations) and Ksetrajnas. By the knowledge 
of the Ksetras separately and severally, a Brahmavid (man with 
the knowledge of Brahman) should be known. 

36. The state of being the object of knowledge (Visayaiva) and 
of not being so ( Avisayatva ) are proclaimed (as the characteris¬ 
tics) of Ksetra and Kfetrajna. Brahma should be known as 
Aoisaya (not object of knowledge, the knower) and Ksetra is 
called Visaya (object of knowledge)*. 

37. Ksetra is presided over by Ksetrajna and so is said to 
be for his sake. Since the bodies are many, the Sarlrin (the embo¬ 
died soul) is remembered as many. 

38. These souls are stationed without any arrangement 
(avyuhat) and are unmixed (a-sahkardt) like luminaries. Since 
there is the perception of happiness and sorrow severally in the 


BrahZd iuT ” ; -. COndr f diC,S lst linc of thc verse. It runs thus : 

be known os 

^ “ d Kwr * ““' d Av**. (non-objee., 

p v 11r V lm T- ^ '*** 

avairraha after n - M«« -a j emended as tu-amfqya (toamfqya) and the 
vagraha after » dropped, theVa.P. text will not be a contradiction. 



40.39-50 


881 


different bodies, the multiplicity of Purusas should be known by 
one who is wise. 

39. When the withdrawal of those different beings sets in, 
that is brought about naturally after the lapse of a great deal 
of period. 

40. At that time the passion for sustenance of the worlds of 
the self-born god Brahma recedes, along with all the residents of 
Brahma’s heaven. 

41. Then the attachment for the sustenance of those resi¬ 
ding (in meditation) in Atman recedes and they begin to see 
defects therein of their contemporaries. 

42-43. Then their (sense of) detachment is aroused and 
it dispels their Atma-vada (egotism). Bhoj'ya (object of 

enjoyment) and Bhoktrtva (the state of being the enjoyer)_ 

through this they comprehend Sarhsara. They have been 
Kfetrajiias due to their vision of their separateness. Then the 
residents of Brahmaloka (see the multiplicity of individuals but) 
they are beyond the cause of Prakrti. 

44. Now they dwell in the Atman alone. They arc quiescent 
and endowed with (true) vision. All of them are pure, free from 
blemish and in conscious or unconscious stage. 

45. It is proclaimed that they attain complete absolution 
there itself and they do not return to Sarhsara since they are 
devoid of Gunas (state of nirgunatva ) and the sense of identity 
with the body (niratmatva). 

46-47. Thus the process of dissolution by the Self-born 
Brahma through Prakrti has been recounted. In this Prasarhyama 
(final curbing and restraint) the Karanas (organs of activity) of 
all living beings differ. Thus is the curbing of the Tattvas 
(Principles) along with that of the Karanas. This Tattvaprasamyama 
is remembered as capable of repetition. 

Suta said : 

48-50. Dharma and Adharma, penance, perfect knowledge, 
the auspicious, the inauspicious, truth, falsehood, superiority, 
inferiority, happiness, sorrow, likes, dislikes—all these are mere 
attributes of one who has gone* (i.e. who has attained salvation). 

*Prapaflcaslham in Bd. P. v. 26 ‘current in the worldly existence’is logically 
a better reading. 



882 


Vayu Purana 


Whatever is meritorious and sinful, auspicious and inauspicious 
is regarded as the nature of Gunas of the (spiritually) wise 
who are devoid of (attachment to) sense organs—all merits and 
demerits are stabilised in Prakrti. It is the Prakrti which is the 
source of origin. (Merit and demerit) are deposited in the 
nature of embodied beings. 

51. The merits and demerits of living beings that have been 
stabilised in Prakrti, are declared to lie unmanifested. The same 
merits and demerits (in different situations) join this body or 
the next. 


52. Dharma and Adharma (virtue and sin) are merely 
two qualities of creatures. They flourish in the form of the body 
along with the organs of sense ( Karam ) of creatures. 

53. The sentient Gunas (i.e. Sattva etc.) presided over 
by Ksetrajfia get dissolved during the primary creation and 
secondary creation in the world. The creatures come into con¬ 
tact or get separated from their Karanas (organs of activity) and 
they move about (i.e. undergo worldly existence and suffer¬ 
ing)- 

54. The Vrttis (proclivities, causes of activities) are three¬ 
fold according as they are of the nature of Sattva, Rajas or 

Tamas. They function on being presided over (and activised) 
by Purusa. ' 


55. The (attribute) Sattva of the divine nature is conducive 
to attain the upper part (heaven) and Tamas is of the 
nature of (falling off) to the lower part (hell). The activiser 

ly in'htwor/d Ra>! WhiCh m ° VeS ab0llt r 'P ea ‘' d - 


56-57. In all the worlds, within all the living beings these 

narreTo femM T'“ , r tieSare,h ' "W-l — of ,h« 

rr iSrzxtZT — 

pursued hv m*n a Avidya, 1 activities are 

pursued by men and they derive meritorious, sinful or non¬ 
committal goals through these three. 


it, the defects such^A^ (AtUchmenO b ° ndages crea,ed by 

and leading to hell (67-69) Ld birth in “ 



40.58-67 


883 


58. All living creatures do not understand the reality due 
to their being overwhelmed by Tamas. But not realising the 
Tattva (Reality), they are fettered in three ways. 

59. He is bound by three types of bondages: 

(i) Prakrta Bandha (bondage of Prakrti) 

(ii) Vaikarika Bandha (bondage of its evolutes) 

(iii) Bondage called Daksina (a technical term in theSankhya 
System for the third bondage). 

And being bound thus; the creature turns round and round 
here (in Samsara). 

60-61. These are the three types of bondage due to ignora¬ 
nce. The following are the usual defects (due to them)—Seeing 
permanence in what is transcient; perception of happiness in 
what actually is the cause of misery; feeling of possessiveness in 
what does not belong to one; and decisive knowledge of purity 
in what is impure. Those who have these mental defects have 
the defects of knowledge through misapprehension. 

62. The cessation of attachment (. Raga ) and hatred ( Dvesa ) 
is called knowledge. Ignorance is the root-cause of Tamas. 
Rajas has two-fold Karman (the auspicious and inauspicious) 
as its result. The resumption of the physical body once again 
is the result of Karmas. Thus great misery begins to function. 

63. The various sins committed by ears, eyes, skin, tongue 
and nose are the causes of the rebirth and misery. 

64. A man with a craving is said to be a Bala (an imma¬ 
ture or ignorant person). As a result of actions committed by 
himself, the individual soul goes round and round there only (in 
the Samsara) like the bull yoked to the oil-pressing machine. 

65. Hence it is taught that gross ignorance is the cause of 
all miseries. Realising that it is the sole enemy one shall endea¬ 
vour to acquire knowledge. 

66. One renounces {tyajate*) everything by perfect know¬ 
ledge. As a result of renunciation the intellect becomes detached, 
one becomes pure as a result of detachment; the pure one be¬ 
comes liberated by means of Sattva Guna. 

67. Henceforth I shall explain Raga (passion and attach¬ 
ment) that overwhelms living beings. Due to this attachment, 


♦Reading in A.« vijayati ’ in our text is rather confusing. 



8S4 


Vdyu Pur ana 


all living brings become indulgent in worldly pleasures in spite 
of themsel v es- 

53- Aztaenment is undesirable and calamitous inasmuch 
zs iz yields pleasure, sufferings and dejection. Suffering is due 
*o dbe misery tha: befalls (when the desired object is not acquir¬ 
ed^ and the recollection of (previously experienced) happiness. 

89. It is the attachment to worldly pleasures that is declar¬ 
er as the cause of births. In all the physical worlds beginning 
with 3-aimi and ending with the immobile beings, this attach¬ 
ment ahne is the cause of birth and that is the result of 
ignorance. Hence one shall avoid ignorance. 

70-71. If one does not accept the words of sages as authority 
nor has regard for good manners as practised by virtuous and 
respectable men: if one is opposed to the discipline of (four) 
castes and stages in life; and if a man is antagonistic to wise men 
and scriptural injunctions—that is the cause of rebirth in lower 
species. 

72. There are various kinds of tortures in remaining (or 
taking birth) among the six kinds of lower animals. There is 
complete obstruction in the matter of cause and object of 
knowledge (?). 


73. The entire non-attainment of Ativarya (glory and pros- 
perity) is in the nature of Pratighata (obstacle) (to the desires). 
Thus the four types of Tamasa proclivities of the living beings 
etc. have been recounted. 


/4-/d. The mind can be considered mainly Sattvic if the 
Sattvic traits are evinced. Tattvas can be comprehended onlv 
after viewing them in accordance with reality. And the know- 
Wge. of the multiplicity (? difference) of Sa.tva Guna and 
Ksetrajnas is the perfect knowledge. It is said that Yoga origi¬ 
nates from perfect knowledge. b S 

76. Bondage is for one who is fettered to it (the worldy 

Whence 1 bberali ° n 6 for one who is released therefrom. 

^ el from reC ' dK ' th ' ,ibera “ soul is reieas- 

sttirTef P LT Wa (,h ' subt1 ' ***** or body con- 

sistmg of Pranas, subtle sense organs etc.). 

77. Devoid of any Sarhbandha (contact) and in a state of 

being unconscious (of the pvtPm.i .. , , . 

s us ioi tne external world), he abides in his own 




40.78-87 


885 


self. Even while remaining within his own self,, he is touched 
(contaminated) by diversity and multiplicity. 

78. Thus the characteristic features of perfect knowledge 
and liberation have been succinctly explained. That liberation 
is declared by those who see truth. 

79-80. The first one is the separation from worldly impres¬ 
sions, thanks to perfect knowledge. The second one is due to 
destruction of passion (passionate attachment) whereby the 
liberated soul attains Kaivalya, because even the Linga Sarira 
(the subtle inner body) is absent. Through Kaivalya he becomes 
Niranjana (unsullied). By not being sullied, he becomes Suddha 
(pure). In this state of liberation there is no guide or leader. 
The third type of cause of liberation is by the destruction of 
Tfsna (thirst) (for enjoyment). 

81-82. The liberated souls do not experience misery caused 
by the obstacle to the worldly objects of desired melody etc. 
These eight things caused by Prakfti adhere to the Ksetrajiias. 
They are called Gunas and Matras (the three Gunas and the 
five Tanmatras ). 

Henceforth I shall explain detachment, arising from the sight 
of faults. 

83. One should practice non-hatred and absence of attach¬ 
ment to the five Visayas (objects of sensual enjoyment) of 
both divine and human nature, after seeing the defects therein. 

84. One should avoid heart-burn, pleasure and dejectedness. 
By having recourse to non-attachment the embodied soul be¬ 
comes free from Mamatva (the feeling of my-ness i.e. possessive¬ 
ness). 

85. He should decide in his mind (intellect) that (the 
worldly existence) is non-eternal, inauspicious and conducive 
to misery. Then with Sattvic traits he should perform pure 
activities. 

86-87. When the attachment to worldly objects of pleasure 
becomes firm, he becomes able to see defects and blemishes 
entirely. 

At the time of the journey 1 (i.e. at the time of death) the 
heat in the body becomes virulent due to conditioning causes 


1. Verses 87-92 describe the process of death. 



886 


Vdyu Purana 


e.g. Dosas (disorderly state of the humours in the body produced 
by causes dependent on particular circumstances). 

88. Due to the chilliness, the virulently excited Vayu (life 
breath) pierces the centres of Pranas (vital airs), cuts off 
vulnerable parts of the body and rises up. 

89. It is the breath stationed in the abodes of vital airs of 
all living beings. By contraction, Jfiana (consciousness and 
knowledge) becomes covered up and the activities are enshroud¬ 
ed. 


90. The Jiva (the individual soul) being bereaved of the 
supporting body, is induced by its own actions committed be¬ 
fore. It then dislodges the Pranas from the eight limbs. 

91. (In the end) abandoning the body.it ceases to have 
breathing activity. Being abandoned by the vital airs thus, the 
person is called “Dead”. 

92. This is something like this. When someone holds the 
glow-worm in his hand and goes about here and there he too is 
visible in its light. He who kills it, though a carrier (of the 
glow-worm) ceases to be a carrier (leader). 

93-94. The third, viz. the elimination of thirst or covetous¬ 
ness is spoken as the characteristic of liberation. It is the (result 
of) observation of defects in five objects of sensual pleasure such 
as sound and others. Absence of hatred, absence of intense 
attachment, avoidance of pleasure and agony (about objects of 
pleasure)—these are the dissolutions of the eight Prakrtis 
(primary essences which evolved the whole Universe). 

95. All the eight Prakrtis mentioned before should be 
known in order, beginning with Avyakta (the Unmanifest) 
and endmg with BHUas (Elements). These are called the 
dissolution of the Prakrtis. 


6. Those who follow the rigorous discipline of the four 
castes and stages of life and those who do not go contrary to 

0f *y cri P tures are called Siffas (the eminent 
« dlS r ^ gU1Shed) - Practice and adherence of the 

mZ p o ?: h ^ ramasis 

ment of the abodes of the Devas (i.e. Heaven). 

97. The eight groups of Devas (and their abodes) are those 


40.98-107 


887 

beginning with Brahma and ending with Pisacas. The 
Siddhis conducive to AiSaarja (supernatural powers), Anima 
(minuteness) etc. are the causes eight in number. 

98-102. Those who stay in those abodes do not experience 
the misery due to the obstacle to the achievement of such 
desired objects as sweet melody etc. These are the eight Prak r ta 
forms in ord-.r. They come into contact with the Ksetrajnas 
They are of the nature of the three Gunas and five Tanmatras 
People do not see with their eyes the clouds distinct from the 
water therein in the course of the rainy season. (Similarly 
ordinary people do not see the individual soul. They can only 
infer.) y 

The Siddhas, however see it like this by means of their 
divine vision. The soul takes all kinds of bodies such as those of 
Brahmanas and those of Candalas*. 

Thus he moves about in a certain order up and down as 
well as in the sides (as a result of his own Karmans). He is 
called by these various names, all synonymic, viz. Jiva (indivi¬ 
dual soul), Prana (vital air), Linga (the symbol), Karana 
(cause). In both manifest and unmanifest (worlds) he is an 
authority. 

103. After realising categories ending with Avjakta (the 
Unmanifest) and what is presided over by the Kselrajna, he be¬ 
comes pure and becomes liberated through knowledge. 

104-106. When the truth is realized, the principle that was 
obscure comes out. But in different bodies that have completely 
ceased to exist, the Karana (the individual soul) differs from the 
Avyakta and the Jrianin. One who is completely liberated from the 
body in the form of Gunas as well as Prana etc. does not take 
up another body, just as sprout never comes out when seed is 
burnt. 

107. Due to knowledge he becomes enlightened and pure 
of the four DaSas (conditions). He follows the Prakrti. They 
say that Prakrti is the reality, while Vikaras (its evolutes) are 
unreal. 


*The reading Svaviti SvanapanaSca is obscure. Bd. P. v. 78 reads khadataS 
cannapandni ‘Siddhas sce...even as they take food, drinks, enter different 
yonis,’ 



888 


Vayu Parana 


108. Its Sad-bhava (apparent? existence) should be known 
as Anria (unreal). Sadbhava (State of being existent) is called 
Salya (Reality). Satya (Brahman) is without name and form. x 
They called Ksetrajna" as possessing name and form. 

109. Because he knows (thoroughly) the Ksetra (the field 
i.e. the body) he is called Ksetrajna. Ksetrajna is auspicious 
because of the perception of Ksetra. 

110. Ksetrajna is remembered. Hence it is mentioned as 
Ksetra by those who know it. Ksetra is seen to be without intelli¬ 
gence but Ksetrajna is always endowed with intelligence. 

111. Those who know Ksetra call it so because of its Ksayana 
(destruction), Karana (being created), Ksalatrdna (protection 
from wound), Bhojyalva (state of being what is eaten or 
enjoyed) and Visayalva (state of being the object). 

112. All categories beginning with Mahat, ending with 
VtSesa possess variety of forms and they are characterised as 
Vikara (an evolute, change). Hence they arc peculiar (Vila- 
ksana) . Hence verily Aksara (imperishable) approaches the / 
Kfara (perishable) I. * 3 . 

113. That evolute ( Vikara ) is called Ksara as it wastes away 
and perishes. 4 

114. Happiness, misery, delusion are called Bhojya (that 
which is to be experienced). It is Visaya (object of enjoyment) 
as it is insentient. That which has the opposite quality 5 * * * * is remem¬ 
bered as Vibhu. 

115. It is called Aksara (imperishable) for the following 
reasons : It does not waste away (na ksiyate) . It does not 
perish ( na ksarati) . Evolutes spread from it. It is not diminished. 


I. The compound: andmarapa-k^etrajna-namarupa is split in Bd P as 

anamarupam and Kjtlrajna. 

? 108 ' 13 .°- A desultor y discussion of Ksetrajna. It incidentally 

explams the terms sadbhava, ksetra, karana, aksara, ur P u f a and others. 

P v on -f lT t0a Ca in * he tCXt “ obscure - Hcncc reading in Bd 

P. v.90, so kfarah kfaram eti cal is accepted. 

•Thai whi^t/r V ; 1H (C r h ' I0 V n A ’ VM1) herC ' 11 is un,raced in Text. 

cSed Stra/ ^ ^ ^ aIs0 fr0m :™ er >' i3 

vihh,',h dharmavibhu ^ s j n r ta b in the text is obscure. Hence lad vidhannd 

mbhub smrtab in corresponding Bd. P. v.93 is accepted. 



40.116-127 


889 


116. Since it lies in Pur (puri anuSele ) it is called Purusa. 
The term Purusa is derived also as follows: Since it is Purafira- 
tynyika that is the Pratyayi (the knower) of the Pura (Body), 
it is cailed so. 

117-118. He is other than what can be called existent, non¬ 
existent, bound, liberated, mobile, stable. As he is devoid of 
any cause, he cannot be specified (by any of these terms). 1 

119. Since he is very pure, he cannot be indicated specifi¬ 
cally. Since he is full of bliss, it is of equal vision. Since he is 
the cause (Karin) of Atmapralyaya (the knowledge of Atman), no 
causal expression applies to it 2 (?) It can be imagined or in¬ 
ferred. Those who perceive thus are not deluded. 

120. When he sees the knower who is quiescent in regard 
to all objects, who is of the nature of Vision, and who is the 
only one to be pointed out among the visible and invisible 
objects, his emancipation (uplift) takes place. 

121-122. After having realised this great Being, the perfect 
knower attains quiescence (calmness). He, the perfect knower, 
does not see the separateness in the effect, cause, the physical 
objects of intellect etc., that is in contact or severed, and him who 
is dead or alive. 3 

123. The causal Atman controls that Atman (the individual 
soul) by means of his own self. He abides in the Prakrti, in its 
cause and in his own Atman. 

124-125. He exists. He does not exist. He is he or he is 
another. He is here or he is hereafter. He has oneness or 
separateness. He is Ksetrajna or Purusa. He possesses Atman or 
he is devoid of Atman. He is sentient or non-sentient. He is a 
doer or non-doer. He is the enjoyer or he is only the enjoyed. 

126. On realizing the unsullied Ksetrajna, there is no 
further return to Sariisara. It is called Avdey n (inexpressibe) be¬ 
cause it cannot be described by means of logic or by arguments 
it cannot be grasped. 

127. It is (called) Apratarkya (that which cannot be argued 
about) because it cannot be conceived. After attaining that 

1. Bd.P. v. 95 reads: juuldjnanavivarjilah ‘He is a knower, devoid of 
ignorance*. Abetter reading. 

2. Bd. P. v. 98 reads anyunam vdpyahetukam 'not deficient and not caused— 
spontaneous*. 

3. Some lines in the text mixed up. 






890 Vdyu Purana 

principle along with the mind, he (the soul) does not become 
attached (to other objects). 

128-130. When the Ksctrajha is free from Gunas, when it 
is pure, quiescent, unsullied, exhausted, devoid of both happi¬ 
ness and misery, when it is checked and attains calmness and 
when it becomes Niralmaka (devoid of ego ?), there is neither 
Vdcyatva (state of being expressed) nor Avacyatva (the state 
of not being expressed) (?) These two, annihilation 
and creation are manifest and unmanifest. Purusa creates and 
swallows (the entire world). Everything functions again with 
the Ksetrajna presiding over. 

131. At its end, it consciously resorts to the Adhisthana 
(substratum). Their mutual contact is known as being brought 
about by SadharmyavxiA Vaidharmya (similarity and dissimilarity). 
The Samyoga (contact) of the great Purusa is beginningless.* 

132. As long as creation and subsidiary creation last 
Prakrti keeps Purusa restrained and stays: At the outset 
it functions unintelligently but in favour of it. Its function is 
for the sake of Purusa. 

133. This creation and dissolution are effected by Pradhana 
as well as by Is'vara. But it is beginningless and endless. 
Prakrti approaches the Universe even while terrifying it with 
the feeling of identification. 

134. Thus the third creation of Prakrti characterised by 
Helu (cause) has been recounted. One who strictly adheres to 
it becomes liberated as mentioned by poets (seers). 

135. Thus three types of dissolution have been recounted 

to you in detail as well as in proper order. What shall I explain 


* After slightly correcting obvious 


mistakes, with the help ofBd. P. 109. 



41.1-8 


CHAPTER FORTYONE* 

Recreation of the Cosmic Egg 


891 


The Sages said: 

1-4. OSuta, a great narrative has been recounted by 
Your Holiness. * 1 You have narrated the wonderful deeds of all 
subjects along with Planus, of JDevas along with sages, of Pitrs 
Gandharvas, Bhutas (goblins), Pisacas (ghosts)/ serpents', 
Raksasas, Daityas, Danavas, Yaksas and birds. Their Vidhi- 
supported decision of their Dharmas and their excellent and fine 
births have been narrated in wonderful stories. Being narrated 
to us in your sweet voice (or in charmingly polished words), 
O son of Suta, it rendered pleasure to our ears and minds for 
ever till the end of the creation of living beings. 

5. After having thus propitiated and honoured Suta, all 
the great sages, the performers of the Salra (sacrifice) asked him 
ibout the process of creative function. 2 

6-7. “O highly intelligent Suta, how does creation re¬ 

appear? To us who ask you, please narrate how the creation 
begins again, when the bonds have dissolved, when all the 
Gunas have attained the state of equilibrium, when everything 
is enveloped in darkness, when the groups of Vikdras (created 
beings) have become inactive and stationed in the unmanifest 
Atman and when all the Ksetrajnas have attained Sayujya 
(identity) with Brahman.” 

8. On being thus requested, SutaLomaharsana again began 
to narrate the process of creation. 


*This chapter corresponds to Bd.P. 3.4.4. References are to versenunbers 
therein. 

1. The speech of sages shows that this must be the last chapter. They 
have duly honoured Suta. They performed Avabhrtha bath and went to 
heaven (42). The review of the contents, Phalairuti and the genealogy of 
teachers who handed down the text of this Purana—all these confirm the 
above conclusion. 

2. Dissolution of the Universe and its recreation form an important 
characteristic ( Laksapa ) of a Purana. As the topic of recreation of the 
Brahmanda was not properly dealt in previous chapters,. it is taken here to 
fulfil the PaftcalaksaQa criterion. 



892 


Vdyu Purana 


9. “I shall recount to you how the creation functions 
(again). The order of the creation should be known (to occur) 
as (it took place) before. 

10. I shall mention what is seen and what can be inferred. 
I shall mention cogent arguments. From it (the principle of 
creative function), all words recede without reaching it along 
with the mind (i.e. the mind cannot conceive it, the words 
cannot express it). 

11. Just as the unmanifest is invisible and incomprehensi¬ 
ble, (the objects of creation too) are invisible and incomprehen¬ 
sible. When the Vikdrai (evolutes) become dissolved they are 
seen nowhere. The Gunas attain equilibrium and the created 
things recede. 

12. Pradhana stands on a similar footing with Purusas. The 
Dharmas and the Adharmas of living beings too merge in 
Avyakla (the Unmanifest). 

13. Their Dharma of the nature of Sattva gets settled in 
the Guna of Sattva, while Adharma of the nature of Tamas 
(darkness) abides in the Guna Tamas. 

14. These two Gunas arc devoid of distinction when the 
Gunas are in the state of equilibrium. In all the functions of 
Pradhana the activities will be backed by the intellect. 

15. The Ksetrajna will preside over those Gunas without 
the (intermediary) intellect. Thus the Pura (physical body) 
will be attained through Abhimana (the act of identification). 

16. When it becomes necessary to function both 1 the 
Ksetra and Ksetrajna begin to interact mutually; they become 
united together in the relationship of Bhojya (that which has to 
be enjoyed) and Bhoktr (the enjoyer). 

17. The only refuge for them is the Avyakta. Stabilised 
in the state of equilibrium, the group of Gunas become 
presided over by the Ksetrajna (at the time of the beginning of 
creation) and then their equilibrium is upset. 

18. Then both Ksetra and Ksetrajna reach the state of 


vv 16ff A H«r d - C |! Cn k in8 th ' Sta,e of Giwa-S&mya (Equilibrium of all Gunas). 
fcJautn of * t 7- stat " gets disturbed and how the evolution 

Ibviom i the H UmVerS " tak “ plaee - The -influence of Suhkhyas is 

obvtous in the descnpt.on of evolution and involution of the Universe 



41.19-28 


893 


Vyakta (manifestation). Sattva (Guna) presided over by 
Ksetrajna will produce Vikara (evolutcs). 7 

19. The twcntyfour principles of the nature of Gunas 
beginning with Mahat and ending with Viiefa (which are called 
Vikaras) attain the Ksetrajna, Pradhana and Purusa. 

20. Then in the Brahmanda (the Cosmic Egg) Isvara will 
be born (manifest) first. He will be the lord of all living beings, 
of the entire knowable universe. He is Siva. 

21. He is the overlord of all liberated souls. He is the great 
Brahma of the nature of Brahman. He is the primordial lord 
and it is said that his manifestation is for the sake of blessing 
Pradhana. 

22. Ksetra and Ksetrajna are self-born and beginning¬ 
less. They are remembered as subtle. Their union is beginningless. 
They are aware of all Ksetras. 

23. They are joined together without the intermediation 
of intellect ( AbuddhipQrvakam ) like Matoka (mosquito) and 
Udumbara tree. They are stationed bcginninglessly and in¬ 
conceivably like water and fish. 

24. The creation functions again as it had functioned before. 
The Ajna (non-knowing) Prakrti transforms itself into the 
universe functioning through its Gunas, viz. Rajas, Sattva and 
Tamas. 

25. At the time of the functioning (of Prakrti) the 
Ksetrajna human beings are overwhelmed by Rajas Guna 
and attain the (benefit of) the principles of Mahat, Ahamkara 
etc. ending with Visesa and the sense organs. Then the Gunas 
reach their end (?) 

26. God Brahma is of truthful conception. While he was 
meditating on the Sat, the Gunas Rajas, Sattva and Tamas 
though mutually dissimilar became manifest as caused by the 
Sat (the existent). 

27. Ksetrajhas (knowers of the Ksetra or body) are ever 
produced both at the beginning and at the end. Abhimanins 
[Atmans who identify themselves) become born with instruments 
of actions readily achieved. 

28. All beings are produced from the Aoyakla (Unmanifest) 
at the outset itself, who had been Sadhakas (spiritual aspirants) 
or non-Sadhakas (?) 




894 


Vayu Purana 


29. All of them undergoing the process of worldly existence 
along with their Sthanas (abodes) and Prakaranas (contexts?), 
attain their effects and arc born again and again. 

30. Dharma and Adhanna are solely of the nature of 
quality. They begin (give rise to) each other through boons and 
blessings. 

31. All are equal for the purpose of creation. It is at the 
beginning of creation that they undergo transformation. The 
Gunas rush to him and hence it is liked by him. 

32-33. The Ksetrajhas attain again and again only those 
qualities which they had in the previous creation. Being created 
again and again they attain only them. Qualities of violent or 
non-violent temperament, softness or cruelty, virtuousness or 
sinful nature, truthfulness or falsehood—had already been 
conceived by them (in the former creation) ; they attain them 
again and hence they appeal to them. 

34. It is through Gunas that the multiplicity and diversity 
in the great Bhutas (elements), in the sense-objects and in 
physical forms as well as the separation of living beings take 
place. 

35. Thus I have recounted briefly to you the subsequent 
creation. Now I shall briefly recount the birth (manifestation) 
of Brahma. 1 

36. From that Avyakta (unmanifest) cause which is eternal 
one and of thenature of Sat and Asat (existence and non-existence) 
Mahesvara (the great Lord) is born through Pradhana and 
Purusa. 

37. With the appellation ‘Brahma’, he becomes the evolver. 
He creates the worlds once again of the nature of (i.e. characteri¬ 
sed by) Abhimana (referring all objects to the self) and Gunas 
(Sattva etc.). 

38. Ahamkara (Cosmic Ego) is born of Mahat (the 
cosmic intellect) and Bhutas are born of it (Ahamkara). 


1. Suta narrates the recreation of the Universe by bringing in Puranic 
deities like Mahesvara and Brahma and synthesizing the Sarikhya and 
Puranic accounts. 



41.39-47 


895 


Bhutas and Indriyas (sense organs) are born simultan¬ 
eously from the Atman. The different living beings are born 
from Bhutas (elements). 

It is thus that the creation begins to function. 

39. The ramifications of these are extensive. I have re¬ 
counted to you in accordance with my intellect and in the 
manner I have heard it, formerly. Know them in the same 
manner.” 

40. The sages living in the Naimisa forest heard the story of 
the origin, maintenance and destruction of the worlds and then 
finished the holy ablution of Avabhrtha in the Satra. They 
became pure and attained the meritorious world. 1 

41. In the same manner, you worship duly Devatas (deities) 
etc., take the valedictory bath ( Avabhrtha ) after the sacrifice 
and become pure. At the end ofjife be contented (that you 
have done your duty), abandon bodies, attain the meritorious 
world and proceed (to enjoy) as you please. 

42. All the residents of the Naimisa forest, the performers 
of the Satra went to heaven after taking the ablution, Avabhrtha 
on the conclusion of the sacrifice. 

43. O excellent Brahmana, in the same manner you will 
also go to heaven at the end of your life after performing the 
various kinds of sacrifices and taking the Avabhrtha bath in the 
end. 

44-45. The Wind-god himself who is engaged in the welfare 
of the worlds, has narrated this popular Parana consisting of the 
four Padas 2 (sections), viz. Prakriya is the first section, where 
the story is taken up (the other sections are) Anusahga , Upodgliata 
and Upasamhara . 

46-47. lie narrated it to the sages after going to their 
Satra in the Naimisa forest. It is due to.his favour, O excellent 
sages, that the story of the origin and dissolution of the living 


1. Conclusion of the Satra (sacrificial session) and the completion of 
the narration of the Purana synchronised. The author exhorts the later 
audience of the Purana to perform sacrifices and go to heaven just as the 
sages in Naimisaranya did formerly. 

2. A brief review of the main Padas (Sections) of the Purana. 



896 


Vayu Parana 

beings has been learnt without any doubt. After clearly under¬ 
standing this creation of the Pradhana effected by ISvara, an 
intelligent man will not be deluded. 

48-49. The scholarly Brahmana who listens to or narrates 
or teaches this ancient Itihasa rejoices in the worlds of Mahendra 
for eternal years. * 1 2 After attaining Sdyujya with Brahman along 
with Brahma he becomes liberated. 

50. Eulogising those Prajapatis, the famous noble-souled 
lords of earth,* he attains the status of Brahman. 3 4 

1. Verses 48-57 contain the Phala-Sruti of listening to or narrating this 
Purana. 

2. MS. Kha used by A. (Anandas'rama edition) contains the following 
additional verses: 

(1) The learned scholar who narrates (makes other hear) this (Purana) 
attains the high goal. He is endowed with wealth, food-grains, 
happiness and prosperity. There is no doubt about this. 

(2) A Brahmana will attain knowledge (or learning) and union with 
Brahman. A Ksatriya attains victory (in battles) and excellent position 
in the region of gods. 

(3) A Vaisya will get (ample) riches, food-grains and money. A Sudra 
being blessed with progeny (sons and grandsons) gets happiness. 

(4) He who learns or hears a verse, or a part of a verse of this Purana 
goes to Vi§nu*3 city (Vaikuntha) after death and never experiences 
grief— A. edition p. 421. 

3. A. records the following additional verses from the same (Kha) MS. 
after the words Brahmabhuydya gacchati: They are translated from p 421 of A 
edition as follows: 

(1) He by whom the sacred Bharata (Purana) as narrated by Vayu is 
heard (once or) frequently, attains heaven by the grace (of the Wind- 
god). 

(2) He who devoutly reads this Vayu Purana will be blest with a long 
life. The goddess of wealth will be stable (stay permanently) in his 
house. 

(3) After writing down the Purana or getting it written and after wors¬ 
hipping it (the MS of the Vayu Puraria) duly, there is no fear of fire, 
thieves or fear from the (unfavourable) planets, diseases etc. 

(4) All those (evil influences, fear and such other) troubles get destroyed 
till the moon and stars exist (to the end of the world). Being 
absolved of all sins, he will go to Visnu’s city (Vaikur^ha). 

(5-6) There is not the least danger from cholera. He will get happinesss 

everywhere. He will be blest with longevity, health, prosperity, 
wealth, sons and grandsons forever. No question (doubt) need 
be raised about this. 



41.51-60 


897 


51. This Purana narrated by Kfsna Dvaipayana, the ex¬ 
pounder of Biahman (Vedas), is conducive to wealth, fame, 
longevity and great merit. It is on a par with the Vedas. 

52. He who extols the fame of the lords of Manvantaras, 
of the Devas and sages endowed with enormous wealth and 
splendour, is released from all sins. He shall attain great 
merit. 

53. A scholar wdio always narrates this on every festive 
occasions, snakes off his sins, conquers heaven and becomes 
capable of being merged in Brahman. 

54. If one at the time of Sraddha recites a section of this 
(Purana) to Brahmanas, it ultimately passes on to Pitrs bestow¬ 
ing everything desired and everlasting benefit. 

55. The word Purana is derived thus.’ puva anciuti ilipuranam, 
i.e. that which has been established in ancient times. He who 
knows this derivation becomes liberated from all sins. 

56-57. Those men of the three higher castes who listen to 
this Purana and turn their attention to virtuous activities, 
rejoice in heaven for as many crores of years as there are hair- 
pores in the skin. After attaining Sayujya (absorption) with 
Brahman they rejoice along with Devas. 

58. Brahma handed over to Matarisvan 1 (Wind-god) this 
sacred text of the ancient Purana which dispels all sins, which 
is holy and meritorious and which is conducive to fame. 

59. From him it was acquired by Usanas, and Bfhaspati 
secured it from him. Thereafter, Brhaspati narrated it to Savitr. 

60. Savitr recounted it to Mj-tyu and Mrtyu handed it 
over to Indra. Indra narrated it to Vasistha and he taught it to 
Sarasvata. 


A ICsatriya who studies this has inexhaustible fruit (benefits). 

(7) In this world, he get excellent reputation. He becomes victorious (in 
battles). He gets the happiness of begetting sons and having grand¬ 
sons. After death, he will dwell in Svarga (Heaven). 

(8) If a non-Sudra (Sudra, if the Avagraha [S] in adhiyate'Sudrah be a 
misprint) teaches it or narrates it repeatedly, the goddess of 
Wealth stays permanently in his house. This is true (definitely) , true 
and not otherwise. 

1. Verses 58-66 give the genealogy of teachers who handed down the 
Purana up to Suta, the present narrator. 



898 


Vayu Purana 


, j a nvcr to Tridhaman; Tridhaman 

fii <; a rasvata handed it over lu > 

gave it toSaradvan. Saradvan taught Trivi.ia and he gave tt 

‘° Amarikta gave it to Vartin and he gave it to Tray- 

yaruna. Trayyarunataugh.it to Dhanahjaya and he gave .. to 

^efT^aiijayagotitrrom Kr»»jaya and he gave it 
Bharadvaja. Bharadvaja gave it to Gautama and he handed 

narrated it to Vajaaravas. He handed 

over to Somasusma, who gave it to Trnabindu. 

65. Trnabindu narrated it to Daksa and Daksa taught 
Sakti. Even as he was in the womb, Parasara heard this from 

Sak 66 O excellent Brahmanas, Jatukarna learnt this from 
Parana. From him holy lord Dvaipayana got it. From Dvaipa- 
yana this was secured by me. 


to 

it 

it 


Samiapayana said : 

67. Thus the words uttered by Brahma, the first prece¬ 
ptor, were mentioned by me to my son Amitabuddhi (of un¬ 
measured intellect); it is narrated orally by (a line of preceptors) 
of whom Brahma was the first. 

68-70. Preceptors should be earnestly bowed down to by 
learned men. This story is conducive to wealth, fame and 
longevity. It is meritorious and achieves all objects (of desire). 
It destroys sins. This must always be regularly listened to by 
Brahmanas. This sacred story should not be mentioned to 
an impure person, a sinner, nor to a disciple who has not put in 
at least a year’s disciplined student life. Nor should it be men¬ 
tioned to one who never pays heed, nor to one who is not a 
scholar, nor to one who has no son, nor to one who is inimical. 

71-73. With great mental purity, I bow down to Brahma, 1 
the first Mahesvara whose source of origin, they say, is Avyakta 


1. This salutation to Mahadeva who is identified with the Primordial 
Puru?a shows that it is a Saiva Purana. The Maiigalacarana of this Purana 
pays obeisance to Lord Siva. 



42.1-H 


899 


(the Unmanifcst), whose body is the Manifest. Kala that has 
gone in, whose mouth is Vahni (fire), whose eyes are the Sun and 
the Moon, whose ears are the quarters, whose nose, they say, is 
Vayu, whose words are Vedas, whose body is the firmament, 
whose feet are the earth, whose hair pores are the stars, whose 
limbs are similarly constituted, all the Vidyas are the tail, who 
is the lord of Devas, who creates people, who is firmly stationed 
in all the worlds, who is the foremostof all and who isMahesvara, 
the granter of boons. 


CHAPTER FORTYTWO 


Dissipation of Vyasa’s Doubts 1 * * * 

The Sages Saunaka and others said: 

1-2. O Suta, O blessed one, eighteen Puranas have been 
entirely narrated along with the connected anecdotes in the 
manner of Upakrama (beginning) and Upasarfihdra (conclusion), 

by you, the holy one, who have understood all the sacred texts 

by the favour of Vyasa. o . . 

3-11. You have clearly narrated Matsya Purana- containing 
fourteen thousand verses; the Bhavisya Parana containing an 

equal number of verses with five hundred more; the beautiful 


1 This chapter is a later addition as it is found only in one MS(Ka) 
used by A. The very fact that it comes after PhalaSruli and formal compleuon 

of vt^TeL! Here »n„ .he £** 

narrating eighteen verses give the traditional number 

various topics are included herein. T thcm S unlcss wc presume that that 

of verses in each Purana without ven yi g ’ Purana writer. Thus 

much number of verses was found at the time o ■ there i n on i y 

Kurma Puma is credited with verses but actually 

6000 verses; the Bhagavata Puraiia is ere 
it has less than 15000 verses. 



900 


Vayu Purana 


Markenfcya containing nine thousand verses; the Brahmavaivarta 

containing eighteen thousand verses; the Brahmanja containing 
twelve thousand and one hundred verses; the divine Blidgavata 
containing eighteen thousand verses; the Brahma Purana (the 
Purana called Brahma of tea thousand verses); the Purana 
named Yamana containing ten thousand verses; the Aaipurana 
containing ten thousand and six hundred verses; the Anita 
[Vayu) Purana containing twentythree thousand verses (?);the 
Xaradiya containing twentythree thousand versts; the Vainateya 
(Garufa ) containing nineteen thousand verses; the extensive 
Padmapurana containing fifty five thousand verses; the beautiful 
Kurma containing seventeen thousand verses; the wonderful 
Sankara ( Varaha) Purana containing twenty four thousand 
verses and the extensive Skanda Purana containing eiglityone 
thousand verses. Thus eighteen big Puranas have been narrated. 
In these Puranas many holy rites (Bharmas) ; ave been explain¬ 
ed by you. 

12-15. The holy rites and duties (Dharma) of those with 
and without attachment, those of ascetics, the religious students, 
householders, forest-hermits, women and Sudras have been 
particularly explained by you. Similarly the rites and duties of 
Brabmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and the mixed castes have 
been recounted. You have described the big rivers Ganga and 
others. Many kinds of Yajnas, holy rites and penances have been 
explained in those Puranas. Many kinds of religious gifts, all 
kinds of Tamos (restraints and holy observances), the duties of 
Yoga, Samkhya and Bhagavata (pertaining to the holy devotee 
of the lord) have been explained in them. The paths of devo¬ 
tion, knowledge, and detachment have been explained. The 
procedures for the Upasand (special forms of worship) with water 
and wind (i.c. such as Pranayama where the breath is control¬ 
led) by those whose minds have been purified by holy rites, have 
been mentioned. 


Though our text reiterates 18 as the number of Maha Puranas actually 
a list of 16 Puranas is given. The Adipurapa hereof is cither Visnu or Agni 
or Linga but that number of verses approximates to those of Linga Purana. 
The number of verses attributed per Purana differs in different Puranas. 
But that is a minor point as these Purana writers had no opportunity or 
inclination to verify the actual number of vers.es in each Purana. 



42.16-22 


901 


16. The systems (of philosophy and devotion), the 
Brahma (pertaining to Brahma), Saiva (that of Siva), Vaisnava 
(that of Vi§nu)j Saura (that of the Sun), Sakta (that of Sakti, 
the goddess), Arhata* (that of Arhat, Jina), the six systems of 
philosophy and the materialistic philosophy—all these and 
many other things have been explained in the Puranas. 

17. It is not known whether there is or not anything be- 
yond tills that is excellent and worth knowing. 

18. Could it be that Vyasa or you, holy sir, are hiding any¬ 
thing ? Please clear our doubts in this respect, since you are a 
complete Pauranika (knower of Puranas). 

Suta said : 

19. O Saunaka, listen. I shall explain this intricate pro¬ 
blem. This is a great secret of divine nature. It should not be 
mentioned (to anyone and everyone), so say (the sages). 

20. After writing the scory of the Puranas wherein all the 
meanings of the Vcdic passages have been included, Vyasa, son 
of Parasara, thought thus in his mind. 1 2 

21. c 'The duties of the different castes and stages of life 
have been clearly explained by me. Different paths leading to 
salvation without infringing the Vedic injunctions have been 
mentioned by me. 

22. In my decisions (incorporated) in the {Brahma siilra), 
the (alleged) distinction between Jiva (individual soul), Isvara 
and Brahman has been completely refuted. Brahman the 
supreme soul has been explained on the basis of Vedic 
passages, cogent arguments and deliberations. 


1. Mention of Jainism and non-mention of Buddhism shows that 
Buddhism had either disappeared from India at that time or the inclusion of 
the Buddha as an incarnation of Visnu was probably regarded a sufficient 
ground not to mention it as a separate system of philosophy. I believe in the 
first alternative (disappearance of Buddhism on a large scale). 

2. Gf. Bh. P. 1.4.26-31 and the subsequent two chapters 5 & 6. That 
episode in the Bh. P. is the basis of this episode of Vyasa’s dejection. The 
mention of Brahma Sutras shows that at the time of this Purana the authors 
of the Mahabliarata, the Puranas and the Brahma sutra were believed to be 
one si nglc individual called Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa. 



902 


Vayu Purana 


•>3 The supreme Brahman u unpemhable. It » the 
supreme soul, and the greatest region. It ts for tts reahaattou 
thaMlte religious students, forest-hermtts and ascet.cs perform 

2^25 Highly intelligent persons perform DUmt* (concen¬ 
tration) of different types. Leading sages perform the Mp 
dght- imbed) observance for the sake of Brahman. They 
i^Ldrtm. (posture), (restramt of breath), £«!>«- 

Adre(withdrawal of the senses), (concentratton), Bfcm* 

(meditation), Samidhi (trance, ecstasy), Iran (restraint) and 

Niyama (observance). . 

26. Those who strictly adhere to the injunctions of the 
Vedas, perform holy rites only for the sake of Brahman They 
are free from desires and sins. They perform the holy rites 
dedicating the fruit thereof to the greatest soul. 

27 Those of pure rites and observances resort to the holy 
centres of Ganga etc. in order to wipe off their sinful actions 
and to know the supreme soul. 


28-29. That Brahman is the greatest. It is pure. It has 
neither beginning nor end. It is free from ailments. It is eternal 
and omnipresent. It is steady like the summit of a mountain. It 
is devoid of deception. It pervades all sense organs but is im- 
perceivable. It is devoid of sense-organs that are the creations 
ofPrakrti. It is undeflected by Dik (Space) and Kdla (Time) 
etc. It is eternal. It is pure consciousness. It is unchanging. 

30-31. The whole universe is super-imposed on it like the 


serpent on a piece of cord 1 and hence appears so. Brahman 
is devoid of aberrations. If pondered well, foam, bubble 
and wave will be found not different at all from water; 
similarly considered the universe too is not at all different from 
Brahman. 

32. The Nigamas (Vedas) declare,‘Everything is Brahman 
There is no multiplicity’. It is from Brahman that the crores 
of Brahmarnjas (Cosmic Eggs) are created and dissolved. 


1. This Adhyasavada shows that this chapter was written in the post- 
Sankara period. See v. 39 below. 



42.33-40 


903 


33. The dissolution and creation of all the worlds depend 
upon the Unmesa (opening) and jYimesa (closing) of Brah¬ 
man. 1 The great Sakti (the divine goddess of power) is station- 
ed with the support of Brahman. 

34. The universe is in it. It originates from Brahman. 
It is Brahman itself. It is due to the ignorance of Brahman 
that the universe appears. When Brahman is realised there is no 
universe. 

35. The universe is explained as Asalya (unreal), Ja<fa 
(insentient), Duhkha (cause of misery) and Auaslu (unreal, un¬ 
substantial). The opposite of it is Saccidamndamurti— the 
embodiment of existence, knowledge and bliss. 

36. It is called Vifva when the individual soul is in the 
wakeful state. It is remembered as Taijasa when the individual 
is in a state of dream. It is called Prajna when the individual 
soul is in the state of dreamless slumber. 2 It persists in all the 
states. 

37. It is the eye of eyes. It is the ear of ears. It is the Tvac 
(skin, i.e, organ of touch) of all Tvacs. It is the tongue of 
tongues. They consider it the Prana (vital breath) of Pranas. 

38. Human beings are incapable of knowing precisely and 
attaining it by means of intellect, worldly knowledge, vital 
breath or physical activity for ever. 

39. Just as snake (is misconceived as such) in the rope, 
mirage as water in the desert, and blueness in the sky is super¬ 
imposed due to ignorance, so also the non-existing universe is 
superimposed on Brahman and hence it simply appears to 
exist. 

40. The vast sky appears to be different inasmuch as it is 
restricted by jars etc. Similarly the Jiva is the restricted form 
of the all-pervading soul, restricted through the karya (product 
e.g. the physical body). 


1. A partial quotation from Vasugupta’s Spanda-Karika 1, but attributes 
this creation and destruction of the Universe to Siva’s Para Sakti—an attempt 
to adapt aTrika Saiva concept and adopt it in Kevalddvaita . 

2. The terras Taijasa, Prajna etc. used here are of Upani$adic antiquity 
{vide Mantfukya Up. 9, 10 and 11). 



904 


Vdju Parana 


41 The whole Cosmic Egg is an incomparably superb pamt- 
ing drawn on Brahman as if on a wall by the Maya (Illuston) 
of wonderful activities possessing diverse Gur-as. 

42 That imperishable Brahman is conclustvely amved at 
by the Vedic and Upanisadic passages and principles. 
Brahman is beyond those who rush after tt. It ,s beyond the 
words of those who try to explain it. 

43 There is nothing greater than the Alcsara (indestructible 

Brahman). That is the Acme. That is the great goal. So it is 

explained in the Vedas, when (they are) closely pondered over. 

44-52 I have heard this from the Vedas with whose help he 
became cognisable. Also that Lord KfPja is that supreme man 
(Purusa) - 1 He is abiding in the form of Atman in that Alcsara 
Atman ( imperishable soul) . He is of the form of the mass of 
Bliss the embodiment of Ananda (bliss and felicity). He takes 
interest in divine sports in the midst of the cowherdesses. He is 
embellished with a crown decorated with peacock plumes and 
studded with shining gems. He shines with the two earrings 

having the brilliance of lightning. His eyes beautiful like the 

Khanjarlta (birds) move up to (are longish up to) the ears. He 
indulges in dalliance with the beloved cowherdesses in every 
flower-grove. He wears a divine yellow garment. He has smeared 
himself with sandal paste. He fascinates the cowherdesses with 
the notes of his flute sprinkled with the nectar oozing out of his 
lips. He is the Cidananda (the bliss of knowledge). He suppresses 
the arrogance of Anahga (Cupid) (by means of his beauty) . He 
is a past-master in the arts of love of crores of Kamas. He is as 
pure as the rays of crores of Moons. Bees and deer surround 
him. Round his neck with three lines a diamond necklace shines 
with beads interspersed. To control cows from straying away, 
he runs about here and there on the high banks of Yamuna 
in the jungle of Tamala trees and trees of Kadamba, Campaka, 
Asoka and Parijata that appear very beautiful. It (the forest) 
is full of the chirping sounds of cuckoos, parrots, doves and 
peacocks. He is particularly fond of sporting with Radha. 


1. Verses 4-1-55 show the influence of the Radha- Krsna cult or 
Bhagavatism. 



42.53-66 


905 


53. He sports in the world called Goloka which is Brah¬ 
man itself, the Cil alone, free from difference and Gunas. I have 
heard it so. 

54. There is nothing greater than He as mentioned in 
Nigamas and Agamas. Still the Vedas say that he is beyond and 
greater than Aksara . 

55. The lord who is the resident of Goloka is called greater 
than Aksara . Who is this always spoken by the Vedas as beyond 
even that ? 

56. How is the special meaning, that which is indicated by 
the words of the Vedas to be known? Is the text of the Veda to 
be interpi eted otherwise as it implies more than recorded in 
words (?) 

57. Vyasa, the son of Satyavatl, became doubtful as to the 
meaning of the Sruti. He pondered over it for a long time. He 
could not understand it precisely. 

Suta said : 

58. Even after deliberating (long) the sage did not arrive 
at the decisive meaning of the Vedic passage. The Veda is 
Narayana himself, where even great sages (poets) become 
confounded. 

59. Still he underwent great distress of the heart. Then he 
thought: ‘Whom shall I approach ? What shall I do ? 

60-62. I do not see anyone in this world who is omniscient 
and who sees everything.’ After not knowing anyone in the 
world who could clear his doubts he went to a cave in Meru and 
performed a great penance. There was a beautiful forest there. 
Although there was blinding darkness within, the rocks shed 
a golden brilliance everywhere. 

63-66. The forest was resonant with the chirping sounds of 
the birds among the groves of the different trees and creepers. 
It was devoid of the sufferings due to hunger, thirst, fear, anger, 
distress and dejection. Ponds and tanks beautified with 
lotuses abounded there. Their banks were set with golden slabs 
on which the birds moved about. It was served by the winds 
wafting the fragrance from the lotuses. It was devoid of beasts 
of prey. It was frequented by animalshaving auspicious nature. 
The place was devoid of crowds of people. It was embellished 


906 


Vayu Parana 


with pleasing groves of divine creepers. Tire chirping sounds of 
parrots, doves and intoxicated cuckoos were very plcasmg. 

67 The pollen dust particles rose up and rendered all the 
quarters fragrant. The divine golden cave of very great splen- 

dour was there (in such a forest). 

68. The sage entered that cave. After attaining full con¬ 
trol over his mind, posture and urge for food, he meditated on 
the four Vedas with great concentration. 

69-73. Even as he was meditating, three hundred ycais 
passed and then the four Vedas of beautiful appearance 1 
stood in front of him. Their eyes were resplendent like the 
petals of the lotus. Their heads were embellished with matted 
hair like coronets. Sacred Kusa grass was held in the fists ot 
their lotus-like hands. Their shoulders were adorned with deer 
skin. The splendour of their mouths was heightened by means 
of the sixteen Svara (vowel) sounds intersprsed with Prcmava 
(Om). Their hands with five fingers to each were constituted 
bv the letters of the guttural and the palatal classes of conso¬ 
nants. Their right legs were constituted by the labial class 
consonants and the left legs consisted of the letters of the dental. 
The sides of their belly were constituted of intermediate and last 
consonants (of each group). The letter jVa constituted their 
navels. Their backs were refulgent (The letters ending with 
Ka constituted their backs). The letter Ma was their stomach. 
The letters Ta,Ra, La and Va were their tied up hair (tresses). 
Agnibija (the seed-like Mantra of Agni) shone in their right 
shoulders. The Dhard (Bija ) (the seed-like Mantra of the earth) 
was their neck and the Bhtta (? Mantra) shone on their (left) 
shoulders. 

74. Their joints consisted of the A ntahstha (semi-vowel) 
letters. They were throbbing with Vaikhari speech. He saw (the 
city of) Mathura marked in their lotus-like hearts. 

75. Indeed that is the holy centre of the manifestation of 
Lord Hari himself. He saw (the holy place) KasI in the middle 


1. A beautiful yet significant description of the personality of the Vedas. 
The vision of seven holy cities, important or major sacrifices, four sacred 
fires on their person is interesting as it shows t:.e attritude of the author to 
synthesize Puranic and Vedic traditions. 



42.76-86 


907 

of their eyebrows. He saw the city of Maya (Haridvara) 
stationed in a mystical plexus at the posterior part of the 
body. 

76. He saw the city of Kanci in the region of their penis; 
the city of AvantI in the navel region; the city of Dvaraka in 
the region of the neck and the city of Prayaga in the region of 
Prana (vital air). 

77. To their left and right flowed the rivers Ganga and 
Yamuna. In the middle flowed the river Sarasvati itself. The 
holy centre of Gaya was in the facial region. 

78. The excellent holy centre of Prabhasa was in the 
middle of the neck and the chin. He saw the hermitage of 
Badaryasrama in their Brahmarandhra (cerebral aperture). 

79. The holy seats of Paundravardhana -(Pandua) (Malda 
District) and Nepala were seen in the two eyes. The seat named 
Purnagiri was seen on the forehead, 

80. The holy seat (Pltha) of Mathura was seen in the 
neck. The seat of Kanci was stationed in the hips. The Pltha of 
Jalandhara was seen in the region of the breasts, 

81. The Pitha called Bhrgu was in the region of the ears; 
the city of Ayodhya was in the cup of the nose. The holy centre 
Brahmya was stationed in the cerebral aperture; the holy centre 
Saiva was in the partition on the crown of the head. 

82. The holy centre Sakta was situated on the tip of the 
tongue. The holy Vaisnava centre was in the lotus of the heart; 
the holy centre of the Sun was situated in the region of the eyes 
and all Bauddha (Buddhistic) holy centres were stationed in the 
shadows. 

83. He saw the Sautramani Yajna in the region of the 
neck; the Pasubandha in the chest. He saw the Vajapeya sacri¬ 
fice in the region of the buttocks and the Agnihotra in the 
mouth (Pface). 

84. He saw Asvamedha in the region of the buttocks and 
Naramcdha (human sacrifice) in the belly. He saw Rajasuya in 
the region of the head and Avasathya in the lower lip. 

85-86. He saw Daksinagni on the upper lip and the Garha- 
patya (fire) in the mouth. The Havya was in the ears. He saw 
the different Mantras stationed in the bodily hair. He saw the 
Vedas severally revered and honoured by the Puranas, Nyayas, 


Vayu Purana 
908 

Samhitas and Tantra texts like a great king served by his attcn- 
ST's. He saw the Vedas who blessed the people through holy 
Set perfect knowledge and Upasanas (modes of worshtp). 

87 They had the divine brilliance of Brahman; they 
were blazing like the descending (rays of) the Sun and the 
shooting flames office. They had the appearance of crores of 
Moons (put together). On seeing them, the sa S e Krsna (Dvat- 

payana) became greatly struck with wonder 

P 88. He got up suddenly and prostrated himself (before 
them), while saying repeatedly : “I am contented. I lave 
achieved my object (in life). 

89. Since, O holy Sires, you have been visible to me, my 
birth is fruitful today. My mind is satisfied. My life (longevity) 

has become fruitful today. > 

90. Whatever there is whether worldly or divine, whatever 
is worth knowing whether past, present or future is not un¬ 


known to you. . _ 

91. You all are not the mere instructors of the path oi 

action. Even if you show the path of action, it is only to 
restrict the haphazard actions of those who are passionate. 

92. Your words of injunction and prohibition regarding 
the status of Brahman and the unreality of the universe are 
not based on attachment which is unreal. They are binding as 
the injunctions and prohibitions (?) 

93. Hence the objects such as heaven etc. mentioned by 
yourselves have been censured by you, saying that they are of 
a perishable nature, while the truth is being explained by you, 
the benefactors of the worlds. 

94. By teaching the path of action and the path of know¬ 
ledge to different individuals according to their capacity and 
eligibility, the world has certainly been saved by you whose 
person is constituted of the revealed word of the supreme 
Brahman. 

95. Hence I would like to ask you, should you be kind and 
merciful (towards me). With regard to those whose minds are 
filled with desires only, the fruit ordained for their riles is Svarga 
(heaven). 

96. To those men who have dedicated their minds and 
souls to Isa (the Lord), the fruit of the action performed is the 


42 . 97-106 


909 


purification of the mind. Thereafter they attain perfect know¬ 
ledge and subsequently salvation. 

97. Salvation is the identity with Brahman which is 
Existence, Knowledge and Bliss. When it is realized whatever is 
done or left undone, everything comes to an end. 

98. It is unattached. It is the firmament of knowledge of 
the nature of wisdom unobscured by Maya. It is free from 
desire. It is steady (immovable), pure and devoid of Gunas. 
It is proclaimed to be all-pervading. 

99. When products (the created beings, the world) are 
being destroyed, Brahman (the unchangeable) does not 
perish, just as the Sun retainsits splendour while the whole world 
becomes plunged in blinding darkness. 

100. It is with the brilliance of the Satta (the existent 
Brahman) that the universe is illuminated, in the same way as 
a piece of iron is ignited by the solar crystal or Arani produces 
fire. 

101. It manifests in the form of Jlva (the individual soul), 
Isvara (godhead) etc. and lo ! in the form of the universe too ! 
When everything is dissolved the firm, motionless Brahman alone 
remains. 

102. This has been decided by you and undoubtedly it 
must be so. Still I have a desire to know something and have a 
doubt in my mind. 

103. Is there anything greater than this or not ? O blessed 
ones, please tell it, as you have the vision of reality. 

104. The listening to that alone shall be conducive to the 
success and fruitfulness of my life. 5 ’ 

When Vyasa, the sinless son of Satyavatl, said thus the 
Nigama (Vedas) exclaimed ‘very good, quite right 5 , and 
replied to him: 

Vedas said: 

105. Very well, O highly intelligent one. You are Visnu, 
the Atman of all embodied ones. Though unborn, you take up 
birth and desire to bless the worlds. 

106. Otherwise why should you be fettered by the worldly 
Karmans? It does not affect you. You are untouched for ever 
by the divine Maya that hides perfect knowledge. 




910 


Vayu Parana 


107-108. You take up forms according to your own will 
and you withdraw the same at your own will. Only matters 
accepted by us have been revealed by you in the Purapas, 
Itihasa (Mahabharata) and the (Brahma) Sutras in various 
ways. The imperishable Brahman is supreme, the cause (source) 

of all causes. . . 

109-110, Like the fragrance of a flower or its taste (juice) 
it is the Atman of the Atman. Know that it is the ultimate form. 
This has been experienced by us when the dissolution pertain¬ 
ing to Prakpti took place. It is that which is beyond the Aksara 
(the indestructible). It is the supreme Rasa alone. It is beyond 
all words of expression. We are of the forms of words and 
hence incompetent to express it specifically. 


CHAPTER FORTYTHREE 
The Greatness of Gaya 1 

Vayu said: 

1. Henceforth I shall explain the excellent greatness of 
Gaya 2 on hearing which one is absolved of all sins. There is no 
doubt in this. 

1. This is a Sthala-Purapa glorifying the sacredness of Gaya. It has a 
tenuous relation with the Va. as it comes after the Phala Sruti etc. showing 
the completion of the Va. P. Gaya, as a sacred place, was famous in pre- 
Buddhist limes as Auniavabha’s mention of Samarohana, Visnupada and 
Gayasiras (all sacred spots at Gaya) as the three steps of Trivikraraa, in RV. 
I. 22.17, is recorded by Yaska (Nirukta 12.19). We have Gaya Mdhdtmya in 
Mbh. Vana. Chs. 84-95, Garuda Chs. 82-86, AP Ghs. 114-116, KP 11.35, 
NP Uttarabhaga 44-47. A number of verses are common in the works. It 
shows that probably there must have been an ancient independent Sthala- 
Purapa called Gaya Mdhdtmya which was the source of the different Gaya 
Mahatmyas in these works. 

2. The name indicates that it must have been the site of the hermitage 
or capital of King Gaya. A pious king Gaya, the son of king Samudravijaya 
of Rajagrha, the eleventh Gakravartin as mentioned in Uttarddhyayana Sutra a 
work of Svetambara Jaina Agama. Buddha’s visits to Gayaslsa (Gayasirsa) 
and hermitage of Kasyapa at Gaya are recorded in the Pali canon ( Maha- 



43.2-8 


911 


Siita said : 

2. Once upon a time, the celestial sage Narada was acco¬ 
mpanied by Sanaka and other blessed sages. Bowing duly to 
Sanatkumara, he enquired thus: 

Narada enquired : 

3. O Sanatkumara, please recount to me that holy plsce 
which is the most excellent of all excellent sacred places and 
which saves all living beings who read about it or listen to 
it. 

Sanatkumara replied : 

4. I shall recount the holy and excellent sacred centre 
which saves all by means of (performance of) Sraddha and other 
holy rites. Listen to the description of the holy place Gaya 
which is superior to all other holy centres in the whole of the 
country. 

5. Gaya, the Asura, performed penance. He was requested 
(toofTerhis body) for the performance of a sacrifice by god 
Brahma. Dharma placed a slab of stone on his (Gaya’s) head, 
when he offered (his body). 

6. There Brahma performed a sacrifice. In order to keep 
the demon Gaya steady and immovable day and night (for 
ever), Gadadhara (themace-wielder Visnu) too stayed there 
assuming the form of the (river) Phalgu and other sacred 
places, along with prominent Brahmanas, god Brahma and other 
Devas. 

7. After concluding his sacrifice, Brahma granted houses 
etc. to the Brahmanas. He had performed the sacrifice at Gaya 
in the beginning of the Sveta Varahakalpa. 

8. The holy centre became famous by the name Gaya 
after (the demon) Gaya. This holy centre is liked by god 


vagga 1.21.1 (also As'vaghosa’s Buddhacarita XII. 87-88, XVII.8). This king 
Gaya is not the same Gaya, the VcdicSeer ofRV. X. 63 and 64 as his father’s 
name was Plati. 

Gaya belonged to the ancient Asura clan. We need not associate evil with 
the Asura clan, as we have very pious yet powerful Asura kings Prahlada, 
Bali, Bana. Even Lord Krsna was an Asura by his mother’s side (S.K. 
Ghatterji —Selected Writings). 



912 


Vayu Purana 

Brahma. All manes (Ptyj) afraid of falling into hell, desire for 

9 ‘The son who goes to Gaya will be our saviour . On 
seeing their sons reaching Gaya, the Pius become overjoyed. 
(They say) ‘Even by touching its waters with his feet, what is 
it that he cannot give us?’ 

10. Tf the son goes to Gaya and offers balls of rice (to the 
Pitjrs) they will realise the benefit of (their) having such a son. 
If the son remains there for three fortnights, he sanctifies his 
family till the seventh generation. If that is not possible, let 
him stay there for fifteen days, or seven nights or (at least) three 
nights. 

11. Sins accumulated during the long period of a Maha 
Kalpa perish on reaching Gaya. One should offer balls of rice 
to the Pitrs and others. He can even offer the Pinzas to himself, 
but without including gingelly seeds in that case. 

12. By performing the Sraddha at Gaya, all the sins such as 
those resulting from Brahmana-slaughter, addiction to wine, 
stealing (gold), intercourse with the wife of the preceptor and 
those due to the association with those sinners, perish com¬ 
pletely. 

13. Whether it is by one’s own son or another’s son, if 
the Pin$a is offered in one’s name anywhere on the ground at 
Gaya at any time, one is transported to the eternal Brahman. 

14. There are four modes of attaining liberation, viz. (1) 
through the knowledge of Brahman, (2) through performance 
of Sraddha at Gaya, (3) (by) death in a cowshed, and (4) 
through residence at Kuruksetra. 1 

15. If the son goes to Gaya, of what avail is the knowledge 
of Brahman; what is the necessity of dying in a cowshed; 
and what is the need for a residence at Kuruksetra? 

16-17. The real devotee may offer Pinzas at Gaya at any 
time. It should not be discarded during the intercalary month, 
or on one’s birthday or when Jupiter and Venus are set, or 
when Jupiter is in the Zodiac of Simha (Leo). If by ill-luck 
or inadvertence or when one is struck or wounded (one is un- 


1. Cf. NP. II (Uttara) 44.30; AP, 115.5-6. 



43.18-26 


913 


able to perform the Sraddha at the proper time), one is eligible 
to perform afterwards the Sraddha and other rites. He thereby 
attains Brahmaloka. 

18. Even the opportunity to go to Gaya once or to offer 
Pinda even once is very rare to achieve. What then, if one is 
able to stay in it for ever? 

19. If accidentally one dies in this holy centre which 
confers salvation even upon Brahma and others, one attains 
salvation in the same manner as through the realisation of 
Brahman. There is no doubt about tthis. 

20. In order to redeem the Pitrs who might have died due 
to wormbites etc., one should be wise enough to make all efforts 
to perform Sraddha at Gaya. 

21. One should honour and propitiate with Havyas and 
Kayyas (offerings) the Brahmanas who had been assigned the 
right of receiving those things by Brahma himself. If they are 
pleased, all the Pitys and Devas will be pleased. 

22. Except in the case of the holy centres of Kuruksetra, 
Visala, Viraja and Gaya in all the holy centres, it has been 
ordained that the devotees should shave off their head and 
observe fast. 

23. A Bhiksu (a recluse) need not offer balls of rice after 
going to Gaya. It is enough if he shows his staff. After placing 
his staff at the feet (the footprint) of Visnu he becomes 
liberated along with all his forefathers. 1 

24. Really the staff-bearing ascetic (Sannyasin) does not 
incur sins or acquire merits. Hence he renounces all activities 
and meditates on Visnu with noble thoughts. 

25. One may renounce all Karmans but should not for¬ 
swear the Vedas. He should shave liis head outside the limits of 
the holy centre to the east, west, south or north. 

26. The area of the sacred place of Gaya, as declared by 
Brahma, is two and a half krosas (1 krosa = 5 km.), that of the 
holy centre Gaya is five krosas and that of Gayasiras (Headland 
of Gaya) is one krosa. 2 


1. Cf. NP. II. 45.31. 

2. Cf. NP. 11.44.16; AP. 115.42 



914 


Vdyu Pnrana 


27. Whatever holy places there are in the three worlds 
are present within 1 (the area of Gayas'iras). A person who 
performs Sraddha to the Pitps in the holy centre of Gaya be¬ 
comes free from indebtedness to them. 

28. He who performs Sraddha at Gayasiras uplifts a hundred 
generations in his family. The moment one starts on his pilgri¬ 
mage to Gaya, every step that he takes (on his journey of Gaya) 
constitutes a flight of steps leading to Svarga to his Pitrs 
(ancestors). 

29. At every step taken (by the son) in his journey towards 
Gaya, the fruit of Asvamedha is certainly acquired by him. 
There is no doubt in this. 

30-32. Pindas in Gaya are offered by means of milk pudding, 
Cams (cooked rice soaked in ghee), Saktu (flour of fried 
grains), Pisiaka, rice grains, roots etc. Powdered gingelly seeds, 
lumps of jaggery with ghee or mere curds, any foodstuff mixed 
with honey, oilcake with jaggery, raw sugar and ghee, if offered 
to the Pitrs yield everlasting benefits. Or worship is performed' 
and any seasonal fruit is offered as food or Havisya food is also 
offered as mentioned by the sages. 

33. On one side are all the articles of offering such as clo¬ 
thes and things sweetened with tasty honey. On the other side is 
the sacred water from the Phalgutlrtha brought after meditating 
on the lotus-like feet of Gadadhara (i.e. Both these are at par 
with each other). 

34. The procedure of the Sraddhas in the holy centres is 
this: Seat is offered to Pindas; Pindas are offered, then 
Avanejana rite is performed (water is ritualistically sprinkled on 
the Darbha grass); Daksina is then offered and then the 
Annasamkalpa (ritualistic verbal utterance of one’s intention of 
offering food). 


35. In the Sraddhas performed in the holy centres, there 
is no ritualistic invocation to Pitrs. As there is no defilement 
through seeing (i.e. on being seen by others) there is no screen- 
ing of the sides. Intelligent persons should perform Sraddha 
with due sympathy. 

36. In other places, the Pitrs if and when invoked at the 

h This is the claim of all Sthalas even of lesser importance such as- 
those of Karavira, Pandharpur. 



43.37-44 


915 


proper time, go there. But they always stay in the holy 
centre. Hence there is no (need of any) invocation. 

37. By a person desirous of fruits and performing Sraddhas in 
the holy centres all the rites must always be performed after 
eschewing lust, anger and covetousness. 

38. One who observes celibacy, sleeps on the bare ground, 
takes food only once a day, speaks only the truth, remains 
always pure and is always engaged in the welfare of all living 
beings, attains the fruits of visiting the holy centres. 

39. A self-possessed man visiting holy centres must at the 
outset eschew heresy. A person who does everything urged by 
lust, should be known as a heretic. 

40. Just as the knowers of Brahman engaged in the 
meditation of Brahman with single-minded attention attain 
the knowable object, so also the self-possessed persons performing 
the holy rites in the holy centres enter Brahman named 
Paresa (the supreme lord). 

. . • m S* * _ 11 i._ J-'U 


41. The river Vaitaran! which is famous in all the three 
worlds, has descended into the holy centre of Gaya for saving 
Pitrs. One who takes the sacred bath in the Vaitarani and 
gifts away cows uplifts three times seven (i.e. twentyone) 


42. The devotee should go to the Aksayavata (the eternal 
fitr and nroDitiate the Brahmanas there. One who 



44. It is a rare acluevcme 
else in the three worlds if one 
when the Sun is in the Zodia< 
and Kumbha . 


1. Cf. AP. 116.28. 



916 


Vayu Purarta 


45. Similarly rare is the opportunity, very rare indeed in 
the three worlds, to perform Sraddha at Gaya when the Sun is in 
the Zodiac Makara and also at the times of the eclipses of the 
Sun and the Moon. 

46. The fruit that one achieves by offering balls of rice 
at Gaya, cannot be described by me even in hundreds of crores 
of Kalpas. 


CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 


The Glory of Gaya : The Story of Gayasura* 
jYarada enquired: 

1. How was Gayasura (Demon Gaya) born? What was 
his power? What was his nature? How did he perform the 
penance? How did he acquire purity of the body? 

Sanatkumara replied : 

2. Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, was born of 
the umbilical lotus of Visnu. Formerly, at the instance of lord 
Visnu, he created the subjects. 

3. Formerly he created the Asuras (Demons) through a 
demoniac inclination. Through a benevolent disposition of mind 
he created theDevas of gentle minds. 

4. Demon Gaya possessed the greatest strength and exploit 
among Asuras. His height is remembered to be one hundred 
and twentyfive Yojanas. 


* According to Rajcndralal Mitra, the story of Gayasura is an allegory of 
the vanquishing of Buddhism by Brahmanism (Bodha-Gaya pp. 14-18). O. 
Malley thought it to be an amalgamation of Brahmanism and popular 
demonolatry which preceded Brahmanism (JASB LXXII. iii. 7, 1904). 
B.M. Barua regards, this as an invention to impress the sanctity of the Gaya 
range of hills {Gaya and Buddha Gaya, 1934). I agree with B. M. Barua as, 
while editing theKaraoira Mahatmya, a Sthalapurana of Kolhapur, I found 
sum ar creation of stories to justify and glorify some rites etc. of Mahalaksmi 
t0 ^»ira-Mdfuttmya, pp. 19-29, Pub. Shivaji University, Kolhapur, 
1980). I find the same claim in the Sthala Parana; of Pandharpur, Tirupatbi. 



44.5-14 


917 


5. His girth was sixty Yojanas. He is remembered as the 
most excellent of all the devotees of Visnu. He performed a very 
terrible penance on the excellent mountain Kolahala (Brahma- 
yoni hill including Muntfapr${ha at Gaya). 

6. He remained steady for many thousand years without 
breathing. Scorched by his fiery penance, Devas were 
greatly agitated. 

7. Devas went to Brahmaloka and spoke to Pitamaha 
(god Brahma), “O Lord, save us from demon Gaya”. Then 
Brahma spoke to the Devas: 

8. “O Devas, we shall go to god Sankara.” Brahma and 
others went to Siva. At Kailasa, they bowed to him and said, 
“O Lord, save us from the great demon”. 

9. Sarhbhu spoke to Brahma and others: “We shall seek 
refuge in Hari, in the ocean of milk. He is the lord of all Devas. 
He will do something conducive to our welfare”. Brahma, Siva 
and the Devas bowed to Visnu and eulogised him. 

The Devas said: 

10. Om ! Obeisance to Visnu, the lord of all, the all- 
powerful, the radiant, the victorious and the devourer (destro¬ 
yer) of Raksasas and others. 

11. Hail to the sustainer of all these (worlds). Bow to him 
who leads the Yogins beyond (the ocean of worldly existence). 
Obeisance to the ever-increasing, the Infinite. Hail to the 
resplendent one. 

Sanatkwnara said: 

12. On being eulogised thus, Vasudeva granted vision 
unto the Suras (i.e. manifested himself in front of them). O 
Devas, wherefore have you all come?” On being asked thus by 
Visnu the Devas said to him: 

13. “O Lord, save us from the danger of demon Gaya”. 
Hari said, “May Brahma and others go near that Daitya. I 
shall also come there”. 

14. Seated on Garuda, Kesava started in order to grant 
a boon to Gayasura. All the Devas seated themselves on their 
respective excellent vehicles and proceeded. 




918 


Vtiyit Parana 


15. Vasudeva and others spoke to him : “O demon Gaya, 
what for is this penance being performed by you? We have all 
arrived here fully satisfied (with your penance). Mention the 
boon (you wish to have) 

Gayasura said'. 

16-18. O Devas, Brahma, Visnu and Mahcsvara, if you 
are pleased, may I be ever holier than these : than all the 
Devas, and Brahmanas, than all the Yajfias, holy rivers and 
mountains; than all the Devas; than all the sages; than even 
the unchanging Siva; than all the Mantras; than all the lords of 
Devas; than all the Yogins; than all the renouncers; than all 
the Karmins (the performers of holy rites); than all the Dharmins 
(pious ones); than all the holy Jhdnins (wise ones and 
knowers). 

19. “May you be pure and holy”. After saying this to the 
Daitya, the Devas went to heaven. After seeing and touching 
the Daitya, all people went to Hari’s city (i.e. Vaikuntha). 

20. All the three worlds became vacant. The whole of the 
city of Yama became void. Thereafter, Yama went to Brahma- 
loka along with Indra and others. 

21. All the Devas displaced by Gayasura spoke to Brahma: 
“O Pitamaha, please take back the authority which has been 
given by you (to us).” 

22-23. Then Brahma spoke to the Devas: “We shall go 
to the immutable Visnu”. Brahma and others said to Visnu: 
“Since the Asura has been granted the boon by you, all the 
people have been going to heaven by merely looking at him. All 
the three worlds have become void.” On being informed thus 
by the Devas, Vasudeva spoke thus to god Brahma: 

24. Go and request the demon thus, ‘Give your body for 
the purpose of YajnaV* Urged by Visnu, Brahma went there 
accompanied by the Suras and saw the great Asura. 

25. On seeing Brahma along with the Devas, the demon 
Gaya stood up and duly and devoutly worshipped them. 

Gayasura said : 

26. My birth has become fruitful today. My penance has 


44.27-39 


919 


become fruitful today, since Brahma has come as my guest. 
Everything is obtained by me today. 

27. O Yogin, O knovver of all the ancillaries of Yoga, O 
master of all the worlds, O father, O preceptor, O Brahma, I 
shall carry out the work for which you have come. 

Brahma said : 

28. All the holy centres of the earth seen by me while 
wandering over it, are not as pure as your body, for the purpose 
of Yajna. 

29. Holiness of the body has been attained by you, thanks 
to the grace of Visnu. Hence, O Asura, give unto me your 
pure body for the purpose of Yajna. 

Gaydsura said : 

30. O lordofDevas, I am blessed since my body is being 
asked for by you. If you perform Yaga (sacrifice) over my body 
the Pitrs in my family shall be contented. 

3!. It was by you alone that this body was created. It was 
by you that it was rendered holy and pure. The Yaga should 
necessarily take place for the benefit of everyone. 

32. After saying thus, during the Sveta Kalpa, the demon 
Gaya fell on the ground in a south-western direction on the 
mountain Kolahala. 1 

33. Keeping his head in the north and the feet in the south, 
the Daitya (lay there). After collecting together all the requisi¬ 
tes, Brahma mentally created the Rtviks. 

34-39. They were : Agnis'arman, Ampta, Saunaka, Yan- 
jali, Mrdu, Kumuthi, VedakaundBya, Harita, Kasyapa, Krpa, 
Garga, Kausika, Vasistha, the unchanging sage Bhargava, Vrddha 
Parasara, Kanva, Mandavya, Srutikevala, Sveta, Sutala, Damana, 
Suhotra, Kanka, Laukaksi of huge mighty arms, Jaiglsavya, the 
Brahmana Dadhipaficamukha, Rsabha, Karka, Katyayana, Go- 
bhila the sage of great fierce rites, Supalaka, Gautama, Vedasi- 
rovrata, Jatamalin, Avyagra, Catuhasa the terrible, Atreya, 


1. The Brahmayoni hill in Gaya, including the hill called Mup<?apr?tha 
which contains the impressions of Gadadhara’s feet De 20 i. 








g 2 Q Vayu Purina 

Angiras, Aupamanyu of great holy rites, Gokarna, Guhavasa, 
Sikhan^in and Umavrata. 

40. After creating these and other leading Brahmanas, god 
Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, performed the Yaga on 
the body of Gayasura. 

41-42. AgniSarma, without wasting his penance, created 
these five fires from his mouth : Daksinagni, Garhapatya, 
Ahavanlya, Satya and Avasathya. O celestial sage, the Yajnas 
are founded on these. To stabilise the Yajna, he gave Daksina 
to the Brahmanas. 

43. After performing the Purnahuti and taking the ablution 
of Avabhrtha, Brahma caused the sacrificial post to be brought 
along with the Suras and fixed it. 

44. The auspicious post was fixed in the Brahmasaras which 
is the most excellent of all lakes. Shaken and surprised, Brahma 
spoke to Dharmaraja: 

45. “There is a slab of stone in your house. Without hesita¬ 
tion bring it here at my behest and fix it on the head of the 
Daitya.” 

46. On hearing it, Yama placed the slab on the head of the 
demon to keep him steady. Even when the slab was placed, the 
demon shook along with the slab. 

47. He spoke to Rudra and other Devas, “O Devas, you 
all stand steady on the slab”. They said “Yes” and stood there 
(on it). 

48. The Devas pressed the slab with their feet (?) and noted 
that still the demon quaked. Then the distressed Brahma went 
to Visnu who was lying down in the ocean of milk. Bowing 
down and honouring the lord, he eulogised him. 

Brahma said : 

49. O Lord, O sovereign of the cosmic egg, I bow down 
to the lord of the worlds, the goal of persons possessing glory, 
the granter of worldly pleasures and salvation. 

50. Visvaksena spoke to Visnu,“O Lord, the lotus-born 
deity eulogises you”. Hari said, “You bring him”. Urged by 
Visnu, he brought him. Hari spoke to Aja (Brahma), “Tell me 
why you have come?” 


44.51-61 


921 


Brahma said : 

51-52. O Lord of Devas, when the Yaga was performed 
the demon Gaya moved even when the slab of stone of the 
form of the Devas was placed on his head. Even when Rudra 
and other Devas were stationed (over it) there, the demon 
quaked, O Madhava, be pleased to make it steady now. 

53. On hearing the words of Brahma, lord Hari pulled out 
a Murti (physical body/idol) from his person and gave it to 
Brahma to stop the restless quaking (of the demon). 

54. Bringing the idol with him, Brahma placed it on the 
slab of stone. Still the demon quaked, on seeing which, he 
(Brahma) invoked the lord again. 

55. Visnu came from the ocean of milk and stationed him¬ 
self on the slab, with the name of Janardana and Pundartka. 
The primordial Gadadhara (wielder of mace) himself stood 
there to steady the slab, for stabilising (Gaya or his body). 

56-57. For stabilising (Gaya or his body), Brahma divided 
himself into five, viz. Prapitamaha (Great-grandfather), Pitamaha 
(Grandfather), the master of Phalgu, Kedara and Kanakd- 
vara. Brahma as Vinayaka stood therein the form of an elephant. 
The Sun divided himself into three: Gayaditya, Uttararka and 
Daksinarka. 

58. Laksmi stood there in the name of Sita, Gauti in the 
name of Mangala and Sarasvatl stationed herself in the forms of 
the three, viz. Gayatii, Savitrl, and Trisandhya. 

59. Indra, Brhaspati, Pusan, the eight Vasus of great 
strength, Visvcdevas. thetwoAsvini Devas, Marnts, the leader 
of the universe and Devas along with the Yaksas, serpents, 
and Gandharvas remained there accompanied by their respective 
Saktis (powers). 

60. Since the Daitya was made steady by the primordial 
club and Hari stood there, he is famous as Adi-Gadadhara. 1 

61. Gayasura spoke to the Devas, “Why have I been dece¬ 
ived ? The pure body was given unto Brahma by me for the pur¬ 
pose of Yajiia. Would not have I been steady at the sheer ins¬ 
tance of Visnu ? 


1. Etymology quoted in TSS ( Trislhalisetu ), p. 338. 




922 


Vayu Purdna 


62. Why have I been harassed by Suras and Hari by 
means of the club ? May Devas be delighted for ever now 
that I have been tortured.” 

63. Gadadhara and others were pleased. They all simul¬ 
taneously spoke to Gayasura, “Speak out (choose) a boon. We 
are all very delighted”. Gayasura then spoke to Devas: 

64. “As long as the earth lasts, as long as the mountains, 
the Moon, the Sun and the stars remain, may Visnu, Brahma 
and Mahesvara stand on the slab along with all other Devas. 
Let the holy centre be named after me. 

65. The holy centre of Gaya shall extend to five krosas 
and Gayasiras to one krosa. Amidst them may all the holy 
centres grant welfare unto all men. 

66. By taking ablution etc. and performing Tarpana one 
should offer balls of rice. Then it is more fruitful. That man 
becomes a great soul and. uplifts a thousand members of his 
family. 

67. All of you, slay (here) for ever in manifest and un- 
manifest forms. May Gadadhara himself be the destroyer of all 
sins. 

68. May those on whose behalf the Sraddha has been 
perlormed and Pindas offered, go to lirahmaloka. May the 
sins due to p.rahmana slaughter etc. of those who report to this 
holy centre perish, 

69. May all the holy centres in heaven, firm?vinent and the 
earth such as Naimisa, Puskara, Ganga, Pravaga, Avimuktaka 
and others come here regularly, O Suras, and yield welfare unto 
all men. 

70. O hosts of Devas, of what avail is much talk. Unless 
one of you Devas stand (on this slab), I too will not be steady. 
This is the condition. Let it be strictly observed.” 

71. On hearing the words of Gayasura, Visnu and other 
Suras spoke, “All that you have requested for shall undoubt¬ 
edly be granted. 

72. After worshipping our feet (all the devotees) will attain 
the great goal.” When the boons were granted to him by Devas, 
the Daitya became delighted and remained steady. 

73-76. When Devas stood steady, the urborn deity 
(Brahma) gave unto Brahmanas fifty-five villages and the 


44.77-86 


923 


holy centre of Gaya extending to five krosas. He built divine 
houses endowed with all necessities of life and gave Kamadhenu 
(wish-yielding divine cow), Kalpavrksa (Ka I pa-tree) and Parijata 
and other trees also were given. A great river of milk, many 
streams of ghee, exudations of honey, streams of honey, lakes 
rich in curds etc., a lake of gold, many mountains of cooked 
food etc. were given. Brahma created different items of food 
and fruits and gave them all to the Brahman as. While giving 
these things, Aja said, “O leading Brahmanas, do not beg of 
others”. 

77-78. After giving away all these things and bowing to 
Adigadadhara Brahma went to Brahmaloka. The Brahmanas 
of Gaya officiated as priests of Dharma in his sacrifice at 
Dharmaranya and later begged him (for D'aksina). Out of 
covetousness they took monetary and other gifts at the sacrifice 
of Dharma. Brahma came there and cursed the Brahmanas. 1 

79-81. “O Brahmanas even when everything had been 
given by me, you coveted for more. Hence you will always be 
burdened with debts. The river shall flow with water only (and 
not milk). The mountains of foodstuffs will turn into those of 
rocks. All the rivers shall flow with water and your houses will 
be of mud. Kamadhenu and the Kalpa-tree will come back 
to my own region.” Cursed thus by Brahma all those Brahmanas 
imploringly said to the Unborn deity: 

82. “O lord, everything that had been given by you has 
gone off due to your curse. May you be kind enough to assign 
something for our livelihood”. 

83. On hearing those words, the sympathetic Brahma 
spoke tjius to the Brahmanas: “As long as the Moon and the 
Sun shine, you will be maintaining your livelihood by means of 
(the earning at the) holy centres. 

84. Those meritorious persons who perform Sraddhas in 
Gaya will attain Brahmaloka. I will also always be considered 
worshipped by those who worship you.” 

85-86. The stomach of the Daitya is overlapped by the 
mountain Viraja, the righteous. Near the well that forms its 


1. The story is repeated in NP. 11.44.16-18, AP. 114.36-38. 






924 


Vayu Parana 


umbilical cavity, goddess Viraja is stationed. One who offers 
pin^a etc. shall uplift twenty-one generations. His (the demon’s) 
feet had been made steady by the mountain Mahendra. A 
man who offers balls of rice there uplifts seven generations. 


CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 
Gaydmdhatmya ( Contd .): The Story of the Sila 
Narada said: 

1. What is the origin of that slab whereby Gayasura was 
kept steady and submissive? What is its form? What is its 
greatness? Please mention its name. 

Sanatkumara said: 

2. There was once a highly refulgent person named 
Dharma. He had mastered all sacred lore. His wife Visvarupa 
was devoted to the service of her husband. 

3. A daughter of great qualities and endowed with all 
the auspicious characteristics like LaksmI was born of her to 
Dharma. She was the chaste girl named Dharmavrata. 

4-5. Whatever good qualities there are in the three worlds, 
were present in her. Dharma searched for a befitting bride¬ 
groom to Dharmavrata in all the three worlds, but in vain. 
Then he told her, “Perform a penance for the sake of attaining 
a bridegroom”. She said, “So be it”, and went to the forest. 

6. That girl performed a very severe penance which could 
not be performed by anyone. She subsisted only on the air and 
spent ten thousand Yugas in that Sveta Kalpa. 

7. During the course of his wandering over the earth, the 
mental son of Brahma, well known by the name of Marici, saw 
that jewel of a girl. 

8. To that girl who was endowed with beauty and youth 
and who was engaged in the greatest penance, Marici asked, 
“Tell me who you are and to whom you belong. 


45.9-20 


925 


9. O timid lady, of excellent vows, you are a fascinating 
one by this beauty of yours. I am the son of Brahma, well- 
known as Marici. I have mastered the Vedas.” 

10. On hearing the words of Marici, the girl replied to 
the sage, “I am the daughter of Dharma. My name is Dharma¬ 
vrata. I am endowed with penance. 

11. O leading Brahmana, I am performing this great 
penance for the wooing of a good husband”. Marici thereupon 
spoke to Dharmavrata lovingly: 

12. “O woman of auspicious rites, by merely looking at 
me, you will become a great chaste lady. I am roaming day 
and night on the earth, only with a desire to meet with a chaste 
lady. 

13. If you have become a Pativrata, I shall resort to you 
Come unto me.as your bridegroom. There is no other girl in 
the world like you, and you will never have another bride- 
groom equal to me. 

14. Hence O Dharmavrata, be my lawfully wedded wife 
now”. Dharmavrata thereupon told the sage, “O sage of good 
rites, request Dharma (for my hand).” 

15. On hearing those words, he went to Dharma. Dhanna 
saw the (prospective) bridegroom like a mass of refulgence. He 
bowed to him and honoured him with the offer of seat and 
materials of worship. 

16. On being asked “Why have you come ?” Marici 
replied to Dharma, “While roaming over the whole earth for 
the sake of a (marriageable) girl, your excellent daughter has 
been seen by me. Give that daughter unto me. You will have 
welfare resulting therefrom.” 

17. After honouring him with Arghya etc., Dharma said 
to him, “So be it”. He brought Dharmavrata there and gave 
her to Marici. 

18. He granted him boons as well. He fulfilled the promise 
made. The Brahmana (Marici) took her to his hermitage along 
with Agnihotra (sacred fire). 

19. The sage sported in her company like Vi§nu with Sri 
or Sambhu with Parvatl or Brahma with Sarasvatl. 

20. Marici begot of her a hundred sons comparable even 





___ Vayu Parana 

926 J 

with Visnu. Once Marici went to the forest for the sake of 
flowers and fruits and returned (very tired). 

21. As he was tired, he told thus to his chaste wife, “After 
taking food massage my feet, even as I lie down on the couch”. 

22. Dharmavrata said, “So be it”. As the sage lay down on 
his bed, she rubbed his feet with ghee and began to massage 
them with eagerness. 

23-24. Even as the sage was becoming sleepy Brahma 
came to that place. She was placed in a dilemma, “Shall I 
continue to massage the feet or honour the Jagadguru (the pre¬ 
ceptor of the world).” Then deciding to honour him, as he was 
Guru of Gurus, she stood up. 

25. She offered Arghya, Padya etc. and worshipped Brahma. 
Brahma took rest on a couch after due worship. 

26. In the meantime, the husband got up from his bed. 
Unable to see Dharmavrata, the Brahmana became infuriated 
and cursed her. 

27. “Abandoning the massage of my feet and thereby dis¬ 
obeying my behest, you have gone elsewhere. Hence you will be 
consumed by this fire of curse. Be a slab of stone.” 

28. On being cursed by her husband, she spoke to Marici 
in a great fury, “While you were sleeping, Brahma, your father 
and preceptor, arrived here. 

29-30. It was your duty to have got up and worshipped 
your father. O sage, strictly adhering to pious activities (as a 
wife), I carried out your duty. Hence I am guiltless. Still I have 
been cursed by you. So I too curse you. O husband, you will 
have that curse undoubtedly from Mahadeva.” 

31-32. On seeing her husband agitated, she too became 
distressed. She went to Prajapati and bowed to him, as he was 
lying down. She kindled the fire Gdrhapatya with fuel and stood 
in its middle. There she performed a very terrible penance. 
Similarly Marici who too had been cursed, performed a terrible 
penance. 

33. Indra and others who were distressed due to the penance 
of Marici sought refuge in Hari. 

34. They spoke to Hari who was sleeping in the ocean of 
milk:‘ c O Hari, we are extremely distressed due to the penance 


45.35-47 


927 


of the chaste lady and the sage. O Kesava, save the three 
worlds.” 

35. On hearing the words of Indra and others, Visnu went 
up to Dharmavrata. In the meantime, Aja (Brahma) woke up. 
The Devas including Kesava, spoke to Dharmavrata who was in 
the middle cf the fire: 

36. “O chaste lady, who has the capacity to perform 
penance in the middle of the fire? But that has been achieved 
by you. It is really a thing that terrifies all worlds. 

37. O knower of Dharmas, choose any boon that you desire 
from us”. On hearing the words of Visnu and others, Dharma¬ 
vrata spoke to the Devas: 

38. “I am unable to turn back the curse of my husband 
even with all my power. Let that curse given by Marlci to me 
recede.” 

39-41. On hearing the words of Dharmavrata, the Devas 
spoke to her again, "O daughter of Dharma, of pious rites, 
this curse has been given to you by a great sage. It cannot be 
nullified by Devas and Brahmanas. Hence choose any other boon, 
so that the Dharma proclaimed by the Vedas will be established 
in the three worlds, O lady of auspicious vows”. On hearing 
the words of Devas, Dhamavrata spoke to the Devas: 

42. <c O immortal gods, if you are not able to redeem me 
from the curse of my husband, please grant me an excellent boon 
like this. 

43. I shall then become a slab of stone which will be the 
most auspicious and the holiest in the whole of the Cosmic Egg. 
I shall be more sanctifying than rivers, lakes, Devas etc. 

44. I shall be holier than the sages, ascetics, the chief of 
Devas and others. Let all those Lingas in the three worlds, 
whether manifest or unmanifest, abide for ever on my body in 
the form of a holy place. 

45. Let all the holy centres, the chiefs of the constellations, 
all the Devas and the Devls (goddesses) and the sages stand by 
(on me). 

46-47. Brahma, Visnu and Rudra shall mark theirfootprints 
on me. The five fires andKumara and others be stationed in their 
multiforms. The Devas are stationed in their embodied and 






928 


Vayu Puram 


uncmbodied forms as well as through their foot-prints. They are 
stationed on the earth over the slab in the form of idols, within 
the dimension of a krosa. 

48. All the people will become purified on seeing that slab 
which is the destroyer of all great sins. The performer of Sradd- 
has becoming pure, will be authorised in the holy rites and will 
attain Brahmaloka. 

49. Let all those who after taking their baths in all the sac¬ 
red waters stationed on the rocky slab, perform Tarpana and 
then the Sraddha along with the offerings of Pinda attain Brahma¬ 
loka. 

50-51. Let the visible holy centre of Gadadharabe the most 
excellent of all excellent holy centres. May those who stay there 
or die there go to the region of Brahma. Let the holy centres of 
Varanasi and Prayaga stay therewith the name ofPurusottama. 
Let the holy centres named Gangasagara stay in the holy spot of 
Phalgu. The holiest of spots is presided over by Gadadhara. By 
performing Sraddha of dead persons, Pitrs will attain salvation. 

52. May Jarayujas (viviparous beings), Antfajas (oviparous), 
Svedajas (sweat-born beings) or Udbhids (vegetable kingdom) 
attain the form of Visnu after abandoning their bodies on the 
slab. 

53. Just as all Yajfias become completely accomplished 
when Hari is worshipped, so also let the Sraddha, Tarpana and 
ablution be everlasting here. 

54. Let those who perform the Japas of the mantras of the 
leading Suras on my body become Siddhas and the masters of 
Siddhis ere long. 

55. It is certain that a man who performs Sraddha etc. 
uplifts thousand Pitrs of his family including himself and leads 
them to Visnuloka, the region of Visnu. 

56. O leading Suras, whatever excellent (sacred) rivers 
there are such as Ganga etc., whatever auspicious eddies 
there are whether oceans, or important lakes such as Manasa 
etc., let them be conducive to salvation of the persons who 
perform Sraddhas. 

57-60. Let the Devatas go in their embodied forms in some 
places and in other places let them not go; Visnu is one and 


45.61—46.2 


929 


single; but he is glorified by learned men as having three 
Murlis (physical forms). Let the sages and all the groups of 
Gandharvas stand on the slab of stone along with the Devas 
and all the holy centres. The Sila (slab of stone) shall be called 
Sarvadeva-svariipa (having the form of all the Devas). Let it (the 
(slab of stone) stay as long as the Cosmic Egg lasts. Those who 
perform Japa and penance on my physical body in the form of 
Rocky Slab, shall also be permitted to perform Homa in the fire. 
May it be eternal. Let the Sraddha be eternal, so also be the 
Japas, Homas and the penances. Let them stay on me in the 
form of huge mountain 5 ’. 

61-62. On hearing the words of the chaste lady, the Devas 
spoke to her, “Undoubtedly whatever has been requested by 
you shall take place. When you remain steady on the head of 
Gayasura we shall stay there in the form of footprints and 
remain there steadily. 55 After giving the evidence, of having 
granted the boon, the Devas vanished there itself. 


CHAPTER FORTYSIX 

Gayamahdtmya ( Contd .) : Sila-tirtha and Other 
Sacred Spots 


Sanatkumara said : 

1. O Narada, listen. I shall recount the greatness of the 
slab of rock, that confers salvation. Devas and the prominent 
sages sing of the greatness of the slab. 

2. That rocky slab situated on the earth, has the forms of 
Devas. It is highly sanctifying. The wonderful Silatirtha 1 is 
well known in the three worlds. 


1. Sila TTrtha, the same as Muntf aphtha, as the Sila was placed on the 
back of the (shaven) head of Gaya (v.12 below, also TSS,p. 337). It has the 
combined sanctity of itself and that of the sacred head of Gaya (v.8 below). 
’The area of Sila or the head of Gayasura is 3 Sq. Kms. 




930 


Vayu Purana 


3. On touching it, all the people in the worlds went to 
Hari’s city (Vaikuntha) . When the three worlds became void, 

Yama’s city became empty thereby. «, , - 

4. Accompanied by Indra and others \ ama went to Brahma 

and reported (to him) the wonderful event, O Pl ^ ha > ta ^ 

back this staff of office as well as the assignment offered to me 

as Yama (the controller of the world).” 

5. Brahma then said to Yama, “Keep it in your house . 
Advised by Brahma, Dharmaraja retained the slab m his house. 

6 Yama continued to carry out his duty, viz. the chastise¬ 
ment etc. of the sinners. Thus the weighty slab became well 
known in the universe. 

7 The slab having the forms and features of Devas is 
on a par with Brahma, Visnu, lord Mahesvara and Meru, 
in the whole of the Cosmic Egg. 

8. Since it was held (laid) on the head of Gayasura due to 
its heaviness, the happy combination of two holy things is the 
bestower of salvation on Pitps. 


Sacred Places Connected with Sila 


Part of the Sild. 

Covered by (Verse Nos.) 

Middle (Belly) 

Mt.Xdipala (68) 

Middle Region 

Mt. Naga (26) 

Foot 

Mt. Prabhasa (13) Its cor 
Phalgu 
(17). 

Protruding 

(1) Preta-Siia (15) 

Toe 

(2) Prabhasesa (14) 

Left Leg 

Prcta-Parvata (70) 

Left foot 

Mt. Abhvudyantaka (42) 

Right-hand side 

Mt. Kunda (35-36) 

Mt. Bhasma Kuta (56) 

Mt. Udyantaka (46) 

Left hand 

Mt. Vaditraka (44) 

Mt. Grdhrakuta 

Muntfapr$tba 

The main base of the slab 


Other details 


Rama tirtha 


Vidyarthi (p.6) in the tabular statement of locational and functional 
elaboration of the sacred centre at Gaya includes temples of Rama and Siva, 
Yama’s sacred centre and the famous tree (of spirits) under Rama-Sila (hill¬ 
top cluster), and Siva, Ga^esa, Brahma Kun<ia and Phalgu under 
Ramasila (foot-hill cluster) while Pretasila, Pretabhavanl, Visxju, Rama- 
kuntfa, Kaka-bali under Preta Sila cluster. 



46.9-20 


931 


9. The unborn deity (Brahma) performed Hayamedha 
(horse sacrifice) on the combination of the two holy things. 
On seeing Visnu etc. who came to receive their due shares (in 
the sacrifice), the slab requested : 

10. “All of you take the vow of standing on the slab (for 
ever) to enable Pitrs to attain liberation”. Saying “So be it” 
Vi§nu and other Devas stood on the Slid (the slab of rock). 

11. In accordance with their previous promise, Devas 
stayed on the Si la in embodied and unembodied forms either 
through their idols of stone or footprints. 

12. Since the Sila was stationed on the top of the tonsured 
head of the Daitya, it was called Mundaprsthadri. It is the 
bestower of Brahmaloka upon Pitrs. 

13. The foot of the Sila is concealed by the mountain Pra¬ 
bhasa. It is called Prabhasa because it is illuminated by Bhas- 
kara (the Sun-god). 

14. Silanguttha (the thumb of the Slid) has come out of 
Prabhasa by piercing through it. The lord presiding over Angu- 
spha section is glorified as Prabhasesa. 

15. A portion of the Sildngusfha is remembered as PreiaSild 
(the Rock of the Dead). If Pindas are offered to the dead on this 
rock, the dead man becomes free from the state of a goblin. 

16. A devotee should perform his ablution at the place 
where the Prabhasa mountain meets the great river. Rama i 
his bath here in the company of the gentle lady (i.e. ita). 
Hence this is remembered as ‘Ramatirtha’. 

17. Here Rama was requested by the great river, "O Rama, 
take your bath (in my waters).” Since then it became well 
known in the three worlds as ‘Ramatirtha . 

18. Mantra—“Let all those evil sins committed by me in 

my hundred and odd former births, become destroyed due t 

my ablution in Ramatirtha. A 

19. A man who takes his bath repeating this iv an ra a 

performs Sraddha and offers Pindas in 

Visnuloka (When the great river requested him), Ram , 
elderbrodier of Bharata, said, -So beif and stayod her. aocom- 

panied by Slta. _ ^ 

20. If a devotee repeats this Mantra— “O ama. 


932 


Vayu Purdna 


Rama of mighty long arms, O the bestower of fearlessness on 
Devas, I bow unto you, the lord Devas. Let my sin become des¬ 
troyed 0 : 

21. If the devotee takes his bath repeating this Mantra and 
performs the Sraddha along with the offering of Pinzas , his Pitrs 
become released from the state of a ghost and attain Pitrtva 
(the state of Pitrhood). 

22. Mantra— cc O lord of Devas, you are the waters. You 
are the lord of the luminaries. O lord, destroy my sins commit¬ 
ted mentally, verbally and physically”. 

23. After bowing to the lord of Prabhasa, one should go 
unto the refulgent Siva. After making obeisance to Sambhu, one 
should perform the oblation to Yama. 

24-25. When Rama had gone to the forest, Bharata came 
to this mountain and performed the offerings of Pinda etc. to 
the Pitrs. The lord (Bharata) installed the idols of Rama, Slta, 
Laksmana and the sages. In the holy hermitage of Bharata, the 
foot-print of Matanga is seen by all men. It is always surround¬ 
ed by highly meritorious men. 

26. It is established as a model for people. It contains 
the essentials of piety. One who performs Srdddha in Matanga - 
pada enables all the Pitrs to cross the ocean of existence (sam- 
sara ). 

27. A man who takes bath in Ramatlrtha and wor¬ 
ships Sita and bows down to RameSvara is not reborn as an 
embodied being. 

28. The middle region of the Sila is again covered by a 
mountain. It was urged by Dharmaraja by saying “Na Gaccha — 
Do not go”. Hence it is called Naga (mountain). 

29. “Yamaraja and Dharmaraja attempted to make (Gaya- 
sura) steady. I give Bali (oblation) unto them for the sake of 
liberation of (my) ancestors. 

30. There are two dogs of dark and variegated colour. 
They are born of the family of Vaivasvata (i.e. of Yama). I am 
giving Bali unto them. May they refrain from violence. 

31. May the crows stationed in east, west, north-west- 
south and south-west accept the balls of rice offered by me (on 
the ground). 


46.32-42 


933 


32. O strong one, you are Yama; you are Yama’s messen¬ 
ger. You are a crow. Eating the oblations, destroy the sins 
committed during the seven births.” 

33. When Rama went to the forest, Bharata came to this 
mountain. After offering the Pindas etc. to the Pitrs, Ramesa 
was installed by him here. 

34. After the bath and the worship of RameSa accompanied 
by Rama and Slta, one should perform Srdddha with the offer¬ 
ings of Pin<f<u. Such a pious soul shall go to Visnu’s abode along 
with the Pitrs and hundreds of the members of his family. 

35-36. On the right-hand side of the Sild, the Kunda- 
parvata (mountain) is established. Various deities are installed 
there. Timiraditya, ISana, Bharga—these are the forms of 
Mahesvara. The Vahni, two Varunas and the four Rudras 
yield liberation unto the Pitrs. After going to the hermitage of 
Bharata, the devotee should bow to them and worship them. 

37. He is liberated from all major sins as well as minor 
ones along with his Pitrs. O celestial sage, a man can take bath 
anywhere in the hermitage of Bharata. If he performs a Srdddha 
etc. the fruit thereof is not lost even after a Kalpa. 

38. Really the Sraddha performed anywhere in Gaya is 
never perishing. Still they say that the Japas, Homas and 
penances and anything offered (as religious gift) at Bharata’s 
hermitage are of infinite nature. 

39. There are four idols of Ravi (the Sun-god) in the forms 
of the four Yugas. On being seen, touched and worshipped, 

they bestow salvation on the Pitrs. 

40. There are two deities, viz. Muktivamana and Taraka 
Brahman. These deities are the boats for those who are over¬ 
whelmed by the ocean of worldly existence. Brahman is 
Taraka (that which enables one to cross the ocean of Samsara) 

of all people dead and alive. . 

41. He who sees Trivikrama, Purusottama and Brahma 
becomes a pious soul and attains the greatest goal along with 
the Pit^s 

42 At the left foot of the Sild there is the mountain Abhyu- 
dyantaka established. A devotee who offers Pindas there, 
leads his Pitrs to Brahmapura. 


934 


Vayu Purana 


43. Brahma performed his sacrifice along with Suras 
near the Naimisa forest. That Tlrtha is called Mukhyatirtha (the 
chief of holy waters). Devas are stationed at its feet. 

44. O Narada, the excellent among the sages, whatever 
inauspicious deeds there may be, perish in the three Padas 
(spots) in those holy centres. 

45. The Naimisa forest is holy and resorted to by meri¬ 
torious persons such as Vyasa, Suka, Paila, Kanva, Vedhas, 
Siva, Hari. 

46. By their mere sight, a man is liberated from all sins. 
On the right-hand side of the Sila, there is the Udyantaka 
mountain. 


Some variants (Pafhantara Verses)—additional verses after verse 46. 

1-2. This mountain is established. One who offers Piriqlas 
there leads Pitfs to the city of god Brahma. Kunda and Udyan¬ 
taka were created by him by means of his penance. Brahma 
stayed there along with Savitri and Kumara (i.e. Sanatkumara). 

3. Haha and Huhu and the others made the sound of 
music. The mountains Kunda and Udyantaka were full of 
songs and the sound of musical instruments. 

4. It is here that the holy sage Agastya performed an 
austere penance. From Brahma, he received the boon of great¬ 
ness rarely achieved on the earth. He secured Lopamudra as his 
wife and the great goal (Mok?a) to his Pitrs. 

5. At midday the devotees should take their bath and 
worship Savitn. The Brahmana will become a master of the 
Vedas and very rich for a crore of births (?) 

6. By taking ablution in the Agastya Pada and by offering 
Pindas there, one becomes a pious soul and attains Brahmaloka 
along with the Pitrs. He is worshipped even by the heaven- 
dwellers. 

7. A man who enters Brahmayoni and comes out 
attains the greatest Brahman. He is liberated from the miseries 
of wombs (i.e. rebirth). 


46 (Addl) 8-20 935 

8. A man who bows to Gayakumara attains Brahmana- 

hood. One who performs ablution in Somakunda leads the Pitrs 
to Somaloka (Lunar world). ™ rs 

9 . The oblation to the crows at the Kakasila (the slab of 
crows) is conducive to freedom from indebtedness. After 
bowing to Svargadvaresvara, one attains Brahmapura through 
heaven. 

10. One who offers Pindas at Vyomaganga becomes free 
from impurities and leads the Pitrs to heaven. There is a heap 
of Bhasma at the right-hand side of the Sila. O Narada, the 
devotee should take bath with this Bhasma from the mountain 
called Bhasmakutadri. 

11. Prapitamaha (Brahma) is stationed on the Vafa as 
Vatesvara (Lord of the holy banyan tree). One who offers 
Pindas at the holy Mat'angapada leads the Pitrs to heaven. 

12-13. Ahead of it is Rukmini Kunda and to the west is 
the river Kapila. Kapilesa is on the banks of the river. On the 
new moon day, one should take bath in Kapila and worship 
Kapilesa. If he performs Sraddha in MaheSikunda, he shall 
attain heaven. 

14-15. Gauri, under the name of Mahgala there, grants all 
types of prosperity and glory. Janardana is near the Bhasmakufa. 
One who offers Pindas in his hand, with mantras, if for oneself 
and without gingelly seeds, in the left hand, if for others and 
mixed with curds for those who are alive—all these attain Visnu- 
loka. 

16. Mantra—“O Janardana, this Pind a is offered by me in 
your hand; give it unto him who dies in Gayasirsa . 

17. Mantra—“This Pinda has been given, O Janardana, in 
your hand. At Gayasirsa this must be given to me when I am 
dead”. 

18-19. O Janardana, obeisance unto you. Hail to you of 
the form of the Pitrs. O Lord of Pitrs* obeisance to } ou. bow to 
you, O cause of salvation, O Janardana, O lord ^a f™ 1 * 
you assume the form of the Pitrs at Gaya yourself. Obeisance 
be to you, O bestower of salvation on the Pitrs. 

20. After meditating on Pundarikaksa (Vi»u) one becomes 
released from the three forms of indebtedness, ertam y peop 
Wain heaven after worshipping Pund ar tkaksa. 


936 


Vayu Puratfa 


21. Bhima knelt on his left knee and bowed to Janardana. 
After performing Sraddha along with the offerings of Pintfa, he 
attained Visnuloka along with his brothers. 

22-24. On the right foot of the Sila, the mountain Preta- 
kuta 1 is held by Dharmaraja with both of his feet. He kicked it 
off with his feet on account of the weight of sins. In the forest 
of Kara-grahana, many have stayed behind (unliberated) in the 
form of departed souls (ghosts). They are the cause of obstacles. 
The Tirtha confers salvation on the Pitrs through the perfor¬ 
mance of Sraddha etc. 

25. Pretakufa attained sacredness due to the contact of 
the Sila. Devas are stationed in the form of footprints on 
Pretakufa. After performing Sraddha etc. there, one should get 
the Pitrs released from ghost-hood. 

26. O Brahmana, those who have the terrible forms of a 
ghost near the Sila wander over the earth and in Yama’s 
world. 

27. On the holy head of Gayasura which is devoid of ghosts 
etc., Brahma and other Devas are stationed and he attains 
sacredness. 

28. Among Kikatas (southern Magadha) Gaya is the 
holiest. Rajavana and Rajagrha are holy. The hermitage of 
Gyavanais holy. The river is many times holy (than the rest). 

29. Hemadanqia and the mountain Hemakuta are in 
Vaikuntha. One who performs Sraddha and offers Pinzas etc. 
there leads the Pitrs to Brahmapura. 

30. On the right foot of the Sila, the mountain Grdhrakufa 
is held by Dharmaraja in order to stabilise (Gaya). It is very 
holy. 

31-32. Sages performed their penance there in the form of 
Grdhras (vultures) and attained liberation. Hence this is called 
Grdhrakufa. GrdhreSvara is stationed there. A man who sees 
Grdhresvara attains Sambhu’s region. After bowing down to 
Grdhravata one shall achieve one’s desire and attain heaven. 


1. Pretak&ta, G r dhrakuta, Bhasmakuta etc. are the tops of hillocks 
near Gaya. 



46 (Addl.) 33-38-46.47-5 


937 

33. He who offers Pintfas in the G r dhraguha (vulture-cave) 
attains Sivaloka. There is the Mahesvari Dhara (the current of 
Mahesvara). He who offers Pinzas there, leads the Pitj-s to 
heaven. 

34. There is a lake called Mulaksetra. He who offers 
Pinzas there, attains Brahmaloka. After visiting Siva he attains 
freedom from indebtedness and salvation from sins. He attains 
Siva himself after visualizing Siva. 

35. The middle of the Sila (the belly portion) is over¬ 
lapped (covered) by the mountain Adipala. It is here that 
Vighnesa, the destroyer of obstacles, stands in the form of an 
elephant. He who offers Pinzas at t h e umbilical region (of the 
god) leads his Pitjrs to Brahmapura. 

36. On the hips (i.e. ridges) of the mountain Mundapr$tha, 
there was a big forest of Devadaru trees. One shall destroy one’s 
sins by seeing the mountain Aravinda on Muntfaprstha. 

37. A certain sage performed penance here in the form of a 
Kraunca (heron). The mountain was marked by his feet. Hence 
it is called Krauncapada. 

38. One who takes bath there in the water reservoir, leads 
three generations to heaven. Lak$mlsa (Visnu) is stationed on 
the Sila in the manifest and unmanifest forms along with 
Devas. Hence the Sila is full of Devas. 

[End of Addl. Verses] 

47. That mountain was brought by the noble-souled 
Agastya. Brahma and Hara performed a fierce penance there. 

48. There is the excellent Kunqla (Pool) of Agastya which 
is of a very rare excellence in the three worlds. It was here that 
the eight sages achieved Siddhi after performing penance.. They 
attained final beatitude. After bowing to the eight sages in the 
Kunda, the pilgrim will be able to lead the Pitrs to Brahma’s 
city. 

49. O celestial sage, an auspicious prominent mountain 
was established on the left hand of the Sila . It is always re¬ 
sounding with the sounds of musical instruments and divine 
symphony. It is called mountain Vaditraka. 

50. Even today Vidyadharas, accompanied by hosts of 
Gandharvas and Apsaras-s sing divine songs in chorus. 

51. Mohana, Sunitha, Sailuja, Mohanottama, Parvata> 


ggg Vayu Purana 

Narada, Dhyani, Sangitl, Pu?padantaka, Haha, Huhu and others 
perforin musical concert. 

52. Similarly the Gandharva named Citraratha surrounded 
by all the Gandharvas, sings sweet songs of great festivities on 
the mountain. 

53. Hence that mountain is resorted to by Devas for 
ever even today. Hara, the lord of Devas, is desirous of applying 
Bhasma all over the body like an unguent. 

54. Rudra accompanied by Parvatl rejoices on that moun¬ 
tain resonant with music. He is worshipped as he is the greatest 
goal of the Pitrs. He should be meditated upon. 

55. The greatest Atman (Deity) in Gaya is either the lord 
of the cows or Gadadhara (the wielder of the mace). O sage, 
t hanks t0 the worship of Rudra, the Maya pertaining to Vi?nu 
becomes quelled. 

56. On the right-hand side of the Sila, the mountain 
Bhasmaku^a is held by Dharmaraja. Agastya stays there with 
his wife. 

57-58. One who takes bath at the spot of Agastya and 
offers Pindas, goes to Brahmaloka. It was from Brahma that he 
secured the excellent boon of greatness in the world, Lopamudra 
as wife and the highest goal (liberation) to his forefathers. 
There, on seeing Agastyesvara, one is absolved of the sin of 
Brahmana-slaughter. 

59. On seeing Agastya along with his wife, one leads the 
Pitrs to Brahmapura. Dandin performed a penance on the 
mountain south of Sitadri. 

60-61. There is a Vafa (banyan tree) called Vatesvara. 
Prapitamaha (god Brahma) is stationed there. Beyond that is 
Rukminikunda. To the west of it is the river Kapila. Kapilesa 
is on the banks of the river. When the New Moon and Monday 
coincide with each other, a devout man must take bath in 
Kapila and worship the lord of Kapila. If after that, 
Sraddha is performed and Pindas are offered the Pitrs shall 
attain salvation. 

62. There is a current of fire coming from the excellent 
mountain. There is the pool called Sarasvata Kunda. It has 
been created by Sarasvati. 


46.63-73 


939 


63. Lord Sukra stayed there with his sons Sanda, Amarka 
and others. O excellent sage, a man who performs Sraddha and 
offers Pinda etc. in the various spots at the feet of the eminent 
sages, enables the Pitrs to cross (the ocean of worldly existence) 

64. On the left-hand side of the Sila there stands the moun¬ 
tain Grdhrakuta. The great sages assuming the form of cranes 
performed penance there and became Siddhas. 

65. Hence the mountain is called Grdhrakuta. The deity 
Grdhresvara is stationed there. A man who visits and bows 
to Grdhresvara shall achieve the region of Sambhu. 

66. Pie who offers Pindas on Grdhrakuta and in the 
cave, attains Sivaloka. One who bows to the Vata (the banyan 
tree) on Grdhrakuta attains all his desires and goes to heaven. 

67. On seeing Siva, one attains freedom from indebtedness 
release from sins, and goes unto Siva. There is a Sulaksetra 
(shrine of the trident) there. One who offers Pindas there, leads 
the Pitrs to heaven. 

68. The centre of the Si la is overlapped by the ‘ mountain 
Adipala. Vighnesa, the destroyer of obstacles, stays there is the 
form of an elephant. On visiting him a devotee is freed from 
obstacles. He leads the Pitrs to Brahmapura. 

69. There was a forest of Devadaru trees on the ridge of 
the mountain Mundaprstha. After visiting the mountains Mun- 
daprstha and Aravindadri, one quells all sins. He who offers 
Pindas in the umbilical region of Gaya called Susumna (like 
the nerve Susumna in human body) leads his Pitrs to heaven. 

70. On the left leg of the Sila, the mountain Pretaparvata 
was established by Dharmaraja. The mountain is called Preta- 
sila because of its impurity due to sins. 

71. The mountain was kicked off to a great distance. 
Pretakuta was freed from sins and attained sanctity due to the 
contact with the Sila. 

72. There is a pool called Pretakunda there. Devas are 
stationed at its foot. Performing Sraddha etc. in the Kunda, one 
shall relieve the Pitrs of goblinhood. 

73. There are many of the ghosts staying separately and 
causing obstacles to those men who perform Sraddha etc. for 
the sake of the liberation of Pitrs. The ghosts assume the 
form of archers and catch hold of the hands (of the pilgrims). 


940 


Vayu Purana 


74. There is a rock on Muntfaprstha where Mahadeva 
stays. On seeing it all people become relieved of heinous and 

lesser sin's. . „ „ . _ . , 

75. Gayasiras is holy and devoid of all sms. It is devoid 

of ghosts etc. Hence it is highly sanctifying and excellent. 

76. In the Kikata land (i. e. the territories comprising 
southern Bihar) Gaya is the holiest centre. TheRajagrha forest 
is also holy. The hermitage of Gyavana is another holy spot. 
The river Punahpuna (?) is also holy. 

77. There are other holy spots, viz. Vaikuntha, Lohadanda, 
Grdhrakuta and Sonaka. By performing Sraddha etc. here, a 
pilgrim leads all the Pitrs to Brahmapura. 

78. Assuming the form of a heron, a sage performed pena¬ 
nce on the ridge of Mundaprstha. Since the mountain is 
marked by the foot-prints of the heron, it is remembered as 
Krauncapada. 

79. One who takes bath in the water reservoir there, shall 
lead the entire family to heaven. An oblation offered to crows 
on the rock Kakasila, is conducive to relief from indebted¬ 
ness. 

80. The two sages Lomasa and Lomaharsana performed a 
great penance on the ridge of Mundaprstha. Both of them 
attained Siddhi of the highest magnitude. 

81 -85. Many excellent rivers had been invoked by Lomasa 1 , 
viz. Mahanadi, Saravati, Vetravati, Candrabhaga, Sarasvati, 
Kaveri, Sindhuvlra, the excellent river Candana, VasisthI, 
Sarayu, Ganga, Yamuna, Gandakl, Indira, MahavaitaranI, 
Niksara that originates from heaven, Alakananda, the 
northern river called Kanaka, Kausiki, Brahmada, all these 
are the absolvers of everyone’s sin. The two rivers Krsnavalva 
and Garmavati are the bestowers of salvation. They were called 
the most excellent of all rivers by Lomaharsa daringly. O 
excellent sage, by means of the power of his penance, Narmada 
also was invoked by him. He who takes bath in any of these 
rivers and offers Pindas leads his Pitrs to heaven. 

1. Like other Sthala-purana?, this text claims all important rivers in 
India to be present at Gaya. Small streams and streamlets are supposed to 
represent big rivets like Ganga, Yamuna, Kaveri etc. 



46.86-94 


941 


86. A man who enters the holy spot Brahmayoni and 
comes out of it, attains the greatest Brahman freed from the 
distress of wombs (i.e. re-birth). 

8? ._ A man^ who bathes in the Puskarini (holy pond) 
Niksara and performs Sraddha etc. on the divine Krauncapada 
regularly for three days, leads his Pit r s even if they were 

Paucapapins (those guilty of the five heinous sins) to 
heaven. y 


88. Janardana stays in Bhasmakufa. He who offers 
Pindas m his hands whether for himself or for others-if it is 
for one’s own self it must be without gingelly seeds (and be 
offered) with the sacred thread in the Savya (hanging from the 
left shoulder) position; and if for those who are alive, it must 
be mixed with curds all these go to Visnuloka (Vaikuntha) . 

89. Mantra: “O Janardana, the Pinda that I offer in your 
hand, may please be given by you to that person for whom 
I have given it to thee now. It be given to him after he is 
dead, O lord.” 

90. Mantra. “O Janardana, this Pinda is given into your 
hand by me. When I reach the end of my time (when I am 
dead) this must be given to me at Gayasiras. 1 

91. O Janardana, obeisance to you. Bow to you, granter 
of liberation to the Pitrs. O lord of Pitrs, obeisance to you. 
Hail toyou in the form of Pitrs.” 

92. In Gaya, Janardana assumed the form of Pitrs 
himself. On visiting that Pundarikaksa (lotus-eyed god Visnu) 
one is released from three-fold indebtedness. 

93. O Pundarikaksa, obeisance to you, O releaser from 
the three-fold indebtedness. O Laksmlkanta (Lord of LaksmI), 
obeisance to you, be the granter of liberation to the Pitrs.” 

94. Kneeling on his left knee, Bhlma bowed to Janardana. 
After performing the Sraddha along with the offerings of Pindas, 
he attained Brahmaloka in the company of his brothers. He 
became a pious soul and uplifted a hundred forefathers in his 
family. 


1. Cf. NP. II.47.63b-65. 





942 


Faya Parana 


95 . On the Sila, the lord of LaksmI stays both in the 
manifest form as well as in the unmanifest form, along with 
Devas. Hence the Sila is Devamaj i (full of Devas). 


CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 

Gayamahatmya ( Contd .): The Glory of Adigadidhara 

Narada enquired : 

1. How did the primordial Gadadhara (wielder of the 
mace) stay in the manifest form ? How did he stay both as 
manifest and unmanifest ? 

2. How did the mace (Gada) originate and how did he 
come to be known as Adigadadhara ? How did the Gadalola 
spot become so (sanctifying) as to wipe off all sins. 

Sanatkumara replied: 

3. There was an Asura named Gada whose body was very 
hard and adamantine. By performing a very terrible penance 
he secured boons from Brahma. When he was requested, he 
gave up to Brahma the bones of his body which is very difficult 
to part with. 

4. Urged by Brahma, Visvakarma made the wonderful club 
(out of it). He turned the bone of the demon in the lathe that 
could crush even Vajra (thunderbolt) and kept it in the heaven 
itself. 

5. After a great deal of time, in the Svayambhuva Mau- 
vantara, the demon Heti, the son of Brahma, performed a very 
terrible penance.* 

6-7. For a hundred thousand divine years he subsisted only 
on the air. Then looking up, he stood on his toes with hands 
raised up. Then he stood on a single foot for a long time taking 
in only air or dry leaves. Brahma and others were pleased by 


*. For the Story of Heti cf AP. 114.26-27 and NP. II (i-e- uttara) 
47.9-16. 



47.8-17 


943 


his penance. He chose the boons from them, the bestowers of 
the boons. 

8 . “I should become very mighty. I cannot be killed by 

Devas, Daityas, or human beings with any kind of Sasha or 
Astra (ordinary weapons and miraculous missiles). I should not 
be killed by the discus and other weapons of Krsna (Visnu) 
Isana and others”. ’ ‘' Jy 

9. Saying “So be it”, they vanished. Heti conquered 
Devas and began to rule as Indra. Brahma, Hara and others 
became afraid (of him). 

10. They sought refuge in Hari. They told him, “Kill 
Heti . Hari said to them, “O Suras, this Heti cannot be 
killed by Devas or Asuras. 

!,V ^ ve a 8 reat weapon unto me whereby I can kill that 
Heti”. When told thus, Devas gave the (bone) club to 
Hari. 

12. At the outset he held that (bone) club, so he was call¬ 
ed, ‘Gadadhara” by Devas. After striking Heti with his 
(bone) club, he went to heaven along with Devas. 

13. In order to steady the rocky slab of Gayasuraiiras, he 
went there armed with this Gada to stabilise the Sila. Hence he 
is called Adigadadhara. 1 

14-17. Adigadadhara is manifest in the form of Silas 2 
(rocky slabs and mountains). Through Mundaprstha mountain, 
Prabhasa mountain, the mountains Udyanta, Gitanada, Bhas- 
makuta, Gfdhrakuta, Pretakuta, Adipala and Aravindaka, 
Pancaloka, Saptaloka, Vaikuntha, Lohadandaka, Krauncapada, 
Aksayavata, Phalgutlrtha, Madhus'rava, Dadhikulya, Madhu- 
kulya, the great river Devika and VaitaranI etc. Adigadadhara 
becomes manifest. 


1. This etymology does not explain the term ‘Adi’ in Adigadadhara. 

2. Near Gaya there is a chain of sacred but rocky hillocks and their tops 
are called Bhasmakuta, Gfdhrakuia etc. Gayasiras consists of this chain of 
hillocks extending to about two miles. 

This spot was well-known before the Buddha, as we find the record of the 
Buddha’s visit to Gayasisa (Pali for Gayasirsa) in the Anguttara Nik&ya Vol. 
!V, p. 302. 




944 


Vayu Parana 


18-20. The following are manifest-cum-unmanifest 1 . Visnu s 
Pada (footprint), Rudrapada, the excellent Pada of Brahman, 
Kasyapa’s Pada, which is divine as well as wherein two hands 
have come out, the Pada? of the five fires, the prominent Padas 
of Indra and Agastya and the Pada? of Ravi, Kartikeya, 
Kraunca and Matanga. In all the Lingas the primordial Gada- 
dhara, the glorious and manifest Gadadhara, abides in manifest- 
cum-unmanifest form. 

21-25. The primordial Gadadhara is stationed 2 as 
Gayatrl, Savitrl, Sandhya, Sarasvatl, Gayaditya, Uttararka, 
Daksinarka, Naimisa, Svetarka, Gananatha, the eight Vasus, 
the leading sages, the eleven Rudras, the Seven Sages, Soma- 
natha, Siddhesa, Kapardisa, Vinayaka, Narayana, MahalaksmI,, 
Brahma, Sripurusottama, Markandeycsa, Kautlsa, Angircsa; 
Pitamaha, Janardana, Mangala, the excellent Pundarlkaksa 
etc. (these are the various shrines and deities in Gaya). When 
the Raksasa Heti was killed Visnu went back to his city. 

26. When the Asura was rendered motionless by Brahma in 
the company of Rudra and others, Vedhas (god Brahma) who 
was overjoyed eulogised Adyagadapani (the primordial wielder 
of the club) (as follows) : 

Brahma said : 

27. I bow unto Gadadhara who is the bestower of boons, 
from whom Times (Death’s) blemishes have receded, who is 
stationed in Gaya, whose attributes are well known, who poss¬ 
esses many attributes, who is present in the cavity (of the heart), 
who is in the white-coloured house of the excellent mountain 
and who is worshipped by all the Ganas (groups) . 

28. I bow unto Gadadhara, who bestows prosperity on the 
day, who grants prosperity on the hosts of Devas, who grants 
royal glory even to Bhava (Siva), whose glory tears down 
Daityas, who bestows glory in the Kali age and whose glory 


1. The various Padas (footprints) of gods and sages at which Pivd 33 are 
to be offered are the manifest-cum-unmanifest forms of Adigadadhara. The 
idols are the manifest forms, unmanifest in Phalgu (TSS 365). 

2. These are various deities and shrines at Gaya. The presence of 
Gadadhara is thus claimed everywhere in Gaya. 



47.29-36 


945 


suppresses the impurities of the Kali age. He bestows affluence 
on those who seek refuge. 

29. I bow unto him who is both steady and unsteady who 

is eulogised regularly by masterly persons, who possesses wonder¬ 
fully desirable features, who is very firm, who is both present 
and not present in the traditions, who presides over flourishing 
persons, who cannot be approached by those who commit sins* 
who has his own abode and whose spiritual lineage and eulogy 
is great. 

30. I perpetually bow to the supreme eternal Lord Hari, 
w-ho is incorporeal, who has no sense organs, who has no 
birth, who is decorated on Suryavedi 1 (altar of the Sun), to 
Gadadhara who is devoid of sound and face. 

31. I bow unto Gadadhara who is present in the heart, who 
is faster than the mind, who is beyond the reach of the mind, 
who is always without a second, who is eulogised by learned 
men in the Vedantas, who is Cidatmaka (pure consciousness) 
and who is beyond the causes present in Kali. 

Sanatkumara said : 

32. The primordial wielder of the club, on being eulogised 
thus by Brahma along with Devas said, “You choose the 
boon 5 ’ and Brahma spoke to him : 

33. €< We will not stay on the rock of divine nature and 
features without you. We will stay here for ever along with you 
who have the manifest form. 55 

34. “So be it”, said Gadadhara and stayed there along 
with Sri for the protection of the worlds and for the salvation 
of the people. The manifest form Pundarxkaksa (Visnu) is well 
known as Janardana. 

35. The primordial and eternal form that is incomprehen¬ 
sible even to the Vedas, is very clear and manifest in the Sveta- 
kalpa, will become unmanifest in the Varahakalpa although it 
had become manifest before. 

36. There is no doubt in this that he will be clearly manifest 
in Gayasiras for the emancipation of the worlds and the pro¬ 
tection of the Devas. 


1. Refers to the sacred cluster of the Surya temple—Vidyarthi p. 6. 



946 


Vayu Purarta 


37 . Those who visit lord Adigadadhara and pray to him 
devoutly, will become free from the ailments of leprosy etc. and 
will attain Hari’s abode. 

38. Those who regularly and devoutly visit lord Adigada¬ 
dhara will attain wealth, foodgrain, longevity and good health. 

39. Men who bow unto Adigadadhara with great devotion 
and faith achieve good qualities, fame and happiness, wives, 
sons and grandsons. They attain Brahmapura. They will enjoy 
the fruits of a heap of meritorious action. 

40. By offering scents, one will be rich in fragrance; by offer¬ 
ing flowers, he attains good fortune; by offering sweet incense, 
he attains a kingdom and illumination through lamps. 

41. By gifting flags, he becomes free from sins; by under¬ 
taking pilgrimage, he attains Brahmaloka. He who performs a 
Sraddha and offers Pindas, leads his Pitj-s to Visnu. 

42. Those who bow to Adigadadhara with great faith and 
eulogise him and worship him, lead their Pitrs to Madhava, 
Even Siva eulogised Adigadadhara with great pleasure. 

Siva said : 

43. I bow to Adigadadhara who though unmanifest, be¬ 
comes manifest in the form of Munqlaprstha etc. and the holy 
centre Phalgutlrtha etc. 

44. I bow down to Adigadadhara whc is both manifest and 
unmanifest in the forms of Padas and Mukhalingas etc. 

45. I bow down to Adigadadhara who is born naturally on 
Mundaprstha and who is of unmanifest nature in the form of 
Janardana. 

46. I bow down to Gadadhara who is stationed in the Sila 
of divine features, who is worshipped by Brahma and other 
Suras and who is honoured by Devas. 

47. I bow down to Adigadadhara on seeing, touching, wor¬ 
shipping and bowing down to whom people attain Brahmaloka. 

48. I bow down to Adigadadhara who is the sole cause of 
Mahat etc. that is manifest and who is of the unmanifest form. 

49. I bow down to Adigadadhara who is devoid of physical 
body, sense organs, mind, intellect, vital airs and ego and who 
is free from wakeful and dreaming states. 


47 . 50 — 48.4 


947 


50. I bow down to Adigadadhara who is free from the eter¬ 
nal and the non-eternal (state), who is truth, bliss and the un¬ 
changing state, the fourth one, the luminous Atman. 

Sanatkumara said : 

51. Eulogised thus by Mahesa, Adigadadhara became 
delighted. That lord stationed himself on the slab along with 
Brahma and other Devas. 

52. Those who eulogise and worship Lord Adigadadhara 
who is stationed on the mountain Mun<Japrstha shall attain 
Brahmaloka. 

53. He who seeks piety shall attain piety; he who seeks 
love shall secure love and he who seeks salvation shall get 
salvation. 

54. Even a barren lady gets a son who will be a master of 
Vedas and their Angas (ancillaries). A king attains victory; 
a Sudra too shall attain happiness. 

55 . By worshipping Adigadadhara, a person who seeks sons 
gets sons. Everything that is desired by the mind is obtained 
through worship etc, of Hari. 


CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 
Procedure of the Pilgrimage to Gaya 
Sanatkumara said : 

1. o Narada, listen. I shall recount the (procedure of) 
pilgrimage to Gaya which yields salvation. Redemption for those 
who perform Sraddha has been sung by Brahma earlier.^ 

2-4. If one makes preparations for going to Gaya, 1 one 
should duly perform Sraddha and circumambulate the vil¬ 
lage, dressed only in loin cloth like a pilgrim. He shou t en 
go to the next village and partake of the remainder of the Srad- 


1. Verses 2-5 deal with preliminaries before starting onpilgrimage to Gaya. 




948 


Vdyu Purdna 


dha. Thereafter, he should go on foot everyday. He must avoid 
taking monetary gifts. He who abstains from taking monetary 
gifts, who is contented, who is invariably pure and who is devoid 
of arrogance enjoys the fruit of the pilgrimage to the holy cen¬ 
tres. 

5. He whose hands and feet are controlled, the mind is 
restraiiied and who possesses learning, penance and fame, attains 
the fruit of the pilgrimage to the holy centre. 

6 . At the entrance to Gaya to the east is the great river 
Phalgu. After digging upwater (in the river bed), he should take 
his bath in the pure water. 1 

7. After performing the Tarpana of Devas and others 
and after performing the Sraddha in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions, one should recite the Vedic passage belonging to one’s 
own branch but need not perform Arghyapradana (offering of 
Arghya) and Avahana (invocation). 

8 . On the next day he should with all (bodily and mental) 
purity go to Pretaparvata. 2 The intelligent pilgrim should there¬ 
after take bath in Brahmakunda and perform Tarpana of Devas 
and others. 

9. With all purity, he should perform the Sraddha for 
those who are Sapindas (haying the similar Pindas i.e. near 
kinsmen) on the Pretaparvata. The intelligent pilgrim should 
face the southern direction and wear the sacred thread as Pra- 
cinaviti (from the right shoulder across the chest and passed un¬ 
der the left arm.) 

10-12. “The fire with Kavyabala (?), Soma, Yama, 
Aryama, the Pitf-god, like Agnisvattas, the Barhisads and the 
Somapas may (please) come; you are the deities of the Pitrs. O 
blessed deities, my Pitrs are protected by you. Those kindred 
relations born in the family are to be offered the ball of rice. I 


1. Verses6-7 deal with the 1st dayof the Yatra. Va.P.prescribcs only bath 
in Phalgu, Sraddha and recitation of one’s Veda. TSS. (p.352) prescribes 
visit to Pretasila and Sraddha on that very day after Sraddha at Phalgu. 

2. The rites on the 2nd day: Visit to Pretaparvata, bath in Brahma- 
kuytfa Sraddha, offering of Piitfas first to one’s paternal anscetors ( w. 23- 

5) and to other relatives—a long list of which is given in w.33-55. The list 

shows the breadth of outlook of the ancients. 



48.13-20 


949 


have come to Gaya for that purpose. Let them, all attain perpe¬ 
tual contentment by means of this Sraddha.” 

13-14. After saying this and performing Acamana, the pil¬ 
grim should perform Pranayama with effort, in order to obtain 
Brahmaloka which is devoid of Pmaravrtti (a return to Sam- 
sara'again). After performing the Sraddha duly in this manner, 
he, should invoke the Pitrs and worship them with the mantras. 
Then he should offer the balls of rice. 

15-16. In the holy centre, on the Pretas'ila etc. the place 
must first be washed with Pancagavya separately while their 
mantras are being recited. Then the deities must be worshipped 
with offerings of Caru soaked in ghee. So long as the gingelly 
seeds are taken by the pilgrim in the holy rites of the Pitrs, 
Asuras run off from the place of holy rites like deer afraid of 
lion. 

17. The Sraddha of the mother 1 should be performed sep¬ 
arately during the Astakas (i.e. the 8th day of the three months 
on which the Pitrs are to be propitiated), during the Vrddhi 
(increase) days and on the day of the death at Gaya. On other 
occasions the Sraddha should be performed along with that of 
her husband (i.e. one’s father). 

18. During Vrddhi Sraddha, that of the mother should be 
performed first. But at Gaya that of the father should be 
performed first. The Sraddha is begun with the offerings of 
Padya at the outset and the proper laying of the Kusa grass with 
the tips pointing to the south to the father etc. The remaining 
part of the Sraddha is to be performed as mentioned in the res¬ 
pective Grhya Sutras. 

19. In the case of Sapindas, the Darbha grass is duly spread 
and the water with gingelly seeds is offered once and the Sraddha 
is performed on their southern side. 

20. The water libation is offered with the sacred water of 
the Pitrs holding it in the hollow of one’s palms. He should then 
offer the Aksayya (inexhaustible) Pinda with a fistful of powdered 
fried grain. The other kinsmen are then to be invoked in the 
Ku£a grass by means of the waters with gingelly seeds. 

1. The special Sraddha for one’s mother is prescribed during the A?takas 
and in Vrddhi Sraddha. 



950 


Vayu Purina 


21. May all those Devas, sages. Pi tj-s and human beings, 
mothers and maternal grandfathers and others beginning with 
Brahma and ending with a blade of grass, be propitiated by 
this water libation. 

22. May this be the water libation along withgingelly seeds 
to all those crores of past (members of) families, residing in 
the seven continents beginning with Brahma and ending with 
the earth. 

23-24. A ball of rice has been offered by me to all these: 
father, grandfather, great-grandfather, mother, grandmother, 
great-grandmother, maternal grandfather, his father and his 
grandfather. May that Pinda be of everlasting benefit, 

25-27. At Gayasiras the Pinda offered is of the size of a 
first or that of the green emblic myrobalan fruit or that of the 
leaf of the Sami tree. The devotee shall uplift seven Gotras and 
a hundred families. The Gotras—seven in number—are 
those of the father, mother, one’s wife (before marriage), one’s 
sister (after marriage), one’s daughter (after marriage), and 
those of the father’s sisters and mother’s sisters. The hundred 
and one families are as follows: father and his twentyfour 
ancestors, mother and her twenty ancestors, wife and her sixteen 
ancestors, twelve ancestors of the sister’s husband, eleven an¬ 
cestors of the son-in-law, seven ancestors of the husband of the 
sister of one’s father and eight ancestors of the husband of 
mother’s sister. 

28. There is no invocation in a TirthaSraddha nor is screen 
erected shutting off the quarters. There is no defect due to the 
viewing of others. Clever people should not perform the Tirtha- 
iraddha out of pity. 

29. This following is the procedure in the Tirtha Sraddhas'. 
providing seat of the Pintfas, offering of the Pintfas, Avane- 
jaria (ritualistic sprinkling with the Darbha grass), monetary 
gifts and the Annasarhkalpa (ritualistic expression of one’s inten¬ 
tion in preparing food). 

30. Mantra: “I invoke all those members of our family 
who are dead and who have no other way of salvation. I shall 


48.31-42 


951 


invoke them on the Darbha grass, with water libations along 
with gingelly seeds. 

31. I invoke all those persons in the family of our kinsmen 
who are dead and who have no other way of salvation. I shall 
invoke them on the Darbha grass with water libations along 
with gingelly seeds”. 

32. Thus the pilgrim should meditate on the Darbhas, 
repeat these mantras with the offering of water libations along 
with gingelly seeds, invoke and worship the Pitrs and offer the 
Pindas in due order. 

33. f< I am offering this Pinda in order to uplift those per¬ 
sons of our family who are dead and who have no other means 
of salvation. 

34. I am offering this Pinda in order to emancipate those 
persons of our maternal grandfather’s family who are dead and 
who have no other means of salvation. 

35. I am offering this Pinda for the uplift of those persons 
belonging to the family of our kinsmen who are dead and who 
have no other means of salvation. 

36. I am offering this Pinda for the uplift of those persons 
who (died) before cutting teeth and those who were afflicted 
even while in the womb. 

37. I am offering this Pinda to those persons who were 
duly cremated and who were not those who were struck 
dead by lightning or by robbers. 

38. I am offering this Pinda to those who died in the forest 
fire, to those who were killed by lions and tigers and those who 
were slain by horned and fanged (beasts of prey). 

39. I am offering to those who died by getting hanged, 
who were killed by poison or by weapons and those who 
have committed suicide. 

4 I am offering this Pinda to those who died of hunger, 
thirst in the forest path, and to those who were killed by gob¬ 
lins, ghosts and other evil spirits. 

41. Iam offering this Pinda for the upliftment of those 
persons who have fallen into the hells called Raurava, Andha- 
tamisra and Kalasutra. 

42. Iam offering this Pinda for the emancipation of those 



952 


Vdyu Parana 


persons who have fallen into the terrible hells of Asipatravana 
or Kumbhipaka. 

43 . I am offering this Pinda for the uplift of those persons 
who are stationed in the various abodes of torture and those 

who have gone to the world of ghosts. 

44 . I am offering this Pinda for the uplift of those persons 
who are stationed in the various abodes of torture and those 
who have been taken away by Yama’s attendants. 

45 I am offering this Pinda for the uplift of ail those 
persons who are stationed in any of the hells or abodes of 
torture. 

46. I am offering this Pinda to those who are born in the 
animal wombs or as birds, worms, insects or reptiles or even as 


II CW. 

47 . I am offering this Pinda to those persons who are 
transmigrating into the thousands of other lives as a result of 
their own actions and to whom the human birth has become a 
rarity. 

48. I am offering the Pinda to those Pitrs who are stationed 
in heaven, firmament or on the earth and to those kinsmen etc. 
who have not been cremated duly after death. 

49. May all those Pitrs of mine be propitiated through this 
Pinda for ever, those Pitrs who exist in the form of ghosts. 

50. This Pinda has been offered by me to those who may 
or may not have been my kinsmen in this birth but who were 
my kinsmen in the other births. May it be of everlasting benefit 

reaching unto them. 

51-53. This Pinda has been offered by me to all those who 
are dead in my father’s family, to those who are dead in my 
mother’s family, to those kinsmen, elders, fathers-in-law or 
other relatives who are dead, to such of those in my family as 
had neither sons nor wives and hence had been deprived of 
Pinda offerings, to those who had been defaulters in the holy 
rites, to those who were born blind, to those who had been lame, 
to those who had hideous forms, to those who had been prema¬ 
turely born, to all persons of my family known and unknown. 
To all those the Pinda has been offered by me. May it be of 
everlasting benefit in reaching unto them. 


48.54-62 


953 


54-55. I am offering this Pinda with Svadha to all these: 
Those who are born in my father’s family ever since the 
days of god Brahma; those who are born in my mother’s family; 
those who had been my servants in both these families; to those 
attendants and dependents, to the friends, disciples, animals, 
trees, birds seen or not seen, those who had rendered help unto 
me; those who had been in contact with me in my previous 
births”. 

56. With these Mantras the pilgrim should offer the Pindas 
to the women too, beginning with mother. In that case he 
should make necessary changes in the substantives and adjec¬ 
tives making them conform to the feminine gender. 

57. Whether in one’s own Gotra or in the other man’s 
Gotra, the offering of the Pindas, the performance of Sraddhas 
and the water libation is futile if done separately. 

58. He should put the gingelly seeds in the vessel of Pindas 
and fill it with holy water. He should perform the Parisecana 
rite thrice for all the Pindas and conclude the rite by prostra¬ 
ting himself (before them). 

59. After ritualistically dismissing the Pitrs, he should per¬ 
form Acamana and express these words to Suras as witnesses. 

May these Devas, Brahma, Isana and others be my witnesses. 
After coming to Gaya the redemption of my Pitrs has been 
effected by me. 

60. O Lord Gadadhara, I have come to Gaya for the 
performance of the rites of the Pitrs. 1 O Lord, you alone are 
the witness thereof. I have become free from the threefold 
indebtedness”. 

61. O Narada, the offering of Pindas in all the places should 
be like this alone. Beginning with the Preta mountain, he 
should do it in all the holy spots in due order. 

62. Thereafter, O celestial sage, he should throw powdered 
fried grains mixed with gingelly seeds on the Pretaparvata, 
anticlockwise and facing the south. 


1. To request the supreme deity of Gaya to stand witness to one’s 
visit may appear funny to some, but that denotes the living faith of the 
pilgrim in Gadadhara. 



954 


Vdyu Purdna 


63. Mantra: “May all those Pitrs of mine be propitiated 
by means of these powdered fried grains mixed with gingelly 
seeds, those Pitrs who exist in the form of ghosts. 

64-65. May all the mobile and immobile beings begin¬ 
ning with Brahma and ending with a blade of grass be propitia¬ 
ted by means of the libation offered by me. O Narada, his 
Pitrs shall be released from ghosthood. Thanks to his great¬ 
ness, this ghosthood will never recur in his family. 

66 . In Gayasiras the rocky slab Pretasila is well known 
for its efficacy in bringing salvation. Adigadadhara is stationed 
in the form of the holy centre, Mantra etc. 


CHAPTER FORTYNINE 
The Procedure of Pilgrimage at Gaya ( Continued) 
Sanatkumara said : 

1-3. At the outset, I shall mention the procedure for holy 
rites in the five holy centres 1 in the Uttara (Northern) Manasa. 2 
The pilgrim should perform Acamana and sprinkle water over 
his head. Then he should go to the Uttaramanasa and perform 

1. On the third day Pancatirthi rites are to be observed. The five 
Tirthas are Uttaramanasa, Udicitirtha, Kanakhala, Daksinamanasa and 
Phalgu. TSS (p. 360) clarifies that five baths in a day or bath in each of 
them is not necessary. Phalgutlrth is Gayasiras. The real Kanakhala is 
near Hardwar. Here the tank is supposed to represent that Himalayan 
Tirtha. 

2. As I stated elsewhere, these Sthala Puranas claim ail the sacr ed spots 
in the three worlds as being present in their locality. The real Uttara 
Manasa is a twin-lake of Payoda and Pundarika. It is modern 
Karakul in northern Pamirs (AGP.70), while Southern Manasa is the twin 
take Manasa-sarovara and Raksasa Tala of the Kailasa range. But this 
Purana claims two ponds at Gaya as representing those two magnificent 
lakes. 

The Ultara-manasa tank is now a neglected ‘filthy and weedy tank* 
(Vidyarthi 21). Even Daksina Manasa, Kanakhala and Udici Tirtha are 
partially neglected (Vidyarthi, p. 19, Table 3). 



49.4-12 


955 


the holy ablution repeating the following Mantra: “I am tak¬ 
ing the holy bath in Uttaramanasa for the purity of the 
soul and for the achievement of Suryaloka (the region of the 
Sun-god) etc. and for the salvation of the Pitrs” After propitia¬ 
ting Devas and others he should perform Sraddha along with 
the offer of Pindas. ® 

4. Indeed the lake Manasa is here. Hence it is called 
Uttaramanasa. The devotee shall bow to the Sun and worship 
him. He will lead the Pitrs to the solar sphere. 

5. “Obeisance to the lord and sustainer (Sun) who assumes 

the forms of the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus Saturn 
Rahu and Ketu.” ’ 

6 . From Uttaramanasa, the pilgrim should go to the 
Southern Manasa, 1 duly observing the rite of silence. This is 
called Udicitlrtha (the Northern Holy Centre). An Audicya 
(Northern) holy centre is conducive to salvation. A man who 
takes the holy bath here goes to heaven along with his physical 
body. 

7. The holy centre Kanakhala which is well known in the 
three worlds is there. One taking bath there, shines like gold. 
The man attains sanctity. 

8 . The holy centre of Daksinamanasa is on the south of it. 
Hence Kanakhala is well known as an excellent holy centre. 

9. These are three holy spots in the Southern Manasa. The 
devotee should take his bath therein duly and perform the 
Sraddhas severally. 

10. “I am performing my holy ablution in the Daksina 
.Manasa for the purification of the Atman, for the achievement 
of the solar world etc. and for the salvation of the Pitrs. 

11. O Divakara (Sun), I am taking my holy bath here in 
Daksinamanasa for the sake of freedom from the torture of the 
sins of Brahmana-slaughter etc. 

12. I bow down to the Sun-god for the propitiation and 
redemption of the Pitrs and for the increase of sons, grandsons, 
wealth, prosperity, longevity and health”. 

1. Daksina Manasa is divided into three separate Tirthas : the 
northern part is the UdicI Tirtha, the middle is Kanakhala and the southern 
part is Southern Manasa—TSS 359. 



956 


Vayu Pur ana 


13 With this Mantra the pilgrim should perform the holy 
ablution, worship and Sraddha with the offering of Pittas. 
^ er bo ring silently to the Sun, he shall repeat tins Mantra. 

14 Thereafter the pilgrim should go to the holy centre 
Phalgutirtha 1 which is the most excellent of all the Tirthas. It 
yicldfsalvation perpetually to those who perform Sraddha of 

Pltr i5 th< Visnu on being requested by Brahma formerly, became 
Phalguka (the river Phalgu?). When its dust particles were 
consecrated in the Daksinagni, it came to be known as Phalgu- 

16 There the wish-yielding cow, viz. the earth bears fruits 
in the form of water through Phalgu. It is within (underground 
hence unseen). 

17. All the holy centres in all the three worlds come over 
to Phalgutirtha to take their bath along with Suras. 

18. Ganga is the water oozing out from the foot of Visnu. 
But Phalgu is the primordial Gadadhara himself. He assumes 
the liquid form himself. Hence they call it more sacred than 

Ganga. 

19. Even he who performs a thousand times thousand horse 
sacrifices does not attain that fruit which one attains in 
Phalgutirtha. 

20. “I perform the ablution in the waters of Visnu, in 
Phalgutirtha with due respect, in order to secure Visnuloka for 
the Pitj-s and for the realisation of worldly pleasures and 
salvation”. 

21. The man (the pilgrim) should take bath and perform 
Tarpana and Sraddha in Phalgutirtha in the manner it has 
been mentioned in his own Sutra (i.e. Grhyasuti'a he follows) 
with due offerings of Pindas. He shall then bow down to 
Pitamaha. 

22. “Obeisance to lord Siva, Isa, the (great) Purusa, to 
Aghoravamadeva, Sadyojata and Saiiibhu”. 


1. Phalgutirtha is Gayasiras and its boundaries as given in w. 28-2 > 
from Nagakuta to Grdhrakuta, from there to Yupa and upto Uttara-manasa. 
It is beneath the mountain Mundaprsfha-AP. 115-25-26 and G.P. • 
differ. 



49 . 23-33 


957 


23. After taking bath in Phalgutlrtha and visiting lord 
Gadadhara, the man (the pilgrim) shall redeem his own soul, 
ten generations of the past and ten generations of the future. 

24-25. After bowing to Lord Gadadhara, one should wor¬ 
ship by means of this Mantra: “Om, obeisance to Vasudeva. 
Obeisance to Sarikarsana, to Pradyumna, to Aniruddha, to 
Srldhara, to Visnu”. After performing the ablution in the “five 
holy centres”, the pilgrim shall lead the Pitrs to Brahmaloka. 

26. Futile indeed is the Sraddha of that person who does 
not bathe the mace-bearing deity by means of Pancamrta nor 
embellishes it with flowers, garments etc. 

27. From the Nagakuta mountain to Gfdhrakuta, from 
there to Tupa and from there upto Uttaramanasa—This is men¬ 
tioned as Gayasiras. It is otherwise called Phalgutlrtha. 

28. The excellent Phalgutlrtha is beneath the mountain 
Mundaprstha. All the Pitrs shall attain salvation by means of 
the performance of Sraddha etc. 

29. Thus the procedure of the first day has been explained. 
The Second Day : 

On the second day 1 the pilgrim should go to the Dharma- 
ranya since it was here that Dharma performed the Tajna . 

30. O Narada, he who performs ablutions, Tarpana and 
Sraddha in the MatangavapI (the tank of Matanga) obtains 
Brahmaloka by going to Dharmaranya. 

31-32. After going to MatangavapI the pilgrim should bow 
down to Matangesa and repeat this Mantras: “May the deities 
be the authority and may the guardians of the quarters be the 
witnesses (to the fact that) I had come to this MatangavapI 
and the redemption of the Pitrs has been effected by me”. 

At the outset he should perform the Sraddha etc. at the well 
(crlled) Brahmatlrtha. 

33 . (He who performs the Sraddha etc.) in between that 
well and the sacrificial post, enables all the Pitrs to cross the 
(ocean of existence). After bowing down to Dharma and 
Dharmesvara, he should bow down to the tree of Mahabodhi 
(the great enlightenment). 

1. The second day of Fanca TIrthI Yatra is the 4th day from entrance 
at Gaya. NP.II.45.103-104, AP. 115.34-37 mention these very Tirthas on the 
‘second day*. 




958 


Vayu Purana 


34. “Obeisance to you the king of ASvatthas (holy fig 
trees), of the form of Brahma, Visnu and Siva, the tree of 
enlightenment (. Bodhidruma] ) J for the performers (of Sraddha 
etc.) and the redeemer of the Pitrs. 

Additional Verses 

1. Repeated obeisance to the Asvattha (the holy fig tree), 
the tree with tremulous leaves, the cause of permanent stabilisa¬ 
tion. Obeisance toYajna, the Bodhisattva. 

2. O Pippala, you are the eleventh among Rudras. You 
are the fire among Vasus; you are Narayana among Devas. 
You are the king of trees. 

3. O Asvattha, king of trees since Narayana stays in you 
perpetually, you are the most auspicious of all trees; you are 
blessed for ever; you are the destroyer of evil dreams. 

4. I bow down to Hari who has assumed the form of a 
tree, who is in the form of the Asvattha tree, who is the lord 
Pundarlkaksa (Visnu) wielding Sankha, Cakra and Gada. 

[End of Addl. Verses] 

35. As a result of seeing and touching you, may our kins¬ 
men, of our family or our mother’s family who have been in 
distress, attain perpetual stay in heaven. 

36. O king of trees ! After coming to Gaya, the three 
debts have been repaid by me. Thanks to your grace, I have 
been relieved from the great sin. I have been released from the 
ocean of worldly existence.” 

The Third Day: 

37. On the third day 1 2 the pilgrim—the son should duly 
take bath in Brahmasaras and perform Sraddha with the 
offering of Pindas repeating the Mantra thereof. 


1. The Bodhidruma where the Buddha evolved Pralityasamutpada, be¬ 

came a place of Sraddha! It, however, shows that the Buddha was complete y 
Brahmanised by the time of this Purana. _ 

2. The 3rd day of Pancatirthi is the 5th day from entering Gaya. Some 
of the rites mentioned here are found in AP. 115. 35-40 and NP* II* 4 



49 . 38-47 


959 


38. “I am performing .the ablution in this holy Tirtha for 
the relief from the three debts”. (Sraddha performed) in 
the middle of Kupa (well) and Yupa (the sacrificial post) shall 
lead the Pitrs to Brahmaloka” 

39. This Yupa (sacrificial post) was raised by Brahma 
after performing the sacrifice. After performing this Sraddha in 
Brahmasaras, he redeems all the Phi's. 

40. After circumambulating the Yupa, one attains the fruit 
ofVajapeya sacrifice. After bowing down to Brahma, he will 
lead the Pitrs to Brahmaloka. 

41. “Obeisance be to Brahma, the unborn, the causal form 
of the birth etc. of this universe. Repeated bows to the re¬ 
deemer of the devotees and the Pitrs.” 

42. The Mango trees growing near the place called Gopra - 
cara were planted by Brahma. Merely by watering them, one 
shall enable the Pitrs to attain salvation. 

43. Mantra : “For the cause of the salvation of the Pitrs, I 
am watering the mango tree that has come up from the Brahma¬ 
saras and which is of the forms of Brahma and Visnu”. 

44. “ (Like a Sage) I with the tips of my hands am touching 
the water pot and the Kusa grass. I am offering water at the 
root of the Mango tree. The Mango tree is watered and the 
Pitrs are propitiated. One action alone has become famous as 
serving two purposes.” 

45-46. Then, with a controlled mind, the pilgrim should 
offer the oblation 1 to Yama with the Mantra: “Yamaraja and 
Dharmaraja have been engaged in the work of stabilising 
(demon Gaya). I am offering oblation to both of them for the 
cause of the liberation of the Pitrs” 

O Narada, thereafter the pilgrim should offer oblations to 
the dogs, repeating the following Mantra : 

47. “There are two dogs born of the family of Vaivasvata 
(Yama). They are dark and variegated in colour. I am 
offering oblation to them. May they protect me for ever, on 
the path”. 

1. V. 45 is the Mantra for Yamabaii, v. 46 for £va-bali (Bali to Dogs) 
and v. 47 is for Kakabali (Bali to Grows). The pilgrim is to take a bath (in 
Brahmasaras thereof)— TSS 362-363. 



960 


Vayu Purana 


48 49 O Narada thereafter the pilgrim should offer obla¬ 
tion to the crows repeating the following Mantra : “May the 
crows from the quarters of Indra (i.e. East), Vanina (West), 
Vayu (North-west), Yama (South) and Nirrti (South-west) 
accept the Pinda placed on the ground.” 

The Fourth Day: 

On the Fourth Day, 1 the pilgrim should perform the rites of 
ablution etc. in Phalgutlrtha. 

50. Then the pilgrim should perform Sraddha at the 
foot (of Visnu) in Gayasiras along with the offering of Pindas. 
The real Gayasiras is within the limit of Phalgutlrtha. 

51. Naga, Janardana, Brahmayupa and Uttaramanasa— 
these delimit the holy spot called Gayasiras. It is also called 
Phalgutlrtha. 

52. That area of Phalgutlrtha extending from the seat of 
Pitamaha upto Uttaramanasa should be known as difficult of 
access, rare even to Devas. 

53. The real Gayasiras extends from Krauncapada up to 
Phalgutlrtha. Since this is the face of Gayasura, the Sraddha 
performed here is of everlasting benefit. 

54. The region below the mountain Mundaprstha too con¬ 
stitutes Phalgutlrtha. It is here that the primordial Gadadhara 
is stationed in both manifest and unmanifest forms. 

55. The foot-prints of Visnu and others are there conducive 
to the liberation of the Pitrs. This Visnupada (the foot-print 
of Visnu) is divine and destructive of sins at its very sight. 

56-58. By touching and worshipping it sins are dispelled. 
Whatever is given unto the Pitfs becomes Ak$aya (of inexhaus¬ 
tible benefit). By performing the Sraddha along with the Pin^a 
offerings one leads a thousand members of one’s family to the 
divine foot of Visnu which is auspicious and infinite. By perfor¬ 
ming Srdddha at the foot of Rudra, a man takes a hundred 


1. The 4th day of Pancatirthi is the 6th day from entry into Gaya. TSS. 
366 tells us that there is no separate Sraddha on Gayasiras apart from the 
Sraddhas at Vi§nupada and other Padas. Gayasiras is the holiest spot at Gaya. 
It* extends from Krauncapada to Phalgu Tirtha (v. 53). 



49.59-68 


961 


members of his family including himself to Siva’s city. Similarly 
a pilgrim performing the Sraddha etc. at the foot of Brahmapada 
leads hundred members of his family to Brahmaloka. 

59 . A person performing Sraddha at the footprints of 
Kasyapa leads his Pitrs to Brahmaloka. A person performing 
Sraddha at the footprint of Daksinagni leads Pitrs to Brahma- 
pura. 

60. One who performs Sraddha at the foot (print) of 
Garhapatya attains the fruit of Vajapeya. After performing 
Sraddha at Ahavanlya, one attains the benefit of a horse- 
sacrifice. 

61. By performing Sraddha at the foot of (fire called) 
Sabhya one attains the benefit of Jyotistonia. He who performs 
Sraddha at the foot of Avasathya leads Pitrs to Brahmapura. 

62. Performing Sraddha at Sakra’s foot leads Pitrs to 
Indraloka. One who performs Sraddha at Agastya’s foot leads 
Pitrs to Brahmapura, 

63. He who performs Sraddha at Krauncapada and 
Matangapada leads Pitrs to Brahmaloka. He who performs 
Sraddha at the foot of the Sun-god leads even the perpetrators 
of five great sins to the city of Arka. 

64. He who performs Sraddha at the foot of Kartikeya 
leads the Pitrs to Sivaloka. He who performs Sraddha at the 
foot of Ganesa leads the Pitrs to Rudraloka. 

65. One who performs Tarpana rites in the holy spot 
Gajakarna leads his Pitrs to the resplendent heaven. One who 
performs Sraddha at the feet of other deities leads the Pitrs to 
Brahmapura. 

66 . Among all the footprints, those of Kasyapa. Visnu, 
Rudra and Brahma are glorined as the most excellent of all. 

67. At the beginning and at the conclusion one of them is 
remembered. O Narada, it is conducive to the welfare of the 
performer of the Sraddha. 

68 . Formerly sage Bharadvaja performed Sraddha at the 
divine feet of Kasyapa and began to offer Pindas to the Pitrs 
and others. 1 

1. In order to emphasize that Piij<Jas are to be offered at the foot¬ 
prints and not in the hands of the dead ancestor even if he come in person. 



962 


Vdyu Purdna 

69. Two hands, one white and the other black, came out 
jutting out of the foot (of Kasyapa). On seeing the two (projec¬ 
ted) hands, the sage was overwhelmed with doubts. 

70-71. Then the great sage asked his mother Santa: “O 
mother, is the Pinda to be offered to the white hand or to the 
black hand, at the divine foot-print of Kasyapa? you know 
father (hence) say.” 

Santa said: 

“O Bharadvaja of great intellect, give the Pinda unto the 
black one.” 

72. Then Bharadvaja attempted to give the Pinda to the 
black one. Then the white one, remaining invisible said, “You 
are my legitimate bosom son.” 

73. The black one said, “The field is mine (i.e. the wife). 
Hence give the Pinda to me.” Then the Svairini (wanton woman) 
said that the Pindas are to be given both to Ksetrin (the husband) 
and the Bijin (the procreator). 

74. Bharadvaja thereupon placed the Pinda at the foot of 
Kasyapa. Both of them went to Brahmaloka by means of an 
aerial chariot to which a swan was yoked. 

75. Rama attempted to offer the Pindas at the sacrifice 
at the foot of Rudra. His father Dasaratha came there from 
heaven stretching his hand. 

76. Rama did not offer the Pinda unto the hand. Then 
he placed the Pinda at the foot of Rudra. Dasaratha spoke to 
Rama who was afraid of transgressing the injunctions of the 
sacred texts: 

77. “O Son, I have been redeemed by you. I shall attain 
Rudraloka. If the Pinda had been given (deposited) unto the 
hand, I would not have attained heaven. 

78-79. You will rule over the kingdom for a long time and 
protect Brahmanas and other subjects. After performing 
Yajfias with due Daksina, you will go to Visnuloka along with 
all the citizens of Ayodhya and (including) even germs and 
insects.” 


the stories of Bharadvaja, Rama, Bhisma are given in w. 68-82. These 
stories are given in NP.II.46.29-45. 



49.80-91 


963 


After saying this Dasaratha went toRudraloka. 

80-81. Bhisma invoked his Pitr (father) at the excellent 
Visnupada and performed the Sraddha. When he attempted to 
offer the Pinzas to the Pitrs, both the hands of his father 
Santanu came out of GayaSiras. Bh!§ma did not offer the Pindas 
into the hands. He placed them at the foot-print of Visnu. 

82. The delighted Santanu said: “You are definite about 
the meaning of the sacred text. May you have the vision extend¬ 
ing to the three times (past, present and future). In the end, 
may Visnu be your goal. 

83-88a. You will have death at your will”. After saying 
this he attained salvation. 

By worshipping KanakeSa, Kedara, Narasimha, and Vamana 
in the northern path, one shall redeem all the Pitrs. 

If Pindas are offered at Gayasiras invoking their name, 
persons (who are thus invoked if) they are in the hell, will go 
to heaven and those that are (already) in heaven, attain liber¬ 
ation (from Sarhsara). 

If anyone were to offer Pindas of the size of Sami leaf at 
Gayasiras or were he to offer fruits, roots etc. he shall lead the 
Pitjrs to heaven. 

By performing Sraddha along with the Pinda, he will lead 
his Pitrs to the worlds of those deities, Visnu etc. at whose feet 
he performs the Sraddhas. Everywhere the mountain Munda- 
prstha has been clearly marked by these footprints. 

88b-89. All the Pitrs will attain Brahmaloka, free from 
ailments. The head of the Asura Heti was split into two. Then 
the Gada' was washed in this Tirtha. Hence it is conducive 
to liberation. It is called Gadalola. 1 It is the most excellent 
of all excellent TIrthas. 

90. Since the Gada of Hari was washed in that great Tirtha, 
it was called Gadalola. “I am taking my bath for the realisation 
of Siddhis. I shall attain the imperishable Pada (station).” 

The Fifth Day : 

91. On the fifth day 2 the pilgrim shall take his bath in the 

T TSS. 366 tell us that Gadalola is in the stream Phalgu. 

2. The 5th day of Pancatirthi is the 7th day from entering Gaya. On 
this day one should perform Bath and Sraddha at Ak$ayavata, honour 



964 Vdyu Pvrana 

holy Tlrtha Gadalola and perform the Sraddha along with the 
offerings of Pindas. He will (thereby) lead the Pitrs, and himself 
to Brahmaloka. 

92. The devotee shall propitiate the Brahmanas who had 
been originally assigned the duties at Gaya by god Brahma. 
He should propitiate them by means of Havyas, Kavyas etc. 
If they are satisfied, all the deities along with the Pitrs are 
propitiated 

93. If the Sraddha at Aksayavata is performed with great 
care and effort, with cooked rice alone, the pilgrim will lead 
the Pitrs to the indestructible and eternal Brahmaloka. 

94. If a single Brahmana is fed near that Vatavrksa 
(banyan tree) with vegetables or even with water, it is as fruitful 
as feeding a crore (of Brahmanas). 

95. Sixteen types of gifts should be made to the priest at 
Gayatlrtha after honouring him and offering him clothes, scents 
etc. in the company of one’s sons. 

96-99. Whatever is given at the Vata tree at Gayatlrtha 
to the Pity's will be Aksaya (indestructible). By seeing, bowing 
to and worshipping Vatesa with calm and composed mind, the 
pilgrim will lead his Pitrs to the indestructible and eternal 
Brahmaloka. 

Whatever is offered to the Pitrs at Gaya, Dharmaprstha 
and Brahmasaras and at the Vata at Gayasirsa is Aksaya (in¬ 
exhaustible). Obeisance unto that Yogasayin (one slumbering in 
Yoga sleep) who has assumed the form of an infant boy and 
who sleeps on the top of the Vata tree in that vast sheet of 
cosmic waters. 

100. Obeisance to the Aksayavata which is a weapon 
severing the tree of worldly existence, which removes all the 
sins and which gives the imperishable Brahman. 


the Gayawal Brahmanas with offerings and food and get their blessing and 
worship Prapitamaha. Cf. AP. 115. 71-73. 

Thus the Gaya Yatra is completed within seven days. Sraddha at Preta 
Sila is the 1st rite and that at Aksayavata is the last rite culminating in the 
blessing of the Gayawal—the Brahmana privileged by god Brahma in this 
matter. 

'^ lere are slight differences in the order of Tirthas to be visited in AP and 
NP but TSS follows our Text (Va.P.). 



50.1-9 


965 


In the Kali age, people are the followers of Mahesvara. 
Hence Gadadhara has assumed the form of a Linga. 

I bow down to that Prapitamaha. 


CHAPTER FIFTY 
The Glory of Gaya 


Sanatkumdra said : 

1. The king Gaya, performed a Yajna 1 wherein Daksina 
was offered and much food was cooked. It is impossible to 
calculate the number of articles made use of in it. 

2 -4. At Gaya there were twentyfive mountains of cooked 
food and other articles. The Brahmanas who were well-honour¬ 
ed in the different lands, praise it like this: “No one did like 
this before. No one will (can) do like this in future. The 
monetary gifts (in gold) coins offered were innumerable like 
the sand particles in the world and the stars in the sky. Formerly 
no one has done like this. No one will be doing like this in 
future.” 

5. The Brahmanas who were well propitiated and honoured 
well in the different lands, praised it. Visnu and others (gods) 
who were pleased spoke to Gaya, “Mention the boon you wish 
to choose.” 

6 . Gaya requested them, “May those Brahmanas who were 
formerly cursed by Brahma, become sanctified. Let them be 
honoured in the sacrifices.” 

7-9. For the performance of Gayasraddha there were 
Brahmanas of fourteen Gotras. Even Brahma himself has to carry 

1 . Verses 1-1 la give the story of King Gaya’s munificent sacrifice. The 
object of the story is to inform that Brahmaijas whowerecursedbyBrahmafor 
their greed were absolved of that curse. Verses 7-9 state the names of the 14 
Brahmanas—which are the Gotras of present-day Gayawals. Out of these 11 
are Madhyandins, 2 Samavcdins and only one Rgvedin (follower of Asvala- 
yana Sutra). (Vidyarthi,.Appendix IV, p. 145) 



966 


Vayu Purana 


out their behests. They were : Gautama, Kasyapa, Kautsa, 
Kausika, Kanva, Bharadvaja, Usanas, Vatsya, ParaSara, 
Haritkumara, Mandavya, Lokaksi the greatest in the world, 
Vasistha and Atreya. These were the names of the Gotras. 

10. May this city be known as Gaya after my name. Let 
it be as renowned as the city of god Brahma.” The Suras said, 
"May this be so”. After granting the boon they vanished. 

11 . After enjoying various pleasures Gaya attained the 
great Visnuloka. 

There was a king named Visala, 1 in the city called Visala. 
He had no sons. He spoke to the Brahmanas thus: 

12. “How can I beget sons etc.?” The Brahmanas said to 
Visala, “You will have everything by offering Pinqlas at 
Gaya.” 

13-14. Viiala offered Pindas at Gayaslrsa and begot sons. 
He saw in the sky three persons white, red and black in colour. 
He then asked, “Who are you?” One of them, the white one, 
said to Visala, "I, the white-one, am your father. I have come 
here from Indra’s world. 

15. O Son, my father is this red one. He had slain a 
Brahmana. He was a sinner. This black one is your grandfather 
by whom many sages had been killed. 

16-17. They had fallen into the hell called Avici. They 
have been liberated by your offer of Pindas. O destroyer of 
enemies, you offered the water libation saying, "I shall propi¬ 
tiate my Pitps, Pitamahas and Prapitamahas”. O excellent one, 
as a result thereof and in view of your above statement, we 
have come here simultaneously. 

Pafhanlara (Additional verses) 

1. All of us have been liberated by you. We shall go to the 
imperishable heavenly abode. Accompanied by you, the good 
son, all of us shall go to Brahmaloka. 


1. Verses 1 lb-20a give the story of the childless King Visala, how by pen- 
forming Sraddha and Piijdadana at Gaya he got a son and promoted his 
father, grandfather and great-grandfather (though sinners) to Brahmaloka. 
Story repeated in AP. 115.54-59 and NP.II-44.26-42; GP.I.84-34-39. 



50. (Addl. verses)-2—50.18*28 


967 


2. You shall be endowed with sons and grandsons. You 
will rule over the kingdom and then go to heaven. Becoming 
satiated with the pleasures thereof, you shall attain salvation. 

[End of addl. verses] 

18. O son, liberation has been effected by you. We shall 
go to the excellent heaven. In this manner the excellent liber¬ 
ation of the Pitrs must be effected by all sons. 

19. You will rule over the kingdom for a long time. You 
will enjoy the rarest of pleasures. You will perform Yajnas with 
suitable Daksinas and go to Visnu’s city (Vaikuntha) thereafter.” 

20 . The king who secured the boon thus ruled over the 
kingdom and went to heaven. The king of ghosts 1 attained 
heaven along with the other ghosts, thanks to Gayasraddha. 

21-23. In order to secure his liberation, a certain ghost 
spoke thus to a certain merchant: “Please offer Pinda in my 
name at Gayasiras in order to secure for me release from my 
ghosthood. Take (all) my wealth. Taking all the wealth to meet 
theexpenses connected with the Gayasraddha. I have given you 
five-sixteenth part of my wealth (as your remuneration). I have 
mentioned my name (etc.) in the proper manner.” 

24. The man went to Gaya along with his kinsmen and 
offered Pindas to the king of ghosts at Gayasirsa. It was only 
after that, that he offered the Pinclas to his own Pitrs. 

25. The ghost was liberated from ghosthood. The merchant 
came back to his house. Thus is the holy centre of Gaya, 
of Sambhu, Visnu and Ravi. 

26. The pilgrim should observe fast in the holy centre of 
Gayatrl, on the banks of the great river Phalgu (Mahanadi). 
After taking bath, in front of Gayatrl, one should perform 
Prataht-Sandhya (Sandhya prayer to be perfromed at dawn). 

27-28. By performing the Sraddha along with the offering 
of the Pindas, the pilgrim shall lead his family to the state of 
being favourabler to the Brahmanas. After taking the holy dip 

1. Verses 20b-25 tell how a ghost attained heaven when at his request 
(and for consideration of some property) an unrelated merchant offered 
pindas at Gaya. 

This story is also found in NP.II.44.44-50 and in AP. 115.60-63, GP 1.84 
32-33. 



Vdyu Purana 


968 

in the Samuditatlrtha (in the holy centre mentioned) in front 
of Savitri and performing Sandhya at the midday junction, the 
pilgrim leads hundred members of his family to heaven. Then 
with a desire for the liberation of the Pitrs, he should offer the 
Pindas unto them. 

29. After taking bath duly in the holy water called Praci- 
sarasvati and performing the Sandhya-prayer in the evening 
the pilgrim shall lead the Pitrs to Visnuloka. 

30-32. A person who has incurred sin due to negligence of 
performing Sandhya (prayer to beperformed during the twilight 
period e.g. dawn and dusk) in many births becomes libera¬ 
ted by performing Sandhya on three occasions in the holy 
centre Lelihana, in Visala as well as in the hermitage of 
Bharata. 

A person who takes holy ablution and offers Pindas oon the 
ridge of the mountain Munda (Pfstha) marked by footprints 
and near Gadadhara, in the holy centre Akasaganga and in 
those called Girikarnamukhas, leads hundred members of his 
family to Brahmaloka. He who takes bath in the celestial river 
Vaitaranl leads his Pitrs to heaven. 

33-37. A person who takes bath and makes gifts of cows 
in Vaitaranl, uplifts twentyone generations. O Narada (I 
repeat it three times to emphasize that it is true) it is true that 
he who takes bath in Vaitaranl redeems twentyone generations; 
they say so; there is no doubt in this. The river Vaitarani which 
is well known in the three worlds has descended down into 
Gayaksetra for the redemption of Pitrs. A person who 
performs Sraddha in (on the bank of) the Godavari, Vaitaranl, 
Yamuna and in the celestial river (i.e. Gariga) in the holy 
centre Gopracara; leads his Pitrs to heaven. A person who 
offers Pindas in Puskarinl, in Ghrtakulya and Madhukulya, in 
the Kotitlrtha pertaining to RukminI leads his Pitrs to heaven 
by observing fast for.three nights and visiting the sacred 
waters. 

38-39. By not giving gold or kine, a man becomes indigent. 
A man who takes ablutions in Ghrtakulya, Madhukulya, 
Devika, Mahanadi (Phalgu) and in the celebrated place of 


50,40-50 


969 


meeting of Si la (called) Madhusrava, 1 attains the benefit of 
ten thousand Asvamedhas. 

40. After performing the Sraddha along with the offering 
of Pinzas, the man uplifts a hundred generations in his family 
and leads them to Visnuloka. 

41. One who offers Pindas in Dasasvamedha, Hamsatirtha, 
Amarakantaka, Kotitirtha and Rukmakunda leads his Pitrs to 
heaven. 

42-43. By taking bath in Vaitaram, Ghrtakulya, Madhu- 
kulya and Kotitlrtha and visiting Kotisvara, the pilgrim be¬ 
comes a rich Brahmana and a master of all the Vedas fora crore 
of births. Bowing to Markanqleyesa and Kotisa he shall be the 
redeemer of his Pitrs. 

44. Formerly Sankara sported secretly with Parvati 2 in 
the forest called Rukmaparijatavana for ten thousand Yugas. 

45. Marici went to this Parijatavana for gathering fruits 
and flowers. He was seen by Mahesa. Since he had become 
the cause of the obstruction of his (Siva’s) pleasure he was curs¬ 
ed by Mahesa. 

46. “You shall become miserable.” This was the curse. 
Afraid of him, Marici eulogised Siva. The delighted Sambhu 
spoke to him, “Choose an excellent boon”. 

47. Marici spoke to Sankara, “May I have the absolu¬ 
tion from the curse”. “At Gaya you will have the liberation”, 
spoken thus by Siva, he went to Gaya. 

48. Marici who had been cursed by Isvara formerly attain¬ 
ed Krfnatva (blackness of complexion). Seated on a rock, he 
performed a penance very difficult for anyone else to perform. 

49. By means of a terrible penance, that Brahmana attain¬ 
ed Suklata (whiteness of complexion). Hari spoke to Marici, 
“O son, choose a boon”. 

50. Marici said to Madhava, “When you are satisfied, 
what is inaccessible? I have been relieved from the curse of 
Hara. May this rock be sacred. 

1. Verses 26-43 describe other sacred spots at Gaya such as Gayatri- 
tlrtha, Praci-Sarasvatl Tfrth, Visala, Lelihana and Bharata’s hermitage (30- 
32), Mutujaprsiha, Akas'aganga (26-32), Vaitararii (33-37)and others. 

2. Verses 44-51 tell how Marici was absolved of the curse of Siva by 
performing penance at Gaya. 



970 


Vayu Purana 


51 May it be conducive to the salvation of the Pitrs . 
Saying “So be it” he (Hari) went to heaven. A man approach¬ 
ing Puskarini of the heaven-dwellers becomes pure 

52 ' Whatever is offered to the Purs here becomes in¬ 
exhaustible. He who takes bath there, goes to heaven with his 
own physical body. 

53 . He shakes off his sin like a serpent casting off its 
slough. That forest of clusters of lotuses is holy and is resorted 

to by meritorious persons. . , _ r 6 -jj u 

54 The slab of Pandu (Pantfusila) is there. 1 If Sraddha 

is performed (at Pandusila), it becomes inexhaustible. O sage, 
once Yudhisthira went there to perform Sraddha. 

55 . At that time he was requested by Pandu, “Give the 
Pinda into my hand.” Avoiding the hand, he placed the Pintfa 

on the rock. . . , 

56-58. By the offer of the Pind a ° n the rock, Vyasa s son 

(i.e. Pandu) was delighted. He granted this boon to his son. 
“Rule over the kingdom on the surface of the earth. May 
the kingdom flourish perfectly and devoid of thorns (trouble¬ 
makers) . O son, you are my saviour. Go unto heaven surround¬ 
ed by your brothers and along with your physical boby. Lead 
those in the hell to heaven after purifying them by means of 
your vision alone”. Saying this, Pandu attained the eternal 
immutable region. 

59. All the four typeso.fi'jiving beings, viz. Udbhijjas (plants), 
Svedajas (sweat-born germs), Anfajas (egg-born birds) and 
Jarayujas ' (womb-born animals) who approach Madhu- 
srava shall go to the city of heaven after death. 

60. By performing Sraddha in Dasasvamedhika and 
Hamsatirtha one goes to heaven. By bowing to Dasasvamedha 
and Hamsa, one goes to Sivapura. 

61. By performing Sraddha in the hermitage of Bharata 
one leads the Pitrs to the abode of Brahma. One who per¬ 
forms Sraddha at the footprint of Matanga leads the Pitrs to 
Brahmaloka. 


1. Verses 54-58 state how Yudhisthira deposited the] Pinda at the Sila, 

not in the hand of Paij<Ju though he appeared personally. 





50.62-74 


971 


62-63. After churning the fire within the Sami tree in the 
company of Visnu and others, Vidhi (Brahma) secured the 
Tirtha for the purpose of Yajfia. It is well known in the three 
worlds. That Tirtha named Makha (sacrifice) yields salva¬ 
tion unto the Pitrs. One who takes bath, performs the Tarpana 
rites and offers Pindas shall attain salvation. 

64. After bowing to Angaraka (Mars) and Isvara 
(Siva) at the Sangama (confluence), the pilgrim leads the Pitrs 
to heaven. By offering Pindas at Gayakuta one derives the 
benefit of Asvamedha. 

65. After bowing to Bhasmanatha at Bhasmakuta, one 
shall redeem and uplift the Pitrs. One who performs ablutions 
at Sangama, shall be relieved of sins and he becomes liberated. 

66-67. The excellent sage Vasistha performed the sacrifice 
called ASvamedha. Sambhu who came out of the Isfi (sacrifice) 
said to Vasistha, “Choose a boon”. Vasistha too then replied, 
“O Siva, if you are pleased with me, O lord of Devas, you stay 
here (alone).” Saying “So be it”, Siva stayed there. 

68 . One who offers Pindas at the footprints of Kamadhenu 
in Dhenukaranya after bathing, bowing down and worshipping 
them, leads the Pitrs to Brahmaloka. 

69. By taking bath and performing Sraddha etc. at Karda- 
mala, holy centre in Gayanabhi, near the ridge of the mountain 
Muijdaprstha, one is absolved of debts to his Pitrs. 

70. One shall worship (the deities) Phalgu, Gandi, SmaSa- 
naksi, Mahgala and others. By means of Vrsotsarga (letting loose 
a bull calf) one shall uplift tvventyone generations of his 
family. 

71-74. The deities and the sages who have conquered their 
sense organs are stationed here and there (in Gaya). Meditating 
on the primordial Gadadhara and offering Pindas etc., one up¬ 
lifts a hundred generations in his family and leads the Pitrs to 
Brahmaloka. The six Gayas, 1 viz. Gaya-gaya (Gayagaja), Gaya- 


1. This enumerates the Six Gayas where worship and Pin<ja-dana lead 
to mukti. Gayagaya may be Gayagaja. If so, Kane thinks it may a reference 
to the pillar with a figure of an elephant near Gadadhara temple—HD IV 
Foot Note 150a. This verse is found in NP. II. 47. 39-40. 



972 


Vayu Parana 

ditya, Gayatrl, Gadadhara, Gaya and the demon Gaya are the 
bestowers of salvation. 

A man who reads this holy narrative of Gaya continuously 
and listens to it with faith attains the greatest goal. A man 
who teaches the anecdote of Gaya to the Brahmanas (or who 
causes Brahmanas to read it) is meritorious. 

75-79. Gayasraddha is performed by him. Certainly it is 
done. He who studies the glory of Gaya with purity of mind 

has actually performed Rajasuya and Asvamedha. O Narada, 

Goddess of fortune, Laksml, will stay delightedly in the house 
of the person who writes this book or worships it or causes others 
to write it. 

If this book containing this holy anecdote remains in the 
house, there is no fear due to serpents, fires or robbers there. 

If anyone reads this glory of Gaya at the time of Sraddha, it 
will be considered by Pitrs on a par with Gayasraddha even if 
it is against strict injunctions in the Sastras. 

O Sage, if anyone knows, hears or reads the anecdote of 
Gaya, all the Tirthas of the three worlds are visited by him. 

Suta said: 

80. Sanatkumara thus narrated the holy story with devo¬ 
tion to the leading sage. He then bade farewell to the :preceptor 
in music (i.e. to Narada) and went to his own hermitage 
surrounded by holy forests. 




INDEX 


Abbreviations 


c — capital 
h — husband 
k — king 
1 — lake 
mt — mountain 
n — name 

p — page, pp. — pages 

Abhra, A cloud. Derivation I. 51.27 
Abhuta-Sarhplava, Annihilation of all 
living beings II. 38. 237-240 
Abodes of gods, I. 39 
Abuddhi-purvaka, Unpremeditated 
(Creation) 1.4.68-78 Introd- XXIV 
Acchoda, a river (r) 1.47.6 
Acchodaka, a lake 1.47.5 
Adhisima (Asima)- Krsna, (K.) Va. 

P. narrated in his reign 1.1.10-12; 
_ 11.37.253-255 

Adibaka, Sixth battle between Devas 
and Asuras 11.35.75 
Adi-gadadhara, The chief deity at 
Gaya, The story of, 11.47 
Aditi, Mother of gods, II. 5.57-59 
Aditya, The Sun-god,S. of Kasyapa and 
Aditi 11.22.34; Names of Adityas 
II.5. 66-67 

— Born of Kasyapa & Aditi II.5.57-60 
Advaita, Sankaracarya’s philosophy 

11.42.28-39 

Agastya (the star Canopus) 1.50, 155- 
156 

Agni, The Fire-god, Three types: Di¬ 
vine, earthly and watery 1.53.5 fF. 

— The race of 1.29; fortyninc religi¬ 
ous functions of, p. 185 Ftn. 1,2 

— Agnis, mutual relations 1.29. Ftn. 2 

— Dhis^ya fires, Division into Vihara- 
niya & Upastheya 1.29.19 fF 

Agnidhra, (K) The first K.of Jambu- 
dvipa 1.33.11,37 

— Divides J. dvipa into nine parts and 
distributes them to his sons 1.33.38- 
45 

— Retires for penance 1.33.46 
Airavata, Divine elephant II.8.203- 

205, 207 

Ajatunga, A holy centre of Sraddha 
11.15.48 


r — river 
s — son 

v — verse, vv. — verses 
w — wife 
Explanation : 

Abhra—I (Part I). 51 (Chapter 51). 

27 (verse no. 27) 

Akrura, Son ofGariidini 11.34.106-109 

— His conspiracy for Syamantaka, 
11.34.56-60 

— His generosity, 11.34.79-82, 109 
Alaka, Capital (c) ofKubera 
Alakananda, (r) 1.42.25-40 
Amarakanfaka, A mountain (m) sac¬ 
red for Sraddha II. 15.4-i 6 

Amavasu, (K) Fadicr of Satyavati, 
Vyasa’s mother II. 11.60.67 
Amsuman, Grandson of Sagara, son 
of Asamanjasa 11.26.165 
Anakadundubhi, (Vasudeva) 11.34. 

145-146, 159-161; 172-175. 

Ancient Lores, Intro. XLVII-XLVIII 
Andhra, N. of a dynasty 11.37.341 B- 
325 

— N. of a people 1.45.124-131 
Ahgiras, One of the Seven Sages 1.31. 

16-18; A Vyasa 1.23.118 
Animal-Sacrifice, Brahmanical protest. 
King Vasu’s assent & consequent 
fall 1.57.92-111 

Annihilation, The extent of the period 

1.8.1 

Apava, A sage, Curses Sahasrarjuna 
11.32.43-47, 11.33.12-13 
Aruna, Son of Vinata, Surya’s chario¬ 
teer II.8.63 

Arundhati, W of Vasistha II.9.80 

— W of Dharma II.6.2-3 
Arvaksrotas, Creation of Mankind: 

4th type of creation 1.6.49 
Asamanjasa, Son of Sagara and Kesini 
11.26.154; Banished from the king¬ 
dom 11.26.163-165 

Asipatravana, N of a hell 11.39.146- 
149 

A§taka, A Sraddha II. 19.2; p. 633, 
Ft. n. 2 

Asuri, An ancient Sankhya teacher. 


974 


Vayu Purdna 


Siva’s disciple 1.23.132-133 . 

Asrama, Stages in life, classification 
and duties of 1.8.154-181 

Astronomy, Arrangement of lumina¬ 
ries 1.53 , 

Asvins, Twin-gods, Birdi story of 
11.22.23-24, 32-79 

Asvini, N. of a constellation II.5.46- 
48 

Atharva Veda, No. of Mantras 1.61.69 
Alternative Samhitas of, 1.61.54-55 
Genealogy of Teachers 1.61.49-54 

Avabhrtha, Valedictory Bath after 
conclusion of a sacrifice 11.41.40-43. 

Avidya, Cosmic aspect (see Creation, 
also the second stage of meditated 
creation.) 

— Tiryaksrotas 1.6.39-43 

— The third stage, Cfrdhvasrotas 
(Dcva-sarga, creation of Devas) 
1.6.45-48 

— The fourth creation (Arvaksro- 
tas, creation of mankind) 1.6.49-52 

— the fifth creation, Anugraha Sarga 
1.6.53 

— The sixth creation, Bhutadi 1.6.54 

— Five joints of (viz.) Tamas, Moha, 
Mahamoha, Tamisra, Andha- 
Tamisra 1.6.35 

Ayu, Son of Pururavas & Urvasi II. 
29.48-49; the line of II.31. 12 ff 


Bali (K), Bali promises land to Va- 
mana 11.36.75-77 

— bound by Vamana 11.36.85 

— A king of east India. Kingdoms 
Anga, Vanga in east India named 
after his sons 11.37.26-34 

Bana, S. of Bali 

—arms cut off by Krsna 11.36.101 
Battles, Twelve between Suras and 
Asuras 11.35.72-87 

Bhadrakara, A country west of U. 
Kurus 1.45.41-66 

Bhadrasva, A Varsa east of Meru 
(Mod. China) 1.43.5-38 
Bhagiratha,(K) S. of Dilipa, Grand¬ 
son of Amsuman; brought Ganga to 
the earth 11.26.167-168 
Bharani (Yamya), N. of a constella¬ 
tion II.5.46-48 

Bharata, (K) Rsabha’s son 1.33.51; 
India named as Bharata 1.33.52, P. 
234 Ftn. 2 

Bharata Varsa, India, 1.48.73-137 
— Etymology and importance 1.45. 
76-77 


— Mountain Systems inJL45.88-93 

— River systems in 1.45.94-111 

— People in 1.45.115-134 
Bhautya, See Manvantara 
Bhavani, See Sali (Uma) 

Bhimascna, A writer on Music. See 

Intro. p.L 

Bhimarathi or Bhima, A_sacred river, 
a tributary of the Krsna 1.45.104 
Bhrgu, A mental son of god Brahma 
1.59.88 

— Curses Visnu for killing his wife 

I. 1.137; 11.35.140-141 

— Restores his wife to life 11.35.143- 
147 

— Bhrgu’s daughter Sri (Laksmi) 
marries Narayana 1.28.2 

— Bhrgu’s Progeny 1.28.1 fT 
Bhrgutunga, A peak of mt. Himavat 

1.23.136-137. A Tirtha specially 
meritorious for Sraddha 11.15.82 
Bhuvana-Kosa, 11.39.10-48 
Bindusaras, A laka at the foot of Kai- 
lasa 1.47.24 

Boar, Divine (See Varaha, Brahma) 
Brahma, god, the creator of the Uni¬ 
verse (Sometimes identified with 
Rudra and Narayana) 

Synthesis ofBrahma, Visnu and Siva 

II. 5.86.121 

Brahma-Narayana sleeps on the 
Cosmic waters I.6.1-3 

— Uplifts the earth as a divine Boar 
1.6.11-27 

— Born from the lotus in Visnu’s 
navel 1.24.14 

— Controvesy with Visnu on personal 
superiority 1.24.15-34 

— Nine creations 1.6.32-64 

— Creates nine Prajapatis for World 
creation 1.9.61-63 

— Creates Devas from his body 1.9.2- 

22 

— Creates other creatures from him¬ 
self 1.9.23-51 

—Creates Rudra and Sakti 1.9.6^-78 

— (and Visnu) eulogize Siva 1.24.90- 
164 

— Prescribes duties for different 
Asramas (stages of life) 1.8.173-181 

— Classes of society, parts of Brahma’s 
body 1.6.71 

Brahmacarin, Duties of 1.8.174 ff 
Brahmaloka, 11.39.80-81 
Brahman, The concept of 11.42.28-43 
Brahma-Savarni, See Manvantara 




Index 


975 


Brahma-Tlrtha, A holy place for 
Sraddha 11.15.51 

Brahma-Tuhga, A holy place for 
Sraddha 11.15.82-83 
Brhaspati, The preceptor of Devas 

— rapes his brother’s wife Mamata 
11.37.37-42 

— His wife abducted by Soma 

11.28.28 fF 

— deceives Asuras by impersonating 
as Sukra 11.36.17-38 

— Planet Jupiter, The chariot of 
1.52.77-78 

Budha, his birth-story II.28.27-43 

— his son Pururavas from Ila 11.23.17 

— Planet Mercury, his chariot des¬ 
cribed 1.52.72 fT 

Buddhist Bhiksus, Intro, p. XLII 


Gaitraratha, A forest 1.47.6 
Caksu (r). Countries watered by 
1.47.44 

Caksusa Manvantara, Sec Manvan- 
tara 

Candra, The moon 

— The birth story of 11.28.1-11 

— abducts Brhaspati’s wife Tara 
11.28.28 

— married to twenty-seven daughters 
of Daksa 11.28.21 

— Candra and Pitre (changes in 
Moon’s digits) 1.52.54-71 

— His position 11.39.129 

— Candra’s chariot 1.52.50-54 

— N. of a Dvipa (Mod. Tuva in 
Siberia) 1.45.51-60 

— N. of a Tirtha sacred for Sraddha 
11.15.28-29 

Candrabhaga (r), The Chinab 1.45. 
94-96 

Candraprabha, N. of a mountain 
1.47.4-5, p. 304 Ftn. 3 
Caraka, A group of Brahmins 1.61.10, 
23-24 

Carmanvati, (r) The Ghambal 1.45.- 
97-98 

Castes, (Varnas) Formed in the 
Treta Yuga 1.8.154-164 

— duties of castes 1.8.171-181 

— Echo ofPurusa Sukta 1.6.71 
Chariots (Divine), Given to Yayati by 

Rudra 11.31.18 

— Remained with Puru’s line upto 
Pariksit and disappeared with 
Janamejaya and reached Vasu 
11.31.21 


— Given to Brhadratha of Magadha 

by Indira 11.31.27 

— taken by Bhima after killing Jara- 
sandha and gifted to Krsna II.31.27 

— of Planets : The Sun 1.51.54 ff 

— Budha (Mercury) 1.52.72-73 

— Sukra (Venus) 1.32.74-75 

— Ahgiras (Mars) 1.52.76 

— Brhaspati (Jupiter) 1.52.77-78 

— Sani (Saturn) 1.52.79 

— Rahu 1.52.80-81 

— Ketu 1.52.82-83 

Cities of gods : On Mt. Meru, 1.50.87- 
101 

Clouds, Their formation 1.51.22-26; 
Kinds 1.51.28-37 
Puskaravartakas 1.51.39-40 
Parjanya 1.51.43-50 
Constellations (Naksatras) as distri¬ 
buted in Vithis II.5.46-53 
Construction of Towns, Forts etc. 

I. 8.108-117 
Continents (Dvipas) 

Their locations 1.34.24-33 
Caturdvipl Theory 1.34.46-57, Ft. 
Note 2 p. 241 

Saptadvipi Theory, p. 239 Ft. 
Note 1 
Creation 

by Rudra 1.10.42-59 
by Brahma 1.4.68-78. 

Nine creations (1) Mahat, (2) Tan- 
matra or Bhuta, (3) Vikara or 
Prakrta, (4) Mukhya (of immobile 
beings), (5) Tiryaksrotas (of ani¬ 
mals), (6) Ordhvasrotas (of 

divine beings), (7) Arvaksrotas (of 
mankind), (8) Anugraha (Sattva 
and Tamas), (9) Kaumara (Both 
Prakrta and Vaikrta) 1.6.55-64 
See also under Avidya Creation 
through Prakrti 1.4.17-82 
Different theories: Introduction pp. 
XXIII-XXVI. 

The Vedantic-Sankhya Theory 
1.4.16fF 

The Puranic Theory 1.4.68-78 
The Sahkhya Theory 1.5 
Creation (i.e. recreation) after dis¬ 
solution of the Universe 1.7.72; 

II. 41.9-38 

Cyavana, Siva’s-disciple 1.23.162 

S. of Bhrgu, Etymology of 
the N. il.4.89; married to 
Sukanya II.4.90 


976 


Vdyu Purdna 


Dadhica, A sage: Advocate of Siva’s 
presence at Daksa’s sacrifice 1.30- 
103-104 

Curses Daksa 1.30.106 
Daitya (demons), (Danavas, Yak$as, 
Gandharvas, Apsaras etc.) Their 
origin II.7, IL8 

— Daityas etc. Their progeny Il.o.b/- 

86,11.7 . r 

_Daitya domination for ten xugas 

11.35.91 

— Daityas killed by Raji 11.30.86-88 
_Daityas killed in Tarakamaya bat¬ 
tle II.6.69 

Daksa (i) God Brahma’s son, Sati’s 
father, insults Siva 
1.30.46-49; Sati’s self-im¬ 
molation I.30-53-55;_cur- 
sed by Rudra 1.30.57-61; 
curses Rudra 1.30.62-64^ 
(ii) S. of Pracctas 1.30.74-75; 
Performs sacrifice at Gan- 
gadvara 1.30.94; Dispute 
with Dadhica about Ru- 
dra’s share 1.30.103-106; 
Daksa’s sacrifice destroy¬ 
ed at Devi’s request 
1.30.139-159, 1.30.167- 

171; Daksa submits to 
Siva and is pardoned 
1.30.168-179; 286-294 

— Daksa eulogised Siva 1.30.180-284 

— Progeny of Daksa’s daughters II. 
6,7,8 

Dana, Charitable gifts 11.18 
Danu, Dak§a’s daughter and wife of 
Kasyapa, progeny of, II.7 
Dasaratha, K. of Ayodhya, father of 
Rama 11.26.182; 11.36.91 
Dasasvamedha, A holy centre for 
Sraddha (under Varanasi) 11.15.45 
Death, Process of 11.40. 87-92 
Devas, Sons of Aditi and Kasyapa, 
The race of Devas 1.31; The Three 
groups of (Yama, Sukra and Trpti- 
manta) I.31.5.ff 

Devaki, mother of Krsna but Aditi in 
former birth 11.34.193-198 
Devi, (Sati, Uma) 

(i) Birth from Daksa 1.30.40-41; 
married to Siva; Self-immo¬ 
lation at Siva’s insult 1.30.46- 
55 

(ii) Bom of Himavan and Mena 

. 1.30.70; II. 11.7 

(iii) Performed penance for Siva 
II. 11.10-16; married to Siva 


1.30.70-73 

Devika (r) Mod. Dccg, a tributary to 
Ravi 1.45.94-96 

Dhanvantari, A physician, king of 
Varanasi II.30.9-22 
Dharma, (i) Duty,—General concept 
1.59-21-32 
—as practice of Sis- 
tas 1.59.33-38 
—Characteristics of 
Dharma 1.59.40- 
55 

(ii) Duties of Castes (Var- 
nas) and Stages of life 
(asramas) 1.8.154-181 
Dharma, N. of a Prajapati, His race 
II.5 

Dharmaprstha, N. of a sacred place 
at Gaya 11.49, 95-99 
Dhataki-Klianda, N. of a subcontinent 

I. 49.119-120 

Dhruva, (K) Son of Uttanapada 

II. 1.75-77 

got eternal position II. 1.78-79 
The Polar Star, the pivot of heavenly 
bodies 1.52.83 ff; controls divine 
luminaries 1.52.83-99 
Dhundhumara (King Kuvalasva), 
killed demon Dhundhu. Hence this 
epithet 11.26.29-66 

Dirghatamas, A sage, son of Asija 
and Mamata, Birth story 11.37.44-47; 
follows the Bull-cult (Godharma) 
11.37.47-59; Punishment and rescue 
by King Bali-II.37.60-65; Procreates 
sons for Bali 11.37.83-86; Eyesight 
restored and named Gautama II. 
37.90-92 

Dissolution (Pralaya), End of the 
World 

— (i) Nitya (Daily disappearance) 

— (ii) Naimittika (Periodical) 1.7. 

40-65; 11.38.196-202,244-245 

— (iii) Prakrtika (of Prakrti) II. 

40.5-33 

— (iv) Atyantika (Final) 1.7.38; 

11.40.41-45 

— Abhuta-Samplava 11.36.211, 237- 

245; 11.39.336-351 
Intro, pp. XXVI-XXVII 
Diti, W. of Kasyapa, mother of Dai¬ 
tyas: Diti’s progeny II.6.49 ff 


Earth, Caturdvipi theory II.34.46ff 
Saptadvipi theory 11.34.23-31 




Index 


977 


Milked by Prthu II. 1.96-97, 148-190 
Ekamava, Cosmic Ocean (doctrine) 

I. 6.1-3; p. 43, Ft. n. 1 
Elephant Lore, II.8.203-235; Etymo¬ 
logy of synonyms for elephants, 

II. 8.227-228 
Embryology, 1.14.16-25 

Evolution of the Universe: Sankhya 
Theory 1.5 

The Puranic Theory 1.4.68-78 


Food-articles, Prescribed for Sraddha 
II.16.6-1 la; 11.21.1-12 
— Prohibited for Sraddha II. 16.1 lb- 
17 


Gajacchaya, (or Kunjaracchaya), a 
special occasion (Parvan) 11.21.11- 
12; Ft. Note 4, p. 639 
Gandaki (r) 1.15.91-96 
Gandhamadana (1) N. of a mountain 
1.34.35, p. 239 Ft. N. 2 
Gandharvas (& Apsaras), Birth from 
Kasyapa & Muni: Their Names, 
descendants etc. II.8 
Gancsa (Nikumbha), Siva’s servant— 
Vacalor of Varanasi 11.30.30-53. 
Ganga, Heavenly 1.47.26-29 - Des¬ 
cent & held up by Siva 1.47.30-36— 
Three ways (Stages?) of flowing 
(Tripathaga) 1.47.26-40, p. 306-307 
Ft. No. 2 

—Seven channels (& their identifi¬ 
cation) 1.47.37-39, P. 307 Ft. n. 
1&2 

—The regions watered by 1.47.45-49 
—Her epithets (with’ etymology): 
Bhagirathi 47.31-40, Jahnavi 11.29. 
51-55 

Gautama, (i) One of the seven sages 
1.3.25-28 

(ii) Transmitter of this Va. 
P. to Niryantara II. 
41.63 

(iii) An incarnation of Siva 
1.23.151-152 

(iv) Name of Dirghatamas 

(See Dirghatamas) 
Gaya, A famous holy place in Bihar 

— Glory (Mahatmya of Gaya) II. 
Ghs. 43 to 50 

— Gayasura, The story of-II.44 

— The story of Sila on Gayasura’s 
head 11.45 

— Gayasiras or Phalgu Tirtha 11.49. 
28-29 


— Area of Gaya and Gayas'iras 
11.43.26 

— Procedure, of Pilgrimage at Gaya 
II. Ghs. 48 and 49; Intro. P. LXV 

Gayavalas, Priests appointed by Brah¬ 
ma at Gaya 11.44.73.81 

Geographical divisions of the earth 
and their first rulers. 1.33.9-20, p. 
231 Ft. ns. 1,2,3 

Godavari (r) 1.45.112; Sacred for 

Sraddha 11.15.19 

Godharma, The Bull-cult 11.37.47, 
54-55 

Gokama, (i) An incarnation of Siva 
• * 1.23.161 

(ii) A holy place in Karna- 
tak sacred for Sraddha 
II. 15.21-22 

Gomati, A sacred river 1.2.8, 1.45.95 

Grama, (a musical term) Basic scales 
of the seven notes. Three gramas: 
(1) Sadja (2) Madhyama and (3) 
Gandhara. See Intro, p. XLIX and 
11.24.36 and p. 662 Ftn. 2 

Gunas (and creation of the Universe): 
L5 and Intro. XXIV 


Haihaya, (K) II.32.4-Haihaya line 
of Yadu 11.32 

Hairanyata (or Hiranvat) : Country 
associated with r. Hiranvati (=Zar- 
afshan) adjacent to Sogdiana 1.45.6- 
20, p. 285 Ftn. 2 

Halahala, Deadly poison churned out 
of the sea 1.54.56-62 
(also Kalakuta) Drunk by Siva 
1.54.89-94 

Harivarsa, A continent 1.34.29 
Hells, Names of Hells 11.39.146-149 
Tortures in-1.14.25-31; 11.39. 146- 
184 

— Post-hell evolution 1.14.33-39 
Hemakuta (m), A varsa-parvata- 
1.34.24-27 

Himalaya, Himavan, (i) A mountain 

I. 45.96; 1.34.24-27. 

(ii) Father of Uma 
1.30.70-71 

(iii) Residence of 
Sveta an incar¬ 
nation of Siva 
1.23.107-108 

Hiranyakasipu, A demon-king: Birth 

II. 6.57-58; N. explained II.6.60; 
Father of Prahlada II.6.70; Killed by 


978 


Vdyu Purana 


j^frimha II.6.66 

Hiranyak?a, Demon killed by Varana 
11.35-78 

— Sons of Hiranyak$a II.6.67-68 
Horsc-sacrificc, of Sagara 11.26.163 
Huna, A people of Bharata Varsa 
I.*45.135-137 


Iksu (Cak§u?) (r) The Oxus 1.47.37- 
39 p. 307 Ftn 2 

Iksvaku, K. Born of Manu II.23.4; 

II.26.8 

— His sons Vikuksi, Nimi, Dan<ja 

II.26.9 

— Ik$vaku dynasty 11.26 

— Dynasty extinct with Sumitra in 
Kali Age 11.37.286-288 . 

Ha, Daughter of Manu II.23.7 

Marries Budha, mother of Purura- 
vas 11.23.15-17 

Transformed into a male (Sudyu- 
mna) 11.23.18 

Davrta, A subcontinent (Around the 
Pamirs) 1.46.11-16 
Incarnations, (i) of Visnu 11.36.68- 
111 

(ii) of Siva 1.23.105- 
214 

Indras, General characteristics and 
Powers ofll.3.6-20; Present Indra— 
Mahabala II.3.5 

(ii) Vyasa in the 7th Dvapara 
1.23.127-128 


Jahnu, (K) S. of Suhotra and 
Kesika—drinks up the Ganga 11.29. 
51-55 

Jaigisavya, An incarnation of Siva 

I. 23.127-128 

Jamadagni, Exchange of Carus and 
Jamadagni’s birth as a special case 

II. 29.64-32;—married to Renuka— 
Birth of ParaSurama 11.29.86-88 

Jambudvipa. Geography of Jambu- 
dvipa I. Chs. 34 & 35 

— Mountain-systems in 1.34.13-27 

— Divisions of Jambudvipa 1.34.28-ff 

— Founder King Agnidhra 1.33,11 
Janaka (K). II.27.4-5; Founded the 

city of Mithila II.27.6 
Janamejaya, S. ofPariksit—established 
Vajasaneyika Brahmanas 11.37.246 
—" cursed by Vaisampayana & crip¬ 
pled 11.37.246-251 

Janamejaya, (Lohagandhi) 11.31.22- 


24; His horse-sacrifice II.31.25-26 
Lost divine chariot, sought refuge in 
Indrota 11.31.25 

— loses divine chariot given by Indra 
to Brhadratha 11.31.27 

Jarudhi, A mountain 1.41.66-73 

Jatukama (—karnya), Teacher of 
Krsna Dvaipayana in Va. P. Text 
Transmission 11.41.66 

Jaya (gods), Birth from Brahma’s 
mouth II.5.5; 6-4 

— different names in different yugas 
II.5.8-19; II.6 33-47 

— Neglect of Brahma’s advice II.6.9- 

12 

— Cursed by Brahma and Dardoned 
II.6.14-30 

Jayanti, daughter of Indra, Deputed 
to Sukra for service during penance 
11.35.149-151; II.36.4-11. 

Jivas, Number of, in each species 
11.39.195-208 

Jvara, Fever, types of, 1.30.296-302 

Jyamagha, (K) Banished, wandered 
11.33. 29-31 

— married Saibya, a henpecked 
husband 11.33.32.35 

— His race 11.33. 36-48 


Kadru, Wife of Kasyapa, mother of 
Serpents II.8-65 

Kailasa (mt), Location 1.42.2-22; Des¬ 
cription 1.41, 1.4 7.1 
Kaksivan & Caksus, Sons of a Sudra 
woman and Dirghatamas, attain 
Brahminhood 11.37.70,73 
Kakutstha, S. of King Sasada 
11.26.20-23 • 

Kala (Time), Nature of I.31.24ff; 

I. 32.6-35; Units of 1.57-6-20 
— identified with Yuga 1.32.6 
Kalagni, Fire at the end of a Kalpa 

II. 38.156-161 

Kalanjara (Bundclkhand, M.P.), Place 
sacred for Sraddha, Residence of 
Sveta 11.15.93,1.23.191-192 
Kali Age, Life in 1.58.31-74; a relie¬ 
ving feature 11.36.115-125; 11.37. 
382-405 

Kalinga, Orissa—A desa and a people 
in Bharata 1.45.124-131 
Kalmasapada, K. . Saudasa turned 
demon 1.2.10,11.26.176 
Kalpa, Serial order of 1.21.26-34, 

1.22.9 ff; transition between 2 Kalpas 
1.7; 1.21 




Index 


979 


— the end of 11.38.120-201 

— Identified with Rudra’s incarna¬ 
tions 1.23.57-74 

Kamsa, His attempt to kill Devaki but 
spared on Vasudcva’s promise II.- 
34.219-228. killed sons of Devaki 
11.34.172-173 

(Kanya) Kumari, Sacred Place for 
Sraddha 11.15.28-29 
Kapila, a sage, an incarnation of 
Visnu, burns the sons of Sagara 
11.26.147 

Karma, Identified with destiny 1.9.53- 
56; Law of Karman inexorable 

I. 9.52 

Kartavirya, Sahasrarjuna, a Haihaya 
King, Son of Krtavirya II.32.8; 
Boons from Datta 11.32. 10-13; em¬ 
peror of seven continents 11.32, 
21-23; Exploits 11.32.14-37; Capital 
Mahismati 11.32.26; Ravana De¬ 
feated and taken_captivc 11.32. 35- 
36; cursed by Apava 11.32.38-47, 

II. 33.3-13; Killed by Parasurama 
11.32.47 

Kasvapa (Marica), Creation of II.3, 
II.5.54-76; Wives of II.5.55; Kasya- 
pa’s race, Diti's progeny II.6;Danu*s 
progeny II.7; Dynasties of Yaksa and 
Gandharvas II.8 

Kausambi, A city (Mod. Kosam, 
U.P.) 11.37.267 

Kaveri (r) A sacred river in South 
India 1.45.104 
Ketu, Chariot of, 1.52.82.83 
Ketumala, A Varsa, 1.35.34-41; I. 44 
Kimpurusa, a Sub-continent 1.46.4-7 
Kings, Future dynasties of, Intro, pp. 

LIII-LIX, 11.37. 289-377 
Kolahala, The twelfth battle between 
Devas & Asuras. In this Raji killed 
demons 11.35.85-86 
Krauncadvipa, A continent 1.49.58- 
70,134 

Krcchra, a rite of expiation, II. 16.67 
Krsna, His birth, 11.34.174 

Visnu’s incarnation 11.34.192-198 
Celebrations of birth 11.34.199-203 
Krsna withdrew his Vi?nu form 
and was taken to Nanda (ibid) 205- 
210. J r 
Accused of Prasena’s murder For 
Syamantaka theft (ibid) 35-40 
Quarrel of Balarama for Syaman¬ 
taka, Involvement in Syamantaka 
scandal 11.34.20-98; Marries Jam- 
bavan’s daughter (ibid.) 47-51; 


Visnu’s incarnation (ibid.) 39-55, 
19 i-245. 

KrsO a ’ s 'vives IT.34.233-235 
Kr§na’s sons (ibid) 234-245. ^ 

Krsna Dvaipayana, S. of Kali and 
Paras'ara 1.60.11; 11.9.84^ 

Krsna-Veni, (r) (Mod. Krsna) a- 
sacred river, 1.45.104 

Krta Age, Characteristics 1.8.49-63 
Transition from Krta to Trcta 1.8.69- 
76 

K§altriyas attaining Brahminhood 
11.29. 111-114. 

Kubera, Lord of wealth, Parentage, 
Etvmology of name & Progeny II 
9.35-41 

Kuru (Uttara), Western Siberia II. 
45.11-42 

Kuruksetra, Sacred place for Sraddha 
11.15-64 

— Sacrificial session at 1.1.10-12 

Kus'a-dvipa, A continent 1.49. 48-57 

Kusumapura (Mod. Patna, Bihar) 
11.37.313 


Laksmi (Sri), Daughter of Bhrgu, con¬ 
sort of Visnu 1.28.2 

Lauhitya orLohita (r), Brahmaputra 
in Assam II. 15.95 

Lavana, A demon killed by Satrughna. 
11.26.184 

Linga, Appearance of 1.55.19-27; eu¬ 
logy by Visnu 1.55.30-50 

Lohita, The river Brahmaputra I. 
45.96. 

Loka, The higher worlds 11.39. 138- 
142 

— The Nether worlds H.39.143-184 

— Brahmaloka 11.39.80-81 

— Vairaja Loka II.39.61-79 

— Distances in the planets and Lokas 
11.39 128-142; 11.39. 211-223. 

Lokaloka (mt.) 1.49. 144-147, 157- 
159; 1.50.205-207 

Luminaries. Their locations, dimen¬ 
sions and movements 1.51 
Arrangement of 1.53; II. 5.47-53 

Lunar Race, 11.29 


Madhu-Kaitabha, Slaying of 1.25.29- 
53 

Magadha, N. of a people in Bharata- 
varsa 1.45.123 
Maha-meru see Meru 
Maihalava, Region of Siva 1.23. 



980 


Vdyu Parana 


166-67, 168-69; (Omkaranatha or 
Amares'vara in M.P.) Sacred place 
for Sraddha 11.15.80, 82. 

Mahanadi alias Mandagamini 
(r), A river rising from 
Rksa mountain 1.45.107 
Maha-puranas, List of, II-42.3-11 
Mahat, The first principle 1.4.25,27, 
42-45 

Mahendra (mt.) (i) A Kula-parvata 
in Bharata- 
varsa 1.45.88 
(ii) mt. sacred for 
Sraddha 11.15. 
17 

Mahismati (=Mahesvara, M.P.) 

Kartavirya’s capital 11.32.26 
Malaya, A Kula-parvata in Bhara- 
tavarsa 1.45.88 
Manasa, A Lake 1.42.47-48 

Sacred tanks at Gaya 11.49.1; 
11.49.1-13 

MandakinI (r) 1.45.99-101 
Mandara (mt.) in Bharatavarsa 1.45. 
90 

Mandchas, Demons daily attacking 
the Sun-god 1.50.162-165 
Manu, Bom of half the body of 
Brahma 1.10.7, 10-11; His wife 
Satarupa born of Brahma’s other 
half 1.10.10-11 
His progeny I.10.15.fF 
Manu, Vaivasvata, Son of Vivasvan & 
Samjha, Brother of Yama and 
Yamuna 11.22.37-38 
His progeny IT.23 
Manvantara, Manu-period—each 
period consists of Manu, seven sages, 
gods, Indra, sons of Manu p. 457, 
Ftn. 1 

— !4 in number; their names II. 1.3-4 

— period 74 Yugas 1.61.138-140 

— Transition from one Manvantara 
to another 1.61.145-180 

— Previous Manu-periods II. 1.1-68 

— Future Manus II.38.9ff 

— Savami Manu 11.38.59 69 

— Dharma Savami 11.38.70-86 

— Rtu (Rudra) Savami 11.38.86-99 

— Raucya 11.38.100.109 

— Bhautya 11.38,110-118 
Marica, Race of II. 13 
Mars, The chariot of 1.52.76 
Marut-gods, Birth sfory II.6.84-110; 

Assignment of zones to Marut gods 
II.6.111-134 * 

Measurement of distance (Units) II. 
39.117-127 ' 


Medhatithi, Son of Svayambhuva 
Manu 1.33.9; K. ofPlaksa continent, 
Seven sons assigned seven sub-conti¬ 
nents 1.33.32-34 

Mcgasthcnes and Candragupta, Intro, 

pp. LIX-LX 

Mcru (mt.), Identified with the 
Pamirs 1.34.13 fT; 1.35 
Milking of the Earth, List of persons 
milking the earth II. 1.148-190 
Milky Way, 1.47.26-29 
Mithila, Capital of Janaka II.27.6 
Months, Ancient and modern names 
1.52.2-26; p. 354-55 Ftn. 4 
Moon, The Lord of Stars (Daksa’s 
daughters) II.5.53 

— His chariot and movements 1.52. 
49-71 

Mountains, Kulaparvatas 1.45.2 ff 
Muhurta, A unit of Time 1.50.168- 
174 

Mukhya Sarga, (Creation of immobile 
beings) 1.6.57 

Mundaprsfha, (At Gaya). Place 
Sacred for Sraddha 11.15.102 
Music, Science of II. Chs. 24 & 25; 
Introduction pp. XLVIII-LI 


Nabhi, K. of Himavarsa 1.1.74; 

I. 33.41-50 

Nagna, Nudes, not covered by Vedas 

II. 16.27 ff 

— Should not be allowed to see Srad- 
dha food II. 16.24 

Nahusa, S. of king Ayu, 1.2.23; married 
to Viraja II. 11.88; His progeny II. 
31-llfF 

Naimisa, (i) Forest on the Gomati, 
the venue of the Puranic 
Sattra 1.2. 8, 24-34 

— Description of the Sattra 1.2.24-33 

(ii) Forest in Kuruksetra 

1.1.10-12 

—Etymology of the name 1.1.164-166, 

I. 2.7-12 

Naimiseyas, Brahmin performers of 
the Sattra in Naimisa forest 1.21 ff. 
Kill Pururavas 1.2.18-21 
Performance of a Sattra 1.2.23-32 
Naksatras (Constellations), Distribu¬ 
tion in Vithis II.5.46-53 
Nandana, A park of gods 1.36.11 
Narada, A sage, Son of Paramestfiin 

II. 4. 137-140 

S. of Kasyapa—mental son of 
Brahma 1.1-118 




Index 


981 


Brother of Arundhati and Parvata 
gives Arundhati to Vasi§tha II.9.79- 
80 

Instructs Daksa’s sons and frustrates 
Daksa’s mission of procreation II.4, 
137-140, 146-159 

— Cursed by Daksa II.4.150-158 
—A musician, Intro, p. 1 
Narayana, Etymology of the name 

1.6.5 

— Sleeps on Cosmic Waters 1.6.1-3, p. 
43 Ftn. 1. 

Narmada, (i) A sacred river 1.45.99- 
101; Association ofSah- 
asrarjuna 11.32.28-29 
(ii) W. of Purukutsa and 
mother of Trasaddasyu 
11.26.74 

Natya-Sastra, mention of, Intro. P. L 
Ftn. 3; P. Li Ftn. 1 
Nethcnvorlds (Narakas), Description 
of seven 1.50.10-54 

Nikumbha, Evacuator of Varanasi 
for Siva 11.30.30-53 

— Son of Haryas'va 11.26.62-63 
Nilakantha, Origin of the epithet 1.54. 

89-90 

Nimi, S. of Iksvaku II.26.9; Ruler of 
Videha (Bihar) 11.27 

— Founder of the city Jayanta 11.27. 
1-3 

Non-Vedic Religions, Intro. XLIII 
Non-violence, Puranas in favour of 
(even in sacrifices) 1.57. 98-101 
Nrsimha, Incarnation of Visnu, Kills 
Hiranyakasipu II.6.66 
Numerals, Technical names 11.39. 93- 
102 


Omens, Foreboding death I. 19 
Omkara, Description of 1.20.1-22 

— Esoteric explanation 1.26 

— Characteristics of realization of 
Omkara. 1.20.27-29 


Pallavas and Paradas, Tribes defeated 
and punished by Sagara, 11.26.135. 
140 

Pancalaksanas & Vayu Purana, Intro, 

pp. XXII-XXXII 

Pancasikha, a disciple of Siva 1.23. 
131-132 (Probably a Sankhya 
teacher like Kapila and Asuri men¬ 
tioned there). 

Parasara, Son of Sakti and Adrsyanti 


1.1.160; II.9.83 

father ofVyasa 1.1.160; II.9.84 
descendants of II.9.84-87 
Parasurama, Birth 11.29.86-89; Cause 
of his Ksattriya nature II.29.64-77; 
Kills Kr.rtavirya 11.32.47 
Pariksit, Son of Abhimanyu, Father of 
Janamcjaya 11.37.245,246 
Parvans, days of changes of the moon 

I. 56.32ff 

Pavitra, a ring of Darbha grass around 
finger 11.12.10 

Phalasruti, of hearing Vayu Purana 

II. 41.51-54, 68-70 

— of Gava Mahatmya 11.50.75-79 
Phalgu (r) 11.49.28 ff. 

Philosophy, Advaita 11.42. 28-43 
Pis'aca II.8.251; Sixteen Varieties II. 

8.253-256; description II.8.261-273; 
Brahma grants boons II.8.274-282; 
—an anecdote of Pisacas & Raksas- 
as II.8.108-121 

Pitryana, Path ofPitrs 1.8.187-189 
Pitrs, Manes, Bom of Svadha. Their 
birth, their classes and mental 
daughters II. 11.2-100; Summary in 
Ftn. 1 on pp. 578-79; Pitrs: amurtas 
(formless), Samurtas(endowed with 
form) 11.10.55-56, II. 11.100 
Pitrs and Devas as fathers and Sons 
II. 10.18-23-34 

Pitrs-Saptarcis. Their Mantras II. 
12.16, 21-27 
Plaksa dvipa, 1.49 

Prabhasa, A holy place in Saurastra 
11.15.40 

Prahlada, Hiranyakasipu’s son II.6.70 
His period of rule 11.35.70 
Defeated by Indra after churning of 
Amrta 11.35.79 

Prajapati, Stay in Ekarnava I.6.1-3 
Prakrta Sarga, The first creation of 
Brahma, Intro XXVI; 1.6.58-61 
Pramati, Incarnation of Visnu to kill 
Mlecchas 1.58.73-74 
Pratisarga, Dissolution and recreation 
of the Universes 1.7; 11.40 and 41 
Pratyahara, Restraint over sense- 
organs 11.15.131 

Prayaga, Allahabad—a sacred place for 
Sraddha 11.15.92 

Capital of the Kingdom of Pururavas 
11.29.46-47 

Priyavrata (K.), Son of Manu, mar¬ 
ried to Kanya daughter of Kardama 
1.33.7-8 

— crowned seven sons over seven con¬ 
tinents 1.33.10 ff 


982 


Vayu Purana 


Prthu, King, Son of Vena, Story of. 
birth II.1.126 J u 

— The first emperor coronated by 
Devas IL1.129-131 

— Established law and order II. 1.132- 

134 

— Milked the earth II.1.150-174 
Pulaha (a sage), 1.31.16-18 
Pulastya, 1.31.16-18 

Purana, Characteristics of, Intro, pp. 
XXII-XXXII 

Pururavas, Son of Budha and Ila II. 
29.1 

— Inherited the kingdom of Pratis- 
thana 11.23. 22-23 

— Greatness of p.II.29.1-3 

— Urvasi marries Pururavas II.29.5- 
14 

— Marriage contract broken through 
Gandharvas 11.29.16-27 

For re-union performs Yajnas II. 
29.38-45; had six sons from Urvasi 
11.29.48-49 

Puskara, a lake, a sacred place for 
Sraddha 11.15.40 


Radha-Krsna cult, 11.42.44-53 
Rahu - His chariot 1.52.80-81; Joining 
to the Moon on the full-moon day 

I. 52.81 

Raji, (K.) helps Indra to defeat 
Daityas and is cheated by Indra 
about Indra-hood 11.30.77-90 
Raksasa and Yaksa, Their etymologies 
IL8.97,98 

Sons of Khasa II.8.158-187 
Raksasas-Seven tribes of and descrip¬ 
tions' II.9.57-63 

Rama, S. of Jamadagni, Ksattriya 
Nature due to interchange of caru 

II. 29.64-83 

Incarnation of Visnu to kill Ksat- 
triyas H.36-90 

Rama, S. of Das'aratha, 11.26.183; 
Incarnation for killing Ravana II. 
36.91 

Kills Ravana 11.26 190-196 
Rama’s sons, Lava and Kusa 11.26. 
197 

Ramanaka, A continent identified with 
Sogdiana 1.45.2-5 

Raudri Sr§ti, Rudr^’s creation 1.10. 
42-59 

Raurava, A hell 11.39.146 
Ravana, His description and his pre¬ 
vious birth II.9.42-45; Span of Life 


II.9-46-48; Killed by Rama II.9.- 
48; 11.26.194, 196 

Recreation of the Universe, 1.7.72, 
11.41-9-38, Intro, p. XXVI- 

Religions and Philosophy in Va. P. 
Intro, pp. LI-LIII 

Religious sects in Va. P., Intro, pp. 
XLI-XLIII 

Renuka, Princess, Kamali m. to Jama¬ 
dagni, Parasurama’s mother 11.29. 
86b-88 

Review of the contents of the Purana 
11.41.44-45 

Rgveda, Division among principal 
teachers 1.60.24-31 
See Ftns. pp. 431-432 

River System in Bharata (Sec Bharata 
Varsa) 

Rksa parvata (mt.) 1.45.88; Ftn. 1 on 
p. 293 

R§abha (i) An incarnation o Siva 
1.23.133-134 

(ii) Son of King Nabhi and 
Marudevi, father of 
Bharata 1.33.51-52 

Rohini, (i) A constellation (See p. 
501 *Ft. note) 

(ii) Vasudeva’s wife 11.34. 
159-162 

Romaharsana, the Suta 1.1.13-17 

Royal dynasties of Kali age, 11.37 

Rudra, Asta-murti concept—Intro. 
XXXV ;The ‘Crier’—Eleven Rudras 
1.9.71-73—These Rudras born of 
Kas'yapa and Surabhi II.5.68-70 
See Intro, pp. XXXIV-XXXV 

Rudra-Savarni, See Manvanlaras 

Rukmini, Princess of Vidarbha, marries 
Krsna H.34.233 
Her sons H.34.237-240 


Sacrifices, Spread of Yajna-cult 1.29. 
12-13; p. 187 Ftn. 2,3 
Sacrificial horse ofSagara 11.26.143., 
163-164. Loss and recovery 11.26. 
144-151 

Rama's Sacrifice 11.36.91 
Sacrificial Session at Naimisa 
1.2.23-32 

Sagara, Etymology 11.26. 132 

(K.) Son of Bahu, born in Aurva’s 
hermitage 11.26.132 
Educated by Aurva 11.26.134 
attempts to exterminate his ene¬ 
mies who seek refuge with Vasis- 
tha (Ibid) 135-137; Pardoned 


Index 


983 


but with humiliation 138-149. 
His horse sacrifice (Ibid) 143. 
Sons burnt by Kapila (ibid) 
144-147. His grandson Amsuman 
propitiates Kapila and brings back 
the horse. Kapila grants sea status 
of Sagara’s son 11.26.150 
Sages, Seven (Saptarsis) 1.31.16-18 
Rebirth of II.4.37-45 
Their race II.4.73 fT. Their families 
and progeny 1.28; Mind-born sages 
1.9.61-63; Race of Sages II.9 
Sahya, The Western Ghats. A Kula- 
parvata in India 1.45.88 
gaka-dvipa, A Puranic continent id¬ 
entified with ancient Scythia 1.49. 
73-102 

gakalya, A Rgvedic Sage, Death of 
1.60.35-60 

gakrajit and Syamantaka: episode, II. 
34.20-95 

gakti, (i) Creation 1.9.69.70; epithets 
of gakti 1.9.78-79 
(ii) S. of Vasistha and Arun- 
dhati 1.2.9 ' 

Curses K. Kalmasapada 1.2.10 
Father of Paras'ara 1.2.11 
Salagrama, (Near Kedar, V.P.) 

Place sacred for graddha II. 15.88 
galmali dvlpa, A Purariic continent 

I. 49.29-45 

Sama-Veda, No. of Mantras 1.61.63, 
Intro XLVII 

— Schools and Teachers of 1.61.27-45, 
p.440 Ftn. 1. 

Samudra-Manthana : the fourth battle 
between Devas and Asuras 11.35.74 
Samvartaka, (i) World-drowning 

clouds 11.38.162- 
173 

(ii) Fire annihilating the 
world 11.38.156 

gamyu, S. of Brhaspati 

Interlocutor in graddha-Kalpa 

II. Ch. 10 to 21 

Sanatkumara, Brahma’s Mind-bom 
son like Sanaka 1.9.65-66 
Narrator of Gaya Mahatmya 
H.43-50 

ganda and Amarka, gukra’s sons 
II.4.76-77; side with Devas 11.36.63- 
66 

gani (Saturn), son of Sun and Ghaya 
11.22.50-51 

See under ‘Chariot’ for his chariot. 
Sankhya, A school of Philosophy II. 
40.2-3; Intrd. LII 


Sannyasa, The 4th Stage of life, Duties 
ofl.8.179 

Expiation for violating-he rules 1.18. 
1-31 

The last stage in Yoga 1.17 
Way of facing death 1.19.33-40 

Sapta Godavara, Solangipur (A.P.) 
or the confluence of the Godavari in 
the sea. Places sacred for graddha 
11.15.19 

Sarasvati (r), A river in Kuruksetra 

I. 45.94-96 

Sarayu, A sacred river 1.45.94-96 
Sarga, See creation 
gatadru (the Sudcj) 1.45.94-96 
.gatarupa, Manu’s consort, born of 
Brahma (SeeManu) 

Sati, giva’s consort 1.30.41-55 
Satrajit, Father of Satyabhama 11.26. 
55. Obtained the Syamantaka-jewel 
from Sun-god H.34.20-28 
(For Syamantaka episode see Krsna) 
Satyabhama, Krsna’s wife H.26.55 
Satyavati, Pitrs of Satyavati (story) 

II. 51-66 

Sheaths around the Universe 1.49.152- 
156; 1.50.82-85 

gila, The sacred slab at Gaya, the 
story of II. 45, 46 

gila-Tirtha 11.46; Ftn. pp. 929-930 ^ 
gisumara, Gangetic porpoise imagi¬ 
ned in the Sky 1.52.91-95 
Sita (r), Yarkand-Tarim (The eas¬ 
tern ‘extension’ of Sita is Hwang-Ho 
of China) 1.42.17-24 
Sita, Rama’s consort (See Dasarathi 
Rama) 

giva, Born as Brahma’s son 1.27.4; 
1.25.13-16 

— Called Rudra ‘The crier’ after 
birth 1.9.71-74 

— Eight names and eight forms of 
1.27.6-16, 49-58 

— Created non-procreating progeny 
1.10.42-52 

— Cause of his blue throatedness 
1.54.48-102 

— Names of his forms and consorts of. 
Intro. XXXIV-XXXV 

— The supreme deity 1.1.185 . 

— His highest abode (city) 11.39.230- 
309 

— giva’s incarnations & disciples 
1.23.107-214 

— Origin of his Linga-image 1.55.19- 
27; Intro. XXXVI 

— giva-Visriu identity 1.25.14-29 


984 


Vdyu Parana 


Siva’s eulogy 

— by god Brahma 1.54. 65-77 

— by Brahma and Visnu 1.24.90-164; 

I. 55.30-50 

— by Daksa 1.30.180-284 

— by Sukra 11.35.162-203 

Skanda, Birth-story 11.11.20-36; His 
exploits 11.11.37-50; Commander of 
Deva Army II. 11.47-48 
His evolution as a deity, Intro. 
XXXVII 

Solar Chariot, Significance of its parts 
and horses 1.51.54 fF 
Names of devas etc. accompanying 
him 1.52.1 ffand p. 354 Ftns. 1-4 

Sraddha-Kalpa 

— Proper Time for 1.56 

— Procedure of IT. 10.15 ff; II. 12.7-32; 

II, Chs. 13 and 14 

— Qualifications of invitee 11.21.22- 
31 

— Precedence among invitees 11.17. 
50-58 

— Ineligible Brahmanas 11.21.31-42 

— Defilers of rows of invitees II. 17.66- 
83 

— Yogins preferred as invitees II. 10. 
66-79 

— Vessels suitable for 11.12.1-5 

— Articles of food and meat recom¬ 
mended for Sraddha 11.21; 1.12; 
II.16.6-1 la 

— Articles etc. to be avoided at Sra¬ 
ddha II. 16.1 lb-17 

— People polluting food for Sraddha 
by sight II. 16.24, 27-40 

— Things prohibited for Sraddha 
11.16.43-48 

— Purification of articles for Sraddha 
11.16.50-58 

— Personal purification of the Srad- 
dha-performer 11.16.60-76 

— Fruits of Sraddha-performance un¬ 
der various constellations and days 
of the week 11.20 

— Fruits of Sraddha on various Tithis 
11.19.10-19 

— Holy places for Sraddha II. 15.1- 
125 

— Places to be avoided for Sraddha 
11.16.20-23 

Sris'ailam, Sriparavata (Mt. in An¬ 
dhra Pradesh) Place sacred for Sra¬ 
ddha 11.15.28-29 

Sude$na, Queen of K. Bali 11.37.68; 
sends a maid-servant to Dirghata- 
mas 11.37.69-74; begets Anenas from 


him 11.37.76-79 

Sudyumna, A bi-sexual son of Manu 
11.23.25-28 

Sukra, Son of Bhrgu and Divya II.4. 
74 

— His other names 11.4.75 

— His sons II.4.76-77 

— Obtains SamjivanI Mantra from 
Siva 11.36.1-2 

— Duped by JayantI in marriage 
II.36.6-12 

— Curses Daityas 11.36.35-37 

— Sukra’s eulogy of Siva 11.35.162- 
203 

Sun (Surya), 12 Suns, their distribu¬ 
tion one per month 1.52 (Gh.) 

Sun-worship, Intro, p. XLI 

Suta, Birth during sacrifice as a mixed 
caste 1.1.28-33 

Syamantaka episode, Syamantaka je¬ 
wel gifted by the Sun-god to Satrajit 
11.34.20-28.; Satrajit gives it to his 
brother Prasenajit(ibid) 30; Krsna’s 
request for it refused (ibid) 32; 
Prasenajit killed in hunting and jewel 
taken away by Jambavan 33-34. To 
clear the people’s suspicion Krsna 
brings the jewel from Jambavan, 
returns it to Satrajit 37; Satadhanva 
kills Satrajit & takes the jewel which 
Akrura takes 58-59; Krsna kills 
Satadhanva 74; Akrura fled away 
with the jewel, performed Yajnas 
and outbreak of a famine at Dvara- 
ka in the absence of Syamantaka 
79-90; Akeura returns to Dvaraka, 
Krsna’s open charges in the Asse¬ 
mbly against Akrura for Syaman¬ 
taka 92-94; Akrura hands over the 
jewel in the Assembly and Krsna 
returns in to Akrura 95-96. (all 
refs, from ch. 34) 


Tala, N. of a nether world 11.39.146, 
153 

Talajangha, S. of Jayadhvaja 11.52. 
50 

His 100 sons known as Talajanghas 
11.52.51-52 

Tamravarna, (R.) Tamraparni in 
South India 1.45.105 
Tapoloka, One of the seven higher 
worlds 11.39.140 

Tarakamaya, Battle between Devas 
and Asuras for Tara abducted by 
Soma 11.35.74 




Index 


985 


Teacher-Transmitters of the Va. P. 

11.41.58-66; Intro. XXII 
Time, Units of, 11.38.213-226; Muhu- 
rta and other Divisions of, II.6.37- 
45. Systems of calculating : Saura, 
Saumya, Naksatra and Savana (Sec 
Kala). Sap tarsi era, Krauhca 
andDhruva era 1.57.17, 18 
Tiryaksrotas, Second Type of crea¬ 
tion (See Creation) 

Tradition, Historical in Va. P., 11.37; 

Intro, pp. LIII-LIX 
Treta Yuga, Characteristics of 1.8.74 
ff; 1.57.39-125 

— Agricultural development in 1.8. 
124-137 

— Evolution of Vamas (Castes) 1.8. 
154-164 

— Duties of Varnas 1.8. 171-181 
Trinity, Synthesis of Brahma, Visiju 

and Mahesa II.5.86-121 
Trisahku (—Satyavrata) K. in the 
Solar race, Story of 11.76-116 
Turvasu, S. of Yaynti, cursed by Yaya- 
ti for his refusal to accept father’s 
old age 11.31.40-43 
Tungabhadra, A sacred river,* a tri¬ 
butary of Krsna 1.45.104 


Umatuhga, Mt. sacred for Sraddha 
11.15.81 

Units of Time 1.57.6-20 
Upasamhara, Sec Pratisarga (Disso¬ 
lution of the Universe) 

—Intfod. p. XXVI 
Orvasi, A celestial lady. Her contract 
marriage with Pururavas 11.29. 5- 
14. Her six sons 29.48-49 
Returns to Gandharvas 11.29.16-27 
Uttarakuru, A sub-continent of Jarii- 
budvipa (Corresponding to Western 
Siberia) 1.35.42-47; 1.45.21-50 


Vaikrta creation (=Ordhvasrotas)- 
See Creation 

Vaisnavism, Intro, pp. XXXIX-XLI 

Vais'arhpayana, Preceptor of Yajna- 
valkya, Story of his punishment to 
Y, 1.61.17-19 

Vaivasvata, A Manvantara. Creations 
in II, Chs. 3&4 

Varanasi, A sacred place for Sraddha 
II. 15.93-94 

Vasistha (i) Brahma’s mind-born 
son 1.9.61-63 


One of the Saptarsis in 
Vaivasvata Manvan¬ 
tara II.4.46-47 
Sakti’s father 1.2-9 
Protects tribals from 
Sagara 11.26.135-137 

(ii) A Vyasa 1.23.131-132 

(iii) A disciple of one of the 
incarnations of Siva 
I.23J49 

Vasu (Uparicara), (K.) A pious King, 
Fall for his view on sacrificial Him- 
sa 1.57.103-111 

Vasudeva (See Anakadundubhi) 
Vasudeva (See Krsna)—exchanges 
Krsna for Nanda Gopa’s daughter 
11.34.209-210 

—Karhsa spares the child (ibid) 
211-213 

Vayu, Narrator of the Va.P. 1.2.34-41 
Vayu Purana, Contents I.1.4G-177; 
1.3.2-22 

Padas of 1.4.12-14 

Vedas, Compilation of and distribu¬ 
tion among disciples 1.60-11-30 

— Branches of Veda and their tea¬ 
chers 1.61.1-77 and Ftns 

— Personified 11.42.69-87 

Vena, King Prthu’s father: punished 
for his bad rule II. 1.107-125 
Vikuksi, Son of Iksvaku, Called Sas- 
ada *11.26.12-19 

— Ruled in Ayodhya 11.26.20-23 
Vindhya, A Kulaparvata in India 

1.45.88 

Vipasa, (r) the Beas 1.45.99-101 
Virocana, a demon-king, son of Bali 
(but of Prahlada in the Text), 
killed by Indra 11.35.80 
Visnu—Visnu and Siva identified I. 
25.19-29" 

— Grearness of Visnu 11.35.4-57 

— Sleeps on Cosmic Waters after 
Pralaya 1.24.5-14 

— Visnu’s incarnations II.36.72 IT. 

— Visnu kills Bhrgu’s wife 11.35.139 

— Cursed by Bhrgu (cause of Visnu’s 
incarnations 11.35. 140-141 

Vrsni A king, Son of Sattvata 11.34. 

*1-2; Race ofVr. II. Ch. 34 
Vyasa, Krsna Dvaipayana, S. of Para- 
sara and Satyavati II.9.84; Classi¬ 
fied the Vedas and gave to his dis¬ 
ciples 1.60.11-23 1.61-47 

— Incarnations called Vyasa 1,23. 
109-214 


986 


Vayu Purdria 


Yadu, Eldest son of Yayati 11.31.16 
The Haihaya line II.32.4;Kartavirya 
a Haihaya II. 31.8-10 
Yadavas, The race of Yadu II. Gh.32 
Yajnavalkya, A sage. Asked to recant 
the Yajurveda 1.61.12-19 

— Received Yajurveda from the Sun- 
god 1.61.21 

— Dispute at Janaka’s sacrifice 1.66. 
35-62; defeats Sakalya 1.60.50-59 

— Disciples of Yajnavalkya (Vajis) 
1.61.24-26 


Yajurveda, No. of Mantras 1.61.64- 
66 and for white Yajurveda 67-86. 
See Intro, pp. XLVII-XLVIII 
Yaksas, (See Raksasas & Yaksas) 
Yama, God of death. Son of the Sun 
and Samjna H.22.29; cursed by 
Ghaya H.22.54-56; approaches his 
father 11.22.57-63 

Yamuna (i) Yama’s sister 11.22.29 
(ii) A sacred river 1.45.94-96 
Yavanas, A people of Western Bharata 
1.48.115-119. 


Yayati, S. of Nahusa, story of exchange 
of youth with his son 11.31. 28-101 
Yoga, Mahesvara 1.10.65-89 

— Pasupata I, Chs. 11, 14, 15 

— Disturbances in Yoga 1.12 

— Supreme powers attainable in Yoga 


— Rules of conduct in Yoga 1.16 

— Expiation for violation of rules 1.18 

— The ultimate state in Yoga 1.17 

— Yogic way of death 1.19.33-40 

— Yogins advised to attain Om 1.20. 


Yuga, Characteristics of, 1.30.28-64 

— Duration of Yugas 1.57. 23-28 

— Condition in the Krta Yuga 1.8 
49-63 

— Condition in the Treta Yuga 1.8. 
74 ff., 1.57.39-125 

— Conditions in the Dvapara Yuca 

1.58.1-29 b 

— Conditions in the Kali Age 1.58.31- 
74; 11.36.115-125; 11.37.382-405 











fraflV 
iff !m mis 


rgjf; i{ 


BKWIvHM 

ifillfSifti 

mmmimMk&rnmsEs 


!)iaSp|wi11 

§i?fep 


ii»mi tt 
iiWlllilSl 

: ■ : •:: .• . •••:• •.,••• . V i 

' •;• . : : • .'v.- : :- . ■ '•• : ;:i : i ; 

. . 

. ;m ■■ '■■ ■; •• - 

:■ ^ -i! ' ii 

mn 

.*> r-Sr&uf;fff.'e f v <;‘«- s •*• • ;*'?£?r-'I;‘ 




. . ;•:■ • ;-v,... . f ; ... ., ;:;; 

' • 5: •:i; ; :u'i : i *. ■ 5 # r«* •;• 

:' ' 

-,'Sji 

; .v»: 4: tz 


UbU&fiw 


mm 




, r .‘ 






MpapteWS 

. ;yuk .£< , f;.-'-,. 




:? ifi&iitftfoi 


Wi^^pip^pppiiwi^w 


v.:-. :• 

i WM ii 

? ?: 1 ; 

www i MM B El 


*spi«r 

1 

’.vki 


r,'-- 


ISBN 81-208-0455-4 


804 55 




